
                                           xviii


1               Introduction

1.1 Aims

   Proto Oceanic (POc) is the immediate ancestor of the Oceanic subgroup of the
Austronesian language family (see Map 1). This subgroup consists of all the Austronesian
languages of Melanesia east of 136˚E, together with those of Polynesia and (with two
exceptions) those of Micronesia—more than 450 languages in all.[1] Extensive arguments
for the existence of Oceanic as a clearly demarcated branch of Austronesian were first put
forward by Otto Dempwolff in the 1920s, and the validity of the subgroup is now
recognised by virtually all scholars working in Austronesian historical linguistics.

   This is the second of a set of six volumes bringing together the results of recent work on
the lexicon of the Proto Oceanic language.[2] Volume 1 of The lexicon of Proto Oceanic
dealt with material culture. Volumes 2, 3 and 4 examine relevant sets of cognate terms in
order to gain insights into how Proto Oceanic speakers viewed and exploited their
environment, volume 2 dealing with the geophysical or inanimate environment, volume 3
treating flora and volume 4 fauna. Volume 5 will deal with terminologies centring on
human beings, including the body and basic human conditions and activities, and social
organisation, and volume 6 with grammatical (closed) categories including adjectives,
pronouns, and number. Volume 6, as it is planned at the time of writing, will also include
an index to the POc and other reconstructions presented in the whole work, as well as an
English-to-POc finderlist and a list of all languages cited, together with their subgroups.[3]

[1]   The listing in Tryon ed. (1995) contains 466 Oceanic languages, many of which are subdivisible into
    dialects.

[2]   The project has been jointly directed by Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross, with research assistance
    from Meredith Osmond, in the Department of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies
    at The Australian National University.

[3]   This Introduction incorporates much of the material in the Introduction to Volume 1. We replicate it here
    in order that each volume can be used independently.


2   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   The organisation of the present volume is as follows: Chapter 2 discusses the major
biogeographical regions of Oceania and Island Southeast Asia, summarises the evidence
for locating the Proto Oceanic speech community in the Bismarck Archipelago, and refers
to the range of environments and environmental features to be encountered there. Each of
the remaining chapters investigates terms for a different domain of the environment.
Chapter 3 deals with landscape, in the broadest sense of the term. It is organised under the
following headings: land mass; coastal features; inland landforms; kinds of land; inland
water features; mineral substances; fire; destructive events. Chapter 4 deals with the sea
and its features—currents, waves and tides—and the reef environment. Chapter 5 deals
with meteorology, Chapter 6 with navigation and the heavens, Chapter 7 with the
properties of inanimate objects, Chapter 8 with space: terms of location and direction, and
Chapter 9 with time.

   The development and break-up of the POc language and speech community were stages
in a truly remarkable chapter in human prehistory—the colonisation by Austronesian
speakers of the Indo-Pacific region in the period after about 3000 BC. The outcome was
the largest of the world’s well-established language families and (until the expansion of
Indo-European after Columbus) the most widespread. The Austronesian family comprises
around 1,000 distinct languages. Its eastern and western outliers, Madagascar and Easter
Island, are two-thirds of a world apart, and its northernmost extensions, Hawaii and
Taiwan, are separated by 70 degrees of latitude from its southernmost outpost, Stewart
Island in New Zealand.

   It is likely that the divergence of Oceanic from its nearest relatives, which are the
Austronesian languages spoken around Cenderawasih Bay and in South Halmahera (Blust
1978a), began when Austronesian speakers from the Cenderawasih Bay area moved
eastwards along the north coast of New Guinea and into the Bismarck Archipelago. There
is a strong school of opinion that associates the subsequent break-up of POc with the rapid
colonisation of Island Melanesia and the central Pacific by bearers of the Lapita culture
between about 1500 and 1000 BC (see Map 2 and Chapter 2).

   The present project aims to bring together a large corpus of lexical reconstructions for
POc, with supporting cognate sets, organised according to semantic fields and using a
standard orthography for POc.

   We hope that this thesaurus will be a useful resource for culture historians,
archaeologists and others interested in the prehistory of the Pacific region. The
comparative lexical material should also be a rich source of data for various kinds of
purely linguistic research, e.g. on semantic change and subgrouping in the more than 400
daughter languages.


1.2 The relation of the current project to previous work

   Reconstructions of POc phonology and lexicon began with Dempwolff’s pioneering
work in the 1920s and 1930s. Dempwolff’s dictionary of reconstructions attributed to
Proto Austronesian (PAn) (1938)—but equivalent in modern terms to Proto Malayo-
Polynesian (PMP)—contains some 600 reconstructions with reflexes in Oceanic
languages.

   Since the 1950s, POc and other early Oceanic interstage languages have been the
subject of a considerable body of research. However, relatively few new reconstructions
safely attributable to POc were added to Dempwolff’s material until the 1970s. In 1969
George Grace made available as a working paper a compilation of reconstructions from
various sources amounting to some 700 distinct items, attributed either to POc or to early
Oceanic interstages. These materials were presented in a new orthography for POc, based
largely on Biggs’ (1965) orthography for an interstage he called Proto Eastern Oceanic.
Updated compilations of Oceanic cognate sets were produced at the University of Hawaii
in the period 1977–1983 as part of a project directed by Grace and Pawley. These
compilations and the supporting data are problematic in various respects and we have
made only limited use of them.

                                                                            Introduction   3


    Comparative lexical studies have been carried out for several lower-order subgroups of
Oceanic: for Proto Polynesian by Biggs (resulting in Walsh and Biggs (1966), Biggs et al.
(1970) and subsequent versions of the POLLEX file, including Biggs and Clark (1993), the
version we have referred to in our work); for Proto Micronesian by scholars at the
University of Hawaii (Bender et al. 1983); for Proto North/Central Vanuatu by Clark
(1996); for Proto Southern Vanuatu by Lynch (1978b, 1996b, 2001c); for New Caledonia by
Ozanne-Rivierre (1992), Haudricourt and Ozanne-Rivierre (1982) and Geraghty (1989);
for Proto Southeast Solomonic by Levy (1980) and Lichtenberk (1988); for Proto Central
Pacific by Hockett (1976) and Geraghty (1983, 1986, and 1996, together with a number of
unpublished papers); for Proto Eastern Oceanic by Biggs (1965), Cashmore (1969),
Levy and Smith (1970), and Geraghty (1990); and for Proto Central Papuan by Pawley (1975),
Lynch (1978a, 1980), and Ross (1994a).

    Robert Blust of the University of Hawaii has, in a series of papers (1970, 1980b, 1983–84a, 1986, 1989)
published extensive, alphabetically ordered, lexical reconstructions (with
supporting cognate sets) for interstages earlier than POc, especially for Proto Austronesian,
Proto Malayo-Polynesian and Proto Eastern Malayo-Polynesian. He has also written
several papers investigating specific semantic fields (Blust 1980a, 1982, 1987, 1994). At
the time of writing, Blust is in the process of compiling his Austronesian Comparative
Dictionary (ACD) on disk at the University of Hawaii. The version to which we refer dates
from 1998.

    Several papers systematically investigate particular semantic domains in the lexicon of
POc, e.g. Milke (1958), French-Wright (1983), Pawley (1982b), Pawley and Green (1985),
Lichtenberk (1986), Walter (1989), and the various papers in Pawley and Ross (1994a).
Ross (1988) contains a substantial number of new POc lexical reconstructions, as well as
proposed modifications to the reconstructed POc sound system and the orthography.

    These earlier works have provided valuable points of reference, both inside and outside
the Oceanic group, and we are indebted particularly to Biggs and Clark (1993),
Clark (1996) and Blust (ACD). However, previous Oceanic lexical studies were limited both by
large gaps in the data, with a distinct bias in favour of ‘Eastern Oceanic’ languages, and by
the technical problems of collating large quantities of data. Although most languages in
Melanesia remain poorly described, there are now many more dictionaries and extended
word lists, particularly for Papua New Guinea, than there were ten years ago. And
developments in computing hardware and software now permit much faster and more
precise handling of data than was possible even five years ago. A list of sources and a
summary of the Project’s collation procedures is found in Appendix 1.

    As the present project proceeded, we came to realise that the form in which preliminary
publications were presented—namely as essays, each discussing a particular terminology
at some length—would also be the best form for the presentation of our final synthesis. A
discursive treatment of individual terminologies, as opposed, say, to a dictionary-type
listing of reconstructions with supporting cognate sets, makes it easier to relate the
linguistic comparisons to relevant issues of culture history, language change, and
methodology. Hence each of the present volumes is a collection of essays, each paper
presenting the reconstruction of a POc terminology. Some of these have been published or
presented elsewhere, but are printed here in revised form. In some cases we have updated
the earlier versions in the light of subsequent research, and, where appropriate, have
inserted cross-references between contributions. Authorship is in some cases something of
a problem, as a number of people have had a hand in collating the data, doing the
reconstructions, and (re)writing for publication here. In most papers, however, one person
did the research which determined the structure of the terminology, and that person
appears as the first or only author, and where another or others had a substantial part in
putting together the paper itself, they appear as the second and further authors. Meredith
Osmond, the project’s research assistant, played an important role in collating the cognate
sets of most papers, and all contributions have undergone a rather greater degree of
editorial adjustment by all three editors than would otherwise be normal in a composite
volume.

4   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond



1.3 Reconstructing the lexicon

   The lexical reconstructions presented in these volumes are arrived at using the standard
methods of comparative linguistics, which require as preliminaries a theory of subgrouping
(§3.2) and the working out of systematic sound correspondences among cognate
vocabulary in contemporary languages (§3.3). As well as cognate sets clearly attributable
to Proto Oceanic, we have included some cognate sets which at this stage are attributable
to various interstage languages, particularly Proto Western and Proto Eastern Oceanic (but
see below for definitions). We have set out to pay more careful attention to reconstructing
the semantics of Proto Oceanic forms than has generally been done in earlier work, treating
words not as isolates but as parts of terminologies.


1.3.1 Terminological reconstruction

   Our method of doing ‘terminological reconstruction’ is as follows. First, the
terminologies of present-day speakers of Oceanic languages are used as the basis for
constructing a hypothesis about the semantic structure of a corresponding POc
terminology, taking account of (i) ethnographic evidence, i.e. descriptions of the lifestyles
of Oceanic communities and (ii) the geographical and physical resources of particular
regions of Oceania. For example, by comparing terms in several languages for parts of an
outrigger canoe, or for growth stages of a coconut, one can see which concepts recur and
so are likely to have been present in POc. Secondly, a search is made for cognate sets from
which forms can be reconstructed to match each meaning in this hypothesised terminology.
The search is not restricted to members of the Oceanic subgroup; if a term found in an
Oceanic language proves to have external (non-Oceanic) cognates, the POc antiquity of
that term will be confirmed and additional evidence concerning its meaning will be
provided. Thirdly, the hypothesised terminology is re-examined to see if it needs
modification in the light of the reconstructions. There are cases, highlighted in the various
contributions to these volumes, where we were able to reconstruct a term where we did not
expect to do so and conversely, often more significantly, where we were unable to
reconstruct a term where we had believed we should be able to. In each case, we have
discussed the reasons why our expectations were not met and what this may mean for
Oceanic culture history.

                                                                               Introduction    5

    Blust (1987:81) distinguishes between conventional ‘semantic reconstruction’, which
asks, “What was the probable meaning of protomorpheme X?”, and Dyen and Aberle’s
(1974) ‘lexical reconstruction’, where one asks, “What was the protomorpheme which
probably meant ‘X’?” At first sight, it might appear that terminological reconstruction is a
version of lexical reconstruction. However, there are sharp differences. Lexical
reconstruction applies a formal procedure: likely protomeanings are selected from among
the glosses of words in available cognate sets, then an algorithm is applied to determine
which meaning should be attributed to each set. This procedure may have unsatisfactory
results, as Blust points out. Several reconstructions may end up with the same meaning; or
no meaning may be reconstructed for a form because none of the glosses of its reflexes is
its protomeaning.

    Terminological reconstruction is instead similar to the semantic reconstruction
approach. In terminological reconstruction the meanings of protomorphemes are not
determined in advance. Instead, cognate sets are collected and their meanings are
compared with regard to:

__ul__
their specific denotations, where these are known;
the geographic and genetic distribution of these denotations (i.e. are the glosses from which the protogloss is reconstructed well distributed?);
any derivational relationships to other reconstructions;
their place within a working hypothesis of the relevant POc terminology (e.g., are terms complementary —‘bow’ implies ‘arrow’; ‘seine net’ implies ‘floats’ and ‘weights’? Are there different levels of classification—generic, specific, and so on?).

For example, it proved possible to reconstruct the following POc terms for tying with cords
(vol.1, pp.291–293):

__pre__
    POc *buku                  ‘tie (a knot); fasten’
    POc *pwita                 ‘tie by encircling’
    POc *paqu(s), *paqus-i-    ‘bind, lash; construct (canoe +) by lashing together’
    POc *pisi                  ‘bind up, tie up, wind round, wrap’
    POc *kiti                  ‘tie, bind’

In each of the supporting cognate sets from contemporary languages there are a number of
items whose glosses in the dictionaries or word lists are too vague to tell the analyst
anything about the specific denotation of the item, and in the case of *kiti this prevents the
assignment of a more specific meaning. The verb *buku can be identified as the generic
term for tying a knot because of its derivational relationship (by zero derivation) with a
noun whose denotation is clearly generic, *buku ‘node (as in bamboo or sugarcane); joint;
knuckle; knot in wood, string or rope’ (vol. 1, p.85). Reconstruction of the meaning of
*pwita as ‘tie by encircling’ is supported by the meanings of the Lukep, Takia and Longgu
reflexes, respectively ‘tie by encircling’, ‘tie on (as grass-skirt)’, and ‘trap an animal’s leg;
tie s.t. around ankle or wrist’: Lukep and Takia are North New Guinea languages, whilst
Longgu is Southeast Solomonic. Reconstruction of the meaning of *paqu(s), *paqus-i- as
‘bind, lash; construct (canoe +) by tying together’ is supported by the meanings of the
Takia, Kiribati and Samoan reflexes, respectively ‘tie, bind; construct (a canoe)’,
‘construct (canoe, house)’, and ‘make, construct (wooden objects, canoes +)’: Takia is a
North New Guinea language, Kiribati is Micronesian, and Samoan is Polynesian. The
meaning of *pisi is similarly reconstructed by reference to the meanings of its Mono-Alu,
Mota, Port Sandwich, Nguna and Fijian reflexes.

6    Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Often, however, the contributors of these chapters have been less fortunate in the
information available to them. For example, Osmond (vol.1, pp.222–224) reconstructs six
POc terms broadly glossed as ‘spear’. Multiple terms for implements within one language
imply that these items were used extensively and possibly in specialised ways. Can we
throw light on these specialised ways? Unfortunately, some of the word lists and
dictionaries available give minimal glosses—‘spear’ or ‘net’. What we need to know is:
what is the level of reference? Is it a term for all spears, or perhaps all pointed projectiles
including arrows and darts? Or does it refer to a particular kind of spear? Is it noun or verb
or both? If a noun, does it refer to both the instrument and the activity? Most word lists are
frustratingly short on detail. For this kind of detail, ethnographies have proved a more
fruitful source of information than many word lists.

   Another problem is inherent in the dangers of sampling from over 450 languages. The
greater the number of languages, the greater are the possible variations in meaning of any
given term, and the greater the chances of two languages making the same semantic leaps
quite independently. Does our (sometimes quite limited) cognate set provide us with a
clear unambiguous gloss, or have we picked up an accidental bias, a secondary or distantly
related meaning? Did etymon x refer to fishhook or the material from which the fishhook
was made? Did etymon y refer to the slingshot or to the action of turning round and round?


1.3.2 Subgrouping and reconstruction

    The strength of a lexical reconstruction rests crucially on the distribution of the
supporting cognate sets across subgroups. The distribution of cognate forms and
agreements in their meanings is much more important than the number of cognates. It is
enough to make a secure reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in just two languages in a
family, with agreement in meaning, provided that the two languages belong to different
first-order subgroups and provided that there is no reason to suspect that the resemblances
are due to borrowing or chance. The PMP term *apij ‘twins’ is reflected in several
Western Malayo-Polynesian languages (e.g. Batak apid ‘twins, double (fused) banana’) but
in only a single Oceanic language (Roviana avisi ‘twins of the same sex’). Because
Roviana belongs to a different first-order branch of Malayo-Polynesian from the Western
Malayo-Polynesian witnesses and because there is virtually no chance that the agreement
is due to borrowing or chance similarity, this distribution is enough to justify the
reconstruction of PMP *apij, POc *apic ‘twins’.

    Although the subgrouping of Austronesian languages and questions about which
protolanguage was spoken where remain somewhat controversial, it is impossible to
proceed without making some assumptions about these matters. Figure 1 is an approximate
rendering of our subgrouping assumptions, and also serves as a key to abbreviations of
names of language groups and protolanguages. The upper part of the tree (as far down as
POc) is due to Blust, originally presented in Blust (1977a) and repeated with additional
supporting evidence in subsequent publications (Blust 1978a, 1982, 1983–84b, 1993).[4]

[4]   For a commentary on Austronesian subgrouping, see Ross (1995b).

                                                                                      Introduction     7

      Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the diversification of Austronesian languages
                     (see the text with regard to its interpretation)
      Note: Italics are used to indicate a group of languages or a language which have no
      exclusively shared common ancestor. Thus Formosan languages indicates a collection of
      languages descended (along with Proto Malayo-Polynesian) from Proto Austronesian. It is
      assumed that there was no ‘Proto Formosan’.

8   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

Map 3, same as in vol 1

                                                                                          Introduction       9

   Within Oceanic we assume a minimum of three primary subgroups: Admiralties (Adm),
Western Oceanic, and Eastern Oceanic (see Map 3). The Admiralties subgroup is well
founded, and has been defined by Ross (1988). The St Matthias group, also a possible
primary subgroup (represented here only by Mussau), is here included with Admiralties, as
there are some indications that St Matthias and Admiralties languages have exclusively
shared a period of development.[5] Western Oceanic (Ross 1988) is an innovation-linked
group which appears to derive from an original dialect network that probably extended,
originally from New Britain to the western Solomons. Eastern Oceanic (‘Central/Eastern
Oceanic’ in the terminology of Ross (1995b) includes all other Oceanic languages.[6]

   Neither Western nor Eastern Oceanic meets normal subgrouping criteria (i.e. in each
case no shared innovations define the whole group), but treating each as a unit ensures a
rigorous criterion for recognising a reconstruction as POc: a reconstruction must have
reflexes in at least two of the subgroups that are generally regarded as primary, or possibly
primary, branches of Oceanic.[7] Both here and at the interstages described below, no
reconstruction is made if there are grounds to infer borrowing from one subgroup to
another.[8] Occasionally, we make use of data from Yapese, which may also be a single-
member primary subgroup of Oceanic (Ross 1996a), but we have not treated it as a
subgroup for the purpose of reconstruction (i.e. reflexes of an etymon in Yapese and in just
one of the three primary subgroups listed above would not be enough to justify a
reconstruction)

   In Chapter 2, Pawley discusses Robert Blust’s proposal that the primary split in Oceanic
divides the Admiralties subgroup from a subgroup embracing all other Oceanic languages.
Pawley dubs the latter ‘Nuclear Oceanic’. If Blust’s subgrouping were accepted, then an
etymon which lacked cognates outside Oceanic would need to be reflected both in an
Admiralties language and in a non-Admiralties language for a POc reconstruction to be
made. Etyma with reflexes in both Western and Eastern Oceanic, but not in the
Admiralties, would be reconstructed as Proto Nuclear Oceanic. Under the criteria outlined
in the previous paragraph, however, we attribute these reconstructions to POc. These
criteria were used in Volume 1, and we have thought it wise to maintain them throughout
all the volumes of this work. The reader who wishes to single out reconstructions
attributable to a putative Proto Nuclear Oceanic (rather than to POc) can easily recognise
them, however. They are those reconstructions for which (i) there are no Admiralties
reflexes, and (ii) there is no higher-order reconstruction (i.e. PEMP, PCEMP, PMP or
PAn).

[5]   On the position of Mussau, see Ross (1988:315–316, 331).

[6]   The term ‘Eastern Oceanic’ has been used in different ways by various authors. Ours is more inclusive
    than most, resembling more closely the ‘Central/Eastern Oceanic’ set up by Lynch and Tryon (1983).
    The published version of the latter (1985), presents a less inclusive version of Central/Eastern Oceanic.

[7]   A result of this process is that much of the data available to us remains unused because it cannot be
    attributed to a cognate set except at a very low level in the Oceanic family tree. An increase in available
    dictionaries would probably allow more cognate sets to be identified and, therefore, more reconstructions
    to be made, but it is reasonable to assume that there would always be a large proportion of the available
    data which would not fall into cognate sets because of the vocabulary innovation which goes on in all
    languages, although at varying speeds.

[8]   Cases where such an inference can be made in regard to primary subgroups occur mostly at the boundary
    (in the Solomon Islands) between WOc and EOc. Where an etymon occurs (1) in WOc and only in the
    Southeast Solomonic languages of EOc or (2) in EOc and only in the Northwest Solomonic languages of
    WOc, borrowing is likely (and is often reflected in unexpected sound correspondences).

10     Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

   The Western Oceanic languages seem to be the outcome of the gradual and complex
diversification of an old dialect network. This network was evidently part of the dialect
network into which POc itself diversified (see Chapter 2). It can be argued that these
languages have no exclusively shared protolanguage other than POc (this is the approach
of Ross 1995b), but there are enough innovations in the lexicon and elsewhere to suggest
that the original Western Oceanic dialect network was quite compact, and we treat it here
as a unitary protolanguage, Proto Western Oceanic, even if this is something of a
convenient fiction. When we reconstruct a PWOc etymon, we are saying that, as far as we
know, it is reflected nowhere outside languages descended from the Western Oceanic
dialect network.

   Western Oceanic in turn consists of the North New Guinea (NNG), Papuan Tip (PT)
and Meso-Melanesian (MM) clusters and the Sarmi/Jayapura (SJ) group (see Map 4). The
last-named may belong to the NNG cluster, but this is uncertain (Ross 1996b). It is
possible that the NNG and PT clusters form a super-cluster, New Guinea Oceanic, and so
etyma which occur only in NNG and PT languages are attributed to a putative Proto New
Guinea Oceanic (PNGOc), and etyma found in either NNG or PT (or both) and also in MM
are labelled Proto Western Oceanic (PWOc). NNG, NGOc and MM have much the same
status as WOc. They reflect portions of the WOc dialect network, and may not have
exclusively shared protolanguages. The Papuan Tip cluster, on the other hand, is
apparently descended from a unitary protolanguage, Proto Papuan Tip.

   The Admiralties subgroup is treated as having no internal subgrouping. The Eastern
Oceanic subgroup is assumed to consist of Southeast Solomonic (SES), North/Central
Vanuatu (NCV), South Vanuatu (SV), New Caledonia (NCal), Nuclear Micronesian (Mic),
and Central Pacific (divided for convenience into Fijian [Fij] and Polynesian [Pn]) (see
Map 3).[9] Reflexes in any two of these groups are enough to justify reconstruction of a
Proto Eastern Oceanic (PEOc) etymon.

   As noted above, it is likely that Eastern Oceanic is not a primary subgroup, but a
collection of primary subgroups resulting from the very rapid dispersal of POc speakers
(Pawley & Ross 1995). When we reconstruct a PEOc etymon, we are simply saying that it
has no known reflexes outside the subgroups collected together as Eastern Oceanic.

   We ask the reader to be mindful of the fact that we have provided Figure 1 as an aid to
presentation: as soon as one draws a tree diagram, one has to choose among alternative
hypotheses and draw all nodes as if they were equally well supported. This is far from the
case. One can find more convincing evidence for some parts of this tree than for others,
and, although these differences are not important to our reconstructions, we would not
wish Figure 1 to be taken as a definitive representation of our current assumptions about
Oceanic subgrouping.

   Languages from which data are cited in this volume are listed in Appendix 2 in their
subgroups, together with an index allowing the reader to find the subgroup to which a
given language belongs.

[9]    This subgrouping may well prove to be somewhat inaccurate, especially with regard to the treatment of
     North/Central Vanuatu as a subgroup (see Lynch 1995), but will not invalidate any reconstructions made
     here. The ‘Fijian’ grouping is used only for presentational purposes, and is not assumed to be a discrete
     subgroup within Central Pacific.

Introduction   11

Map 4, same as in vol 1

12   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


1.3.3 Sound correspondences

   As we noted above, reconstruction depends on working out the systematic sound
correspondences among cognate vocabulary in contemporary languages and on having a
working hypothesis about how the sounds of Proto Oceanic have changed and are reflected
in modern Oceanic languages. Working out sound correspondences even for twenty
languages is a large task, and so we have relied heavily on our own previous work and the
work of others. The sound correspondences we have used are those given by Ross (1988)
for Western Oceanic and Admiralties; by Levy (1979, 1980) and Lichtenberk (1988) for
Cristobal-Malaitan, by Pawley (1972) and Tryon and Hackman (1983) for Southeast
Solomonic; by Tryon (1976) and Clark (1996) for North/Central Vanuatu; by
Lynch (1978b, 2001c) for South Vanuatu; by Geraghty (1989) and Ozanne-Rivierre (1992) for
New Caledonia; by Jackson (1986) and Ross (1996a) for Nuclear Micronesian; by
Geraghty (1986) for Central Pacific; by Biggs (1978) for Polynesian; by Ross (1996a) for
Yapese; and by Ross (1996b) for Irian Jaya (West New Guinea).

   For non-Oceanic languages we have referred to sound correspondences given by
Tsuchida (1976) for Formosa; by Zorc (1977, 1986) and Reid (1982) for the Philippines;
by Adelaar (1992a) and Nothofer (1975) for Malay and Javanese; by Sneddon (1984) for
Sulawesi; by Collins (1983) for Central Maluku; and by Blust (1978a) for South
Halmahera and West New Guinea.

   We are well aware that regular sound correspondences can be interfered with in various
ways: by phonetic conditioning that the analyst has not identified (see, e.g., Blust 1996a), by
borrowing (for an extreme Oceanic case, see Grace 1996), or, as recent research suggests,
by the frequency of an item’s use (Bybee 1994). We have tried at least to note, and
sometimes to account for, irregularities in cognate sets.


1.3.4 Proto Oceanic phonology and orthography

   Work based on the sound correspondences of both Oceanic and non-Oceanic languages
has resulted in the following reconstructed paradigm of POc phonemes:

__pre__
            *pw          *p          *t         *c         *k       *q
            *bw          *b          *d         *j         *g
                                     *s
            *mw          *m          *n         *ñ         *ŋ
                                     *r                             *R
                                     *dr
                                     *l
            *w                                  *y
                         *i                     *u
                         *e                     *o
                                     *a

The orthography used here and in the POc reconstructions in this work is from Ross
(1988), with the addition of *pw. POc phonology and its relationship to PMP is discussed in
greater detail in vol. 1, Chapter 2, §2. Since the publication of vol. 1 of the present work,
articles by John Lynch have appeared on POc stress (2000a) and POc labiovelar phonemes
(2002e).

                                                                                             Introduction       13

   Table 1 shows two POc orthographies. The first was established by Biggs (1965), for
Proto Eastern Oceanic, and Grace (1969), who applied it to Proto Oceanic, and has been
used with a number of variants (separated by a slash) shown below. The second is the one
generally used in this work, introduced by Ross (1988). The terms ‘oral grade’ and ‘nasal
grade’ were used by Grace (1969) and have become conventional among Oceanic linguists
to refer to the outcomes of certain sound changes that occurred between PMP and POc (see
vol.1, Ch. 2).

__pre__
                                   Table 1: POc orthographies
Grace etc. oral grade          p          pw              t        d/r          s                  j        k
           nasal grade         mp       ŋp/mpw           nt       nd/nr                 nj                 ŋk
Ross         oral grade        p          pw             t         r            s                  c       k
             nasal grade       b          bw             d         dr                   j                  g
Grace                m     ŋm/mw         n       ñ       ŋ    w         y   l       q          Ø       R
Ross                 m      mw           n       ñ       ŋ    w         y   l       q          Ø       R
Grace etc.           i     o        e        a       u
Ross                 i     o        e        a       u


1.4 Conventions

1.4.1 Chapter format

   Each of the contributions to the present volume concerns a particular Proto Oceanic
‘terminology’. Generally, each contribution begins with an introduction to the issues raised
by the reconstruction of its particular terminology, and the bulk of each contribution
consists of reconstructed etyma with supporting data and a commentary on matters of
meaning and form. In the interests of space, we have not given the history of the
reconstructions themselves, as this would often require commentary on the modifications
made by others and by us, and on why we have made them. Where a reconstruction is not
new, we have tried to give its earliest source, but this is difficult when earlier
reconstructions differ in form and meaning.

   In general, the contributions to these volumes are concerned with items reconstructable
in POc, PWOc, PEOc and occasionally PNGOc. Etyma for PWOc, PNGOc and PEOc are
reconstructed because these may well also be POc etyma for which known reflexes are not
well distributed (see discussion in §3.2). The contributors to this volume vary in the degree
to which they reconstruct etyma for interstages further down the tree. Reconstructions for
lower-order interstages are decreasingly likely to reflect POc etyma and may be the results
of cultural change as Oceanic speakers moved further out into the Pacific.

   Contributors have usually not sought to make fresh reconstructions at interstages
superordinate to POc. What they have done, however, is to cite other scholars’
reconstructions for higher-order interstages, as these represent a summary of the non-
Oceanic evidence in support of a given POc reconstruction. Occasionally, non-Oceanic
evidence has been found to support a POc reconstruction where no reconstruction at a
higher-level interstage has previously been made. In this case a new higher-order
reconstruction is made, and the non-Oceanic evidence is given in a footnote.

14     Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Whilst we have tried to use the internal organisation of the lexicons of Oceanic
languages themselves as a guide in setting the boundaries of each terminology, we have
inevitably taken decisions which differ from those that others might have made. There are,
obviously, overlaps and connections between various semantic domains and therefore
between the contributions here. We have done our best to provide cross-references, but we
have sometimes duplicated information rather than ask the reader repeatedly to look
elsewhere in the book. Indexes at the end of each volume and in the final volume are
intended to make it easier to use the volumes collectively as a work of reference.


1.4.2 Data

    The sources of our data are listed in Appendix 1.

    For most reconstructed etyma, only a representative sample of reflexes is given. We
have endeavoured to ensure, however, that in each case this sample not only is
geographically and genetically representative, but also provides evidence to justify the
shape of the reconstruction. Where only a few reflexes are known to us, this is usually
noted.

    Because our supporting data are drawn from such a wide range of languages, the
convention is adopted of prefixing each language name with the abbreviation for the group
of languages to which the language belongs, so that the distribution of a cognate set is
more immediately obvious. These groups are genealogical except, perhaps, North/Central
Vanuatu (abbreviated ‘NCV’) and Fijian (abbreviated ‘Fij:’).[10] We have sought to be
consistent in always listing these groups in the same order, but contributors vary in the
ordering of languages within groups.

    Although there are accepted or standard orthographies for a number of the languages
from which data are cited here, all data are transcribed into a standard orthography (see
Ross 1988:3–4) in order to facilitate comparison. Except for inflexional morphemes, non-
cognate portions of reflexes, i.e. derivational morphemes and non-cognate parts of
compounds, are shown in parentheses (…). Where an inflexional morpheme is an affix or
clitic and can readily be omitted, its omission is indicated by a hyphen at the beginning or
end of the base. This applies particularly to possessor suffixes on directly possessed nouns
(vol.1, Ch. 2, §3.2). Where an inflexional morpheme cannot readily be omitted, then it is
separated from its base by a hyphen. This may happen because of complicated
morphophonemics or because the morpheme is always present, like the adjectival -n in
some NNG and Admiralties languages and prefixed reflexes of the POc article *na in
scattered languages. When a reflex is itself polymorphemic (i.e. the morphemes reflect
morphemes present in the reconstructed etymon) or contains a reduplication, the
morphemes or reduplicates are also separated by a hyphen.


[10] An argument that North/Central Vanuatu does not constitute a genealogical subgroup is made by Lynch
     (1995) and summarised in Lynch, Ross and Crowley (2002, Ch. 5). The argument that Fijian does not
     constitute a genealogical subgroup was made by Geraghty (1983) and is incorporated into Figure 1,
     where ‘Fijian’ comprises Rotuman, the East Fijian dialects, and West Fijian (also a dialect network).

                                                                            Introduction    15


1.4.3 Conventions used in representing reconstructions

   POc reconstructions, and also PWOc, PEOc and PNGOc reconstructions, are given in
the orthography of §3.4. For reconstructions at higher-order interstages the orthographies
are those used by Blust in his various publications and the ACD. Reconstructions at lower-
order interstages are given in the standard orthography adopted for data (§4.2). Geraghty’s
(1986) PCP orthography, for example, is based on Standard Fijian spelling, and is
converted into our standard orthography in the same way as Fijian. Biggs and Clark’s PPn
reconstructions are in any case written in an orthography identical to our standard.
Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms are shown in Table 2.

__ul__
             Table 2: Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms
       (x)      it cannot be determined whether x was present
       (x, y)   either x or y was present
       [x]      the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with and one without x
       [x, y]   the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with x and one with y
       x-y      x and y are separate morphemes
       x-       x takes an enclitic or a suffix
       ‹x›      x is an infix

    It happens fairly often that the final consonant in a higher-order reconstructed etymon
(e.g. *-R in PMP *kamaliR ‘men’s house’) is not evidenced in any Oceanic reflex. Often
POc final consonants are regularly lost in all the languages from which reflexes are drawn,
and we therefore have no evidence as to whether or not the final consonant was retained in
the POc etymon in question. In such a case, since we know that final consonants were
usually retained in POc, the consonant is reconstructed in brackets (e.g. POc *kamali(R)).

    When historical linguists compile cognate sets, they commonly retain the glosses given
in the sources from which the items are taken. However, again in the interests of
comparison, we have often reworded (and sometimes abbreviated) the glosses of our
sources. Where the latter were in a language other than English, we have translated them.
In the interests of space and legibility, and because data often have multiple sources, we
have given the source of a reflex only when it is not included in the listing in Appendix 1.
Some authors have adopted the convention of providing no gloss beside the items in a
cognate set whose gloss is identical to that of the POc (or other lower-order) reconstruction
at the head of the set, i.e. the reconstruction which they reflect.

    Where glosses have been standardised, they are given according to the conventions
described by Geraghty (1983:8–11), although our abbreviations differ from his. Briefly, a
noun modifying a gloss is enclosed in brackets. If it refers to a subject or possessor, it
precedes the gloss; if to an object, it follows the gloss. A plus sign after the noun indicates
that it is a member of a set (e.g. the gloss ‘(basket +) old’ indicates that a set of items of
which ‘basket’ is a member, probably inanimates, may function as subject of the stative
verb glossed as ‘old’). Where necessary, we use ‘(V)’, ‘(VI)’, or ‘(VT)’ to indicate that a
gloss is a verb, intransitive verb or transitive verb, ‘(N)’ to indicate that it is a noun. In
glosses we use the conventional abbreviations ‘k.o.’ (as in ‘k.o. yam’) for ‘kind of’, ‘s.o.’
for ‘someone’, and ‘s.t.’ for ‘something’.

16   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    In putting together cognate sets, we have quite often found apparent reflexes which do
not quite ‘fit’ the set: either they display a phonological irregularity or their meaning is just
a little too different from the rest of the set for us to assume cognacy. Rather than eliminate
them, our authors often include them below the cognate set under the rubric ‘cf. also’.

    We have mostly not indicated the POc word class to which a reconstruction belongs, as
this is often unclear. POc word classes and factors affecting their identification are
discussed in Chapter 2 of vol. 1, as are issues concerning the derivational morphology
which can be reconstructed for POc.




2               Locating Proto Oceanic


2.1 Introduction

   This chapter briefly describes the major biogeographical regions of Oceania and Island
Southeast Asia, summarises the evidence for locating the Proto Oceanic speech community
in the Bismarck Archipelago, and refers to the range of environments and environmental
features to be encountered there.[1]


2.2 The major biogeographic regions of Oceania

    Oceania is often divided into three main geographic regions: Melanesia, Polynesia and
Micronesia. However, a more useful primary division for understanding the history of
plants and animals, and, particularly, of humans in the Pacific is between Near Oceania
and Remote Oceania.[2]

    Modern Near Oceania consists of Australia and that part of the Pacific Islands whose
chief land masses are New Guinea, the Bismarck archipelago and the Solomons
archipelago, extending as far east as Makira (formerly known as San Cristobal). Some of
the islands in Near Oceania are formidable in their size and rugged terrain. New Guinea is
2300 km long and has a mountainous interior that extends the length of the island, with
peaks reaching 4500 m. New Britain is 480 km long and from 50 to 80 km across,
mountainous and actively volcanic. New Ireland is 350 km long though never more than
50 km across. Bougainville is more compact but has a landmass similar to New Ireland.
The islands of Near Oceania for the most part form an intervisible series of landmasses
which served as stepping-stones for the dispersion of plants, animals and people, enhanced
at times by lower sea levels during the late Pleistocene.

[1]  I am indebted to Roger Green, Meredith Osmond, Malcolm Ross and Christophe Sand for helpful
    comments on a draft of this chapter. A number of issues to do with locating Proto Oceanic are
    raised in a paper by Terrell, Hunt and Bradshaw (2002) which came to hand after this paper was written.

[2]   See Green (1991b) for an extended discussion of the Near Oceania vs Remote Oceania division,
first proposed in Pawley and Green (1973).

18   Andrew Pawley

    The east-west boundary between Near and Remote Oceania is the ocean gap of 350 km
separating the easternmost point of the Solomons chain from the small Santa Cruz group.
Beyond the Solomons the landmasses are generally smaller and island groups are separated
from each other by long distances of open sea. Along the equator and to its north lie
several extensive groups of small islands traditionally grouped under the heading of
Micronesia: the Marianas, the Carolines, the Marshalls and Kiribati. The large
archipelagoes of Vanuatu and New Caledonia-Loyalties are southeast of the Solomons.
Some 900 km east of Vanuatu are the Fiji group and Rotuma. The vast Polynesian
Triangle, whose apices are Hawaii, New Zealand and Easter Island, contains some
extremely isolated islands and island groups, several being separated by ocean gaps of
between 1000 and 3000 kilometres from the nearest inhabited land.

    The western landmasses of Near Oceania are close to the easternmost islands of the
Indo-Malaysian archipelago. The latter consist of two biogeographical regions: Sundaland
and Wallacea. At various times during the last Pleistocene glaciation, beginning about
120,000 years ago, sea levels were much lower than today, with an extreme lowpoint at
about 18,000 years ago. For much of this period Sumatra, Java, Borneo and Palawan were
connected to continental Southeast Asia by the Sunda shelf. This continental extension,
Sundaland, was permanently separated by short ocean gaps from the region known as
Wallacea, which includes the Philippines, Sulawesi, the Lesser Sundas and the Moluccas.
Wallacea has always been a world of islands, whose flora and fauna are intermediate
between the ‘Southeast Asian’ and the ‘Australian’ types. During the Upper Pleistocene
and until about 8000 years ago New Guinea was linked to Australia, forming the continent
known as Sahul. They share a distinctive mammalian and bird fauna and a number of
distinctive plant genera. Map 5 shows the major biogeographic regions of island SE Asia
and the Pacific.

    Within Wallacea, stretches of open sea up to 60–70 km were traversed by the first
settlers—very likely the first substantial open sea voyages made by humans. The shortest
sea crossings from Wallacea to the Australia-New Guinea continent were between 65 and
 100 km. These crossings were made no later than 40,000 BP, because human settlement of
Australia and New Guinea is securely dated to that time, and there are earlier, less widely
accepted dates, indicating that Australia may have been settled as early as 60,000 BP.

    The relatively narrow (70 km) but permanent ocean gap between New Guinea and New
Britain has proved an important barrier limiting the spread of plants and animals. New
Guinea harbours far more species and genera than any other region of the Pacific. Almost
all the plant genera of the Bismarcks (627 of 632) and Solomons (637 of 654) are shared
with New Guinea (Mayr & Diamond 2001). However, 800 genera present in New Guinea
are lacking in the Bismarcks and Solomons (Mayr and Diamond refer to the latter two
archipelagoes as making up ‘Northern Melanesia’). New Guinea has about 520 species of
land birds (and in any one locality there are likely to be at least 200 species), New Britain
about 80, the Solomons 127, Fiji 54, Samoa 33, Tonga 20, the Society Islands 17 and the
Marquesas 11. Whereas New Guinea has some 130 species of indigenous terrestrial
mammal species (Flannery 1995), the Bismarcks have one bandicoot and one wallaby
species, two phalanger species and four genera of rats, and the Solomons have one
phalanger species and three genera of rats. (When it comes to mammals, it is only in bats
that New Guinea and Northern Melanesia show a comparable diversity: New Guinea has
about 70 bat species and the Bismarcks and Solomons about 58.) This diminution in land-
dwelling biota must have greatly handicapped human colonists of Northern Melanesia
dependent on hunting-and-gathering to get their food.

                                                              Locating Proto Oceanic      19


   The divide between Near and Remote Oceania is also an important one for fauna and
flora distribution. Roger Green (1991a: 495) notes that:

|     all terrestrial mammals other than rats and mice or those which accompanied people
|     reach their eastward limit in the Solomons. The same applies to all fresh-water
|     mussels, and most of the Palaeo-Oriental land-snail fauna. Thirty Papuan and
|     Malayan genera of birds find their eastern limits here, as do 162 genera of seed-
|     plants, about 24% of the total.

   Even in marine life the difference is marked. The reefs of the Bismarck and Solomons
show a much richer diversty of fish, molluscs, echinoderms, crustacea, seaweeds, and
other edible life than those of Remote Oceanic.

Map 5: Major biogeographic regions of Island SE Asia and the Pacific: Sundaland, Wallacea, Near Oceania and Remote Oceania

20   Andrew Pawley

2.3 Early human settlement of Near Oceania

    For human settlement of the Pacific the Near/Remote Oceania boundary proved to be
far more formidable than the ocean gaps within Wallacea or Near Oceania.

    The crossings from New Guinea to New Britain and from New Britain to New Ireland
occurred no later than 35,000 years ago (Allen & Gosden 1996, Allen & White 1989,
Gosden & Specht 1991, Pavlides & Gosden 1994). The Manus group was reached by at
least 21,000 BP and probably a good deal earlier (Ambrose 2002). The earliest dates for
Buka-Bougainville are about 28,000 BP (Spriggs 1997a). At that time most of today’s
Solomon Islands were joined into a single landmass, and the first settlers would have been
able to walk to the central Solomons (Guadalcanal).

    The first settlers of Near Oceania were broad spectrum tropical forest hunter-gatherers.
As land food resources would have been meagre, except in New Guinea, the early settlers
would have relied heavily on coastal resources. Early archaeological sites in the Bismarcks
point to a dependence on marine shellfish, inshore fish and hunting of birds, rats, bats and
reptiles. After 20,000 BP there is evidence of considerable regional interaction, with
obsidian moving from New Britain to New Ireland, and game animals (chiefly, a phalanger
and a wallaby species) being transported from the New Guinea mainland (Spriggs 1997a).
By the mid-Holocene, 7–8000 years ago, a range of tree crops was cultivated or tended.
However, there is no clear evidence that full scale agriculture was practised in the
Bismarck Archipelago or the Solomons before the arrival of Austronesian speaking
peoples. The situation was different in New Guinea. The discovery of extensive irrigation
systems and forest clearing in the central highlands of New Guinea dated to 6000–9000 BP
(Golson 1977, 1991, Golson, Denham, Swadling & Muke forthcoming), indicates an
indigenous development of agriculture based on root crops, presumably taro, and at lower
altitudes, probably bananas and yams.

    Anderson (2000) doubts that any systematic long distance voyaging took place in
Wallacea and Near Oceania during the Upper Pleistocene and early Holocene. It is
noteworthy that the Mussau (St Matthias) group, 100 km to the north of New Ireland,
remained uninhabited until about 3500 BP. For around 25,000 years human expansion into
the Pacific got no further east than the Solomons — presumably the ocean gaps to the
islands of Remote Oceania were too great to cross against the prevailing SE trade winds
with the sailing technology then available. It may be that the shorter gaps, such as from the
Solomons to Santa Cruz, were occasionally traversed by accident. However, permanent
settlement on small Remote Oceanic islands, with their restricted flora and land fauna,
would have been very difficult if not impossible to sustain without agriculture and without
the capacity to make regular two-way long distance voyages to replenish the population
and other key resources.

    A number of striking facts about language distributions suggest a sequence for the
differentiation or appearance of language familes in Oceania. New Guinea, and the islands
of Halmahera and Timor, Alor and Pantar are home to some 750 ‘Papuan’ languages (i.e.
non-Austronesian languages indigenous to the region). These belong to more than a dozen
genetic stocks and isolates which are on present evidence unrelatable to each other or to
any languages outside of this region (Foley 1986, Ross 2005). Such extreme genetic
diversity indicates a very long occupation of the New Guinea area. Small numbers of non-
Austronesian languages are also present in New Britain, New Ireland, Bougainville and the
central Solomons. These, too, fall into several different families, not on present evidence
relatable to each other or to any other languages (Ross 2001a, 2005), a pattern that points
to ancient local diversification. It is noteworthy that all the Papuan languages are confined
to Near Oceania and Wallacea.

                                                                        Locating Proto Oceanic           21


    The Austronesian family presents a very different situation. Its origins clearly lie in
Southeast Asia.[3] The centre of genetic diversity of this family is in Taiwan, making that
island the most likely location of Proto Austronesian (Blust 1995a,1995b, 1999). It is a
striking fact that almost all the 480 or so Austronesian languages of the Pacific Islands fall
into a single branch of Austronesian, and one that is no more than a fourth-order subgroup.
This is the subgroup known as Oceanic, which is defined by a considerable number of
uniquely shared innovations in sound system, morphology and lexicon (Lynch, Ross & Crowley 2002).
All Austronesian languages of mainland and island southeast Asia and
Madagascar are excluded from Oceanic, being divided among a number of higher order
subgroups. The only Pacific Island Austronesian languages that are excluded from Oceanic
are (a) Chamorro, spoken in the Marianas, (b) Belau, spoken on Belau (Palau) Island at the
western margin of the Carolines, and (c) about 30 languages located at the western end of
New Guinea between 130 and 136 degrees E, either on the Bird’s Head or on the islands of
Cenderawasih Bay.

    Austronesian speakers probably first entered New Guinea from the Moluccas. The
immediate relatives of Oceanic are a group of languages spoken at the western end of New
Guinea, around Cenderawasih Bay, and in South Halmahera. This group, known as South
Halmahera-West New Guinea, and Oceanic form a larger subgroup known as Eastern
Malayo-Polynesian (Blust 1978a). Occam’s Razor makes the likeliest location of Proto
Eastern Malayo-Polynesian close to where its two primary branches meet, i.e. on or near
the north coast of New Guinea, in the area bounded by Cenderawasih Bay and the
Bismarck Archipelago. A dispersal centre in or near Cenderawasih Bay is favoured by the
fact that Eastern Malayo-Polynesian in turn has its closest relatives in the Moluccas and
the Lesser Sundas. The Oceanic branch probably diverged from South Halmahera-West
New Guinea when some speakers of Eastern Austronesian moved eastwards, either along
the north coast of New Guinea or directly to the Bismarcks. Today, Austronesian
languages in New Guinea are largely confined to coastal pockets and offshore islands. In
Remote Oceania, by contrast, Austronesian languages dominate. Indeed, all 180 or so of
the languages indigenous to Remote Oceania belong to the Austronesian family.

    From these facts we can draw a number of inferences about the linguistic sequence in
the Pacific. (i) The non-Austronesian families have been in Near Oceania for much longer
than Austronesian. (ii) Non-Austronesian languages probably did not reach Remote
Oceania. (iii) Austronesian languages entered Near Oceania from Wallacea. (iv) When
speakers of Austronesian languages reached Remote Oceania they had the field to
themselves.

    Around 3500–3300 BP a dramatic transformation of the cultural scene in Near Oceania
began. At this time a highly distinctive Neolithic archaeological tradition, known as Lapita,
appeared suddenly in the Bismarck Archipelago. The earliest Lapita sites are in the region
of the St Matthias Group, New Britain and in the islands off the east coast of New Ireland.

[3] There are several recent major syntheses of interdisciplinary evidence concerning the Austronesian
  diaspora by archaeologists, especially Bellwood (1997), Green (2003), Kirch (1995, 1997, 2000), Kirch
  and Green (2001) and Spriggs (1997a), with a dissenting view presented by Terrell (1986) and
  Terrell et al. (2001). For overviews by linguists see Blust (1995b), Pawley (2003a) and
  Pawley and Ross (1993, 1995).

22    Andrew Pawley

A vast literature on Lapita has accumulated over the past 40 years and it is impossible to
reference this fully. Kirch (1997) is the most comprehensive overview. Other important
reviews include Allen and Gosden (1991), Best (2002), Green (1991b, 2003), Kirch (2000),
Kirch and Green (2001), Kirch and Hunt (1988), Spriggs (1997a), and
Summerhayes (2000a, 2001).

    Lapita was a culture quite different from those which preceded it in Near Oceania.[4] Its
most prominent markers are earthenware vessels with red-slipped surface, in a
characteristic variety of shapes, including water jars, globular cooking vessels and flat
bottomed dishes. Some vessels were plain, but a minority were decorated with very
distinctive, precise and elaborate geometric motifs, mainly achieved by dentate stamping,
i.e. with repeated applications of a set of toothed implements. The plainware was clearly
for domestic use; the highly decorated pots probably had ceremonial uses.

    In the more completely excavated Lapita sites the pottery is part of a cluster of
features—settlement patterns, architecture and artefacts—which Green (1979) termed the
‘Lapita cultural complex’. Lapita settlements are in the hamlet to village range and nearly
always situated on small islands or on the coast of large islands and handy to beaches that
would provide good launching sites for boats. In at least some settlements, houses were
built on piles. The Lapita tool kit often contains ground and polished stone and shell adzes;
obsidian and chert flake tools, often imported from remote sources; one-piece shell
fishhooks; pearlshell knives and scrapers; various kinds of conus shell disks and pendants.
Earth ovens are present. Middens are typically full of lagoon fish and turtle bones, attesting
to the importance of fishing and to a variety of fishing techniques. The bones of dog,
chicken and pig are often present, indicating that these animals (none of which is native to
Near Oceania) were kept as domesticates.

    In the Bismarcks after 3200 BP, the earliest Lapita pottery style, known as Early (Far)
Western Lapita, evolved into a style with modified vessel forms and less ornate decorative
patterns, known as Western Lapita. By 3100–3000 BP there were Lapita settlements
making pottery in this Western style in Santa Cruz and Vanuatu (Green 2003), and no
doubt in the Solomons, where the record is sparse. Only slightly later, by 3000–2950 BP,
Lapita people had colonised New Caledonia and had reached Fiji and Tonga, some 4000
km to the east of the Bismarcks. At the same time or within another century or so, Samoa,
Futuna and Uvea were settled. Upwards of 200 Lapita sites have now been found in the
southwest Pacific, although only a minority have been excavated (see Map 6). The fact that
the earliest Lapita pottery found in Santa Cruz, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji shows
similar stylistic changes to that exhibited by the later Lapita assemblages in the Bismarcks
supports the idea that there was a significant pause, lasting perhaps three centuries, before
Lapita people moved from Bismarcks into Remote Oceania.

[4] At least two and probably three other movements into Remote Oceania occurred at about the same
time as the Lapita expansion, but independently of it. All were into western Micronesia and all can be
associated with Austronesian languages. The Mariana Islands, forming the northwest margin of
Micronesia, were settled by at least the late 2nd millennium BC (Bonhomme & Craig 1987). Belau
(Palau), at the western margin of the Carolines, was perhaps settled about the same time although as
yet there are no published dates earlier than 600 BC. The sources of these movements were probably the
Philippines and/or Sulawesi. Early assemblages in the Marianas and Belau show a red slip decorated
earthenware remarkably similar to that found in the southern Philippines and Sulawesi—and to the
Lapita tradition. It is likely that Yap (Western Carolines) was also settled very early. The highly
divergent Yapese language is Oceanic but cannot on present evidence be subgrouped with any other
member of Oceanic (Ross 1996a).

Locating Proto Oceanic   23

Map 6: Lapita sites in the south-west Pacific (after Spriggs 1995: 113)

24    Andrew Pawley

2.4 The location and dispersal of the Proto Oceanic speech community

   Where did Lapita culture come from? What language did the bearers of the Lapita
complex speak? It is possible to answer these questions with considerable assurance
because of a remarkably close fit between the evidence of historical linguistics and
archaeology, with support from the study of plant and animal distributions.

   Most scholars now accept the view that Lapita was an amalgam of ingredients from
three sources or dynamics, which Green (1991b, 2003) refers to as ‘intrusion’, ‘integration’
and ‘innovation’.[5] ‘Intrusion’ refers to a core complex of elements of Lapita which entered
Near Oceania from Island SE Asia. These comprised language, and many elements of
technology, domestic animals, architecture and settlement patterns and social organisation.
The intrusive technology included red-slipped pottery, seagoing outrigger canoes, the two
boom triangular sail, tattoo chisels, pearlshell knives, trolling hooks, and both
quadrangular sectioned and ovoid to lenticular polished stone adzes. The domestic animals
were the pig, chicken and dog. Also part of this complex were large villages, rectangular
houses and houses on stilts.

   This extensive ‘intrusive’ component of Lapita can be equated with the culture brought
by a colonising community of Austronesian speaking migrants. The archaeological
grounds for this equation are the close similarities between Lapita and contemporaneous
and older Neolithic cultures in Southeast Asia (Bellwood 1997, Kirch 1997, Spriggs 1996, 1997).
The spread of the Neolithic through the Philippines and across Indonesia and into
the Bismarck Archipelago now seems to have been quite swift, taking less than 1000 years
(Bellwood 2001). Although certain archaeologists disagree (see footnote [5]) it seems we are
dealing here with a clear case of populations maintaining a high degree of cultural and
linguistic continuity while migrating. Evidence from historical linguistics gives powerful
support to this view. The support goes far beyond the matter of family trees and the
directions of dispersal. It includes massive continuities in the terminologies for social
organisation and material culture from Proto Malayo-Polynesian through Proto Oceanic to
contemporary Oceanic languages of both Near and Remote Oceania.[6]

[5] Some archaeologists have in the past favoured a predominantly local origin of Lapita in the
Bismarck archipelago (Allen 1984, Allen & Gosden 1996, Allen & White 1989, Gosden & Specht 1991,
Terrell 1986, Terrell & Welsch 1997, Terrell, Kelly & Rainbird 2001, White 1996). They point out that
the Bismarck archipelago had a long history of human occupation before the appearance of Lapita and
that there are precedents for some elements of Lapita technology and trade patterns in the pre-Lapita
period there, including lagoon fishing, trochus shell armrings, one piece shell fishhooks, earth
ovens, and trade in obsidian.

[6] See Blust (1995b), Kirch (2000), Kirch and Green (2001), Pawley and Green (1984), Pawley and Ross
  (1994), and Ross, Pawley and Osmond (1998) for overviews and extensive references in this field.

   ‘Integration’ refers to elements having antecedents in Near Oceania and eastern
Wallacea. Green considers as most likely from such a source the use of earth ovens and
possibly the heavy, hinge-portioned Tridacna adze. The interisland trade in obsidian
practised by Lapita peoples was almost certainly based on trade systems that had existed in
the Bismarcks since the Upper Pleistocene, but shows significant changes in the range and
frequency of trade and in the degree of formal blade technology (Summerhayes 2000a, 2000b).
Following Yen’s conclusion (1973, 1991) that a number of tree crops and plant
domesticates such as Australimusa bananas, breadfruit, coconuts and sugarcane, were Near
Oceania domesticates, Spriggs (1997a), Kirch (1996) and Green (1991b, 2003) suggest that
these may have been added to the Lapita suite of crops as a result of contact with non-
Lapita populations. However, Blust (1995b) provides evidence that certain of these plant
domesticates were already familiar to Malayo-Polynesian speakers before the settlement of
Near Oceania, and such items are better placed in the ‘indeterminate’ category.

                                                                        Locating Proto Oceanic          25

   ‘Innovations’ refers to features unique to Lapita, i.e. generated within Lapita
communities rather than due to external stimulus. The distinctive decorative style on
Lapita pottery is deemed to be an innovation (although it had parallels in the decorative
styles found on red slip pottery of Island Southeast Asia in the 4th millennium BP) as are
the planilateral section and plano-convex section stone adze types. Under probable local
innovations of Lapita, Green would also place certain developments in canoe building and
sailing techniques.

    The logic of the equation between the Lapita dispersal and the spread of Oceanic
languages is succinctly stated by the archaeologist Glenn Summerhayes, in the course of a
comparative study of pottery from three Lapita sites in the Bismarcks:

|      What is the relationship between the makers of the pottery from Mussau, Anir and the
|      Arawe Islands and those populations who colonised Remote Oceania? … There are
|      few who would doubt that the colonisers of Remote Oceania were Austronesian
|      speakers who made Lapita pottery. There would also be few who would not agree that
|      they came from communities in the Bismarck Archipelago. It is a simple step to then
|      argue that they came from the same communities, such as Anir, the Arawe Islands or
|      Mussau, that made and used Lapita pottery in the Bismarck Archipelago. It would
|      follow that these communities also spoke Austronesian languages and shared in a
|      similar ideology. (Summerhayes 2001:62)

   We can be more precise than ‘Austronesian speakers’.[7] We can infer that the early
Lapita peoples of the Bismarck Archipelago spoke Proto Oceanic, that stage of Oceanic
which was spoken by a more or less unified Oceanic speech community immediately prior
to its decisive breakup. The dispersion of Lapita culture beyond the Bismarcks out into
Remote Oceania can be equated either with the breakup of Proto Oceanic or of a branch of
Oceanic that included all its members except the Admiralties subgroup (on which see
below). Before its eastward expansion Proto Oceanic was probably confined to the
Bismarck Archipelago and (possibly) to parts of the central north coast of New Guinea.

   One source of evidence for locating the dispersal centre of Oceanic is the structure of its
family tree and the geographic distribution of its subgroups. The centre of greatest genetic
diversity within Oceanic itself is in the Bismarck archipelago. Blust (1978b, 1998a) argues
that the first split within Oceanic was between the Admiralties group and the rest of
Oceanic, on the grounds that the rest all merge Proto Malayo-Polynesian (PMP) _*j_ and _*s_
(as well as merging PMP _*s_, _*z_ and _*Z_) and this is a relatively unusual merger in the
Austronesian family. Blust proposes to reserve the name ‘Oceanic’ for the subgroup that
consists of the rest of Oceanic, i.e. everything except the Admiralties group. He renames
the old Oceanic group ‘Broad Oceanic’. My view is that the traditional use of ‘Oceanic’ is
too well established and too useful to be changed. I will retain it here and refer to Blust’s
proposed ‘rest of Oceanic’ group as ‘Nuclear Oceanic’.

[7]   Some archaeologists and molecular biologists tend to talk of Austronesian speakers, rather than
Oceanic speakers, settling Melanesia and Polynesia. This is correct but unnecessarily vague. It is
rather like talking about the Celtic or the Anglo-Saxon colonisations of Britain as being carried out
by speakers of Indo-European languages.

26   Andrew Pawley

    Ross (1988) recognises at least two and possibly three primary branches of Oceanic in
the Bismarck archipelago (see Maps 3 and 4). One is the Admiralties group. A second may
be the two languages of the Mussau group, (Mussau-Emira and Tench), to the north of
New Ireland, for which evidence is limited. A third is the widely dispersed Western
Oceanic linkage, which includes all the Austronesian languages of New Guinea from
Jayapura east, and all those of New Britain, New Ireland and the western Solomons. A
‘linkage’ refers to the descendants of a dialect network rather than a unified proto-
language. The status of Western Oceanic as a subgroup is thus problematic insofar as it
stems not from a discrete interstage but from a part of the Proto Oceanic dialect chain.
Ross divides Western Oceanic into three branches, of which two (North New Guinea and
Meso-Melanesian) have some representatives in the Bismarck Archipelago, and one,
Papuan Tip, lies entirely outside it. However, North New Guinea and Meso-Melanesian are
also described as ‘linkages’ not as discrete subgroups; that is, they are probably
continuations in situ of a widely dispersed Western Oceanic dialect network rather than the
result of movements away from a compact dispersal centre.

    The distribution of early Lapita sites in the Bismarck Archipelago indicates that
Oceanic speaking communities were widely scattered over this region. More than 70
findspots with Lapita pottery are known from the Bismarcks. But not all Lapita pottery
users in the Bismarcks were Oceanic speakers. Pots certainly found their way into non-
Austronesian communities, as exchange or trade goods. Only those sites that exhibit a
range of features diagnostic of the full Lapita cultural complex — some 20 or so sites — can
be confidently associated with speakers of an Oceanic language.

    Permanent early Lapita settlements in the Bismarcks were largely confined to small
islands offshore from the larger land masses. This peculiar distribution reflects the fact that
the bearers of the Lapita culture were recent intruders into a region already occupied by
other peoples, and that the Lapita people were fisherman and sailors by long tradition. On
this point Kirch (1997:165–166) writes:

|      From a careful study of the environmental settings of 28 Lapita sites, Dana Lepofsky
|      (1988) discovered a number of traits common to Lapita settlements. First, all sites …
|      were … on the coast at the time they were inhabited. Equally important, all sites were
|      situated facing passages in the reef through which canoes could come and go. A
|      majority of sites are also situated in areas where there is either a broad fringing reef,
|      or a lagoon and barrier reef, or both. Access to the sea and its resources, while clearly
|      significant, was not the only consideration in the choice of settlement locations, for
|      three quarters of these settlements are also adjacent to identifiable fresh water sources
|      (springs or streams), and every site has arable land with good soils within less than a
|      one kilometre walk.

   On Mussau there are five significant Lapita sites, all of them on the small atolls south of
the main island, with the earliest period dated to the late 2nd millennium BC
(Summerhayes 2000b, 2001) Although no open Lapita sites have yet been located on the
main island, Mussau, Spriggs (1997a:118) suggests that this may be due to landscape
change over the last few millennia.

   Among the first Lapita sites to be excavated was one on the small island of Watom,
near the eastern tip of New Britain. Here the Lapita sequence does not begin until the late
stage of decoration, starting some time after 2600 BP, and continues for around 800 years,
by which time it is giving way to a new cultural tradition. A number of Lapita settlements,
with earliest dates of around 3300–3200 BP, have been located on the Arawe Islands, a
group of some 40 small islands just off the southwest coast of New Britain (Specht & Gosden 1997).
All the open sites occur on the protected leeward sides of the islands where
sandy beach ridges have built up over the last few thousand years. Finding Lapita sites on
the north side of New Britain has been made difficult by the effects of large volcanic
eruptions. A massive eruption by Mt Witori about 3600 years ago destroyed pre-Lapita
settlements on the Willaumez Peninsula and adjacent islands. This area was not reoccupied
until about 3100 BP, when users or makers of Lapita pottery occupied several sites near
Talasea, where there is an important obsidian source (Torrence & Stevenson 2000:355).

                                                              Locating Proto Oceanic      27

    Recent work at the Kamgot site on the Anir Island group off the south-east coast of
New Ireland has uncovered a full range of early Western Lapita artefacts, dated from 3200
to 2900 BP (Summerhayes 2000b, 2001). Although the New Ireland mainland has so far
failed to provide a good sequence of Lapita sites, enough information is available to
suggest that such sites remain to be found. The earliest Neolithic sites on New Ireland,
dated from 2700 to 2300 BP, yield pottery that closely resembled that found in the Mussau
sequence of the same period, by which time classic Lapita decorative styles had given way
to incised and relief styles.

    Only three sites with Lapita pottery have been found in the Manus group. The best of
these is located on the islet of Mouk, 300m off the north-east tip of Baluan, which
represents a long but intermittent sequence of occupations from 3000 BP onward
(Ambrose & McEldowney 2000:275). Spriggs (1997a:113) comments that the absence of
Lapita sites on Lou Island, a major source of obsidian for the Bismarck Archipelago, is
probably due to active vulcanism in this region, with deep deposits of ash burying sites,
and to subsidence.

    Over the centuries there was a decline in the quantity of dentate-stamped pots and in the
quality and quantity of the repertoire of motifs. Pots with complex intricate dentate
stamped designs, both curvilinear and rectilinear, give way to pots with coarser open
dentate stamping, with designs almost exclusively rectilinear. Summerhayes (2001:61)
relates these changes to the lessening importance of such pots within the society that
produced them. He traces changes in the decorated pots of three widely separated early
Lapita communities in the Bismarcks, those of Mussau, Arawe and Anir and notes that the
stylistic changes are similar and occur at the same pace in each of the three localities.
However, according to Summerhayes (2000a:234), this coincidence was not the result of
pottery exchange. His chemical analysis of the assemblages showed that the major
component of each was produced locally with only a small imported element. He
concludes that the parallel evolution of styles was due to continued interaction between
closely related communities, that is, between kin groups who shared a recent common
origin.

    As time passed there was a significant change in the pattern of interaction between
dispersed Lapita communities in the Bismarcks. The early Lapita period, from about 3400
to 3000 BP, was a time of intensive exchange. Mussau, which evidently occupied a central
position in the exchange network, shows a considerable range of imported goods in this
period: trade in obsidian, chert, oven stones and adzes. In the centuries that followed there
was much less interaction and more regional specialisation within the Bismarcks
(Kirch 1997:242, Summerhayes 2000a, 2001).

    From the conjunction of the evidence from historical linguistics and archaeology we
conclude that Proto Oceanic was spoken on those islands where early classical Lapita sites
were present, primarily on a number of offshore islands in the New Britain, New Ireland,
Mussau and Manus groups.[8] At least some of these dispersed communities remained in
contact with each other for several centuries after their foundation.

[8] George Grace argued some 40 years ago (Grace 1961, 1964) that the immediate ancestor of the Oceanic
  languages was probably spoken within a zone bounded by the north coast of New Guinea in the south and
  the Bismarck Archipelago in the north. At that time his chief grounds were then current ideas about
  the genetic classification of the Austronesian languages and what was known of the prehistory of
  Southeast Asia and the Pacific. Since Grace’s initial proposal our understanding of the subgrouping
  of the Austronesian family as a whole and of the Oceanic branch has advanced a good deal. These
  advances have broadly supported and strengthened his hypothesis. Some years later, I suggested
  (Pawley 1981) that in its final stage Proto Oceanic consisted of an extensive dialect chain,
  probably extending from New Britain and New Ireland to San Cristobal in the eastern Solomons. The
  arguments were based on several factors: (i) the geographic distribution of subgroups, which showed
  many (apparent) primary subgroups scattered across Melanesia, (ii) assumptions about the settlement
  patterns, social organisation and behaviour of early Oceanic speakers (settling mainly on coasts and
  small islands, with kingroups dispersing but remaining in contact for some generations, (iii)
  assumptions about the voyaging technology and capabilities and (iv) archaeological dating of the
  spread of the Lapita culture, indicating that this culture was carried rapidly across Melanesia in
  the 2nd millennium BC. That paper may have overestimated the extent of the dialect chain, but it did
  bring up the question: If there was an extensive dialect chain, how can we decide at what point
  Proto Oceanic broke up? Malcolm Ross (1988) proposed a more specific dispersal centre for Proto
  Oceanic, namely the region east of the Talasea Peninsula on the north coast of New Britain. This now
  appears too specific. It might be proposed that this region has stronger claims to be the homeland
  of the Western Oceanic subgroup before its dispersal over New Britain, New Ireland, the western
  Solomons and the New Guinea mainland. However, I believe that such a proposal would be open to the
  same objection as the previous one. Ross holds that Proto Western Oceanic was not a well-defined
  subgroup but a dialect chain, specifically that part of the Proto Oceanic dialect chain that was
  left in the New Britain-New Ireland region when Oceanic speakers moved out of the Bismarcks and into
  Remote Oceania. But if Proto Oceanic speakers were already widely dispersed across the New
  Britain-New Ireland region at this point, as I have argued, then the later Western Oceanic dialect
  chain would also have extended over this region.

28    Andrew Pawley


   In Pawley (1981:295–296) I discussed mechanisms that may have been central to the
maintenance of regular contact, or, conversely, loss of contact among dispersed sister
speech communities during the diaspora of Oceanic-speaking peoples. I suggested that a
certain ‘cycle of linguistic diversification’ had been repeated in various parts of Melanesia.

|      [Founding] populations were small and scattered and the sailing technology
|      permitted interisland and coastal voyaging. Such voyaging between dispersed sister
|      communities was encouraged by economic needs, kinship and marriage ties, the
|      political ambitions of leaders, and very likely, a love of adventure and exploration
|      common to hardy pioneering colonials. For a time the sister communities regarded
|      themselves as people of one stock.

|      As the centuries passed, however, contacts between scattered sister communities
|      tended to become relatively less important and less frequent. Adaptive changes in
|      social and economic life led to … a weakening of the lines of communication …
|      [T]he following developments took place: population increase, wider and more
|      intensive exploitation of resources available locally …; [and on large islands] the
|      emergence of substantial, permanent inland populations … Kin and marriage ties
|      weakened and a diminution of the social as well as economic importance of trade
|      exchanges with remote sister communities led in turn to an impairment of the
|      traditional skills of canoe-building and sailing. In many regions other cultural losses
|      (or substitutions) went along with these changes: loss of pottery-making tradition,
|      loss of hereditary chieftainship and the concomitant system of hierachically ranked
|      kin and lineages …

|      … As the dialects of sister speech communities became more and more dissimilar,
|      their speakers more numerous and their common ties and interests weaker, …
|      innovations did not spread as readily as before … [L]inguistic change could work
|      almost unimpeded to produce mutually unintelligible languages.

                                                                Locating Proto Oceanic         29


   Interaction between neighbouring Oceanic and non-Oceanic languages in Near Oceania
has also been an important agent of linguistic change and diversification in some regions
of Near Oceania (Dutton & Tryon 1994, Lynch 1981, Thurston 1987, 1994). However, the
evidence indicates that the main impact of such contacts occurred in the centuries and
millennia after the breakup of Proto Oceanic. In this later period population movements
and contacts, and realignments of speakers of already divergent Oceanic languages, also
contributed significantly to further language splitting and sometimes to dialect resynthesis
(Bradshaw 1997, Clark 1985, Geraghty 1983, Pawley 1981).

    What about the possibility that communities of Proto Oceanic speakers were present
along the central north coast of New Guinea, from the Huon Gulf to the Sepik region, an
area which faces the Bismarcks? The most likely candidates would be the many habitable
islands which lie off the central north coast, extending from Tami Is. in the Huon Gulf
west as far as to the Schoutens group. In this connection, the following observations should
be noted.

(i)   There is at present no good evidence of early Lapita occupation of this region. The
      Siassi Islands in the Vitiaz Strait off the western tip of New Britain have yielded
      the nearest Lapita site to the New Guinea mainland yet found, apart from isolated
      finds of single potsherds. The Siassi site represents ‘a relatively late and seemingly
      ephemeral Lapita occupation’ (Spriggs 1997a:118). It must be admitted, however,
      that little archaeological work has been done on the offshore islands.

(ii) If Proto Oceanic speaking communities existed on parts of the north coast of New
     Guinea and nearby islands they have left no descendants. All the indications are
     that the contemporary Oceanic languages spoken along the central north coast from
     Vitiaz Strait to Jayapura appear to represent a fairly recent expansion (within the
     last 2000 years) in an east to west direction starting in the Vitiaz Straits region
     (Lilley 1999, Ross 1988). The Oceanic languages of the central north coast of New
     Guinea all belong to a middle-order subgroup of Oceanic together with the
     languages of West New Britain, a group that Ross (1988) calls North New Guinea.
     North New Guinea contains several branches. Of particular interest are the
     Schouten chain, whose eastern outliers are Medebur and Manam, and which
     includes all the north coast languages as far west as the Sissano Lagoon, and the
     Ngero/Vitiaz chain, which includes the languages in and around the Vitiaz Straits,
     as far west as Karkar Island, as far east as Tami Is. in the Huon Gulf, together with
     the languages of the western end of New Britain west.

   There are certain noteworthy parallels between the Lapita occupation of the Bismarcks
and the much later settlement of the central north coast of New Guinea by speakers of the
North New Guinea group. In both cases, the strong preference was to settle (presumably
uninhabited) offshore islands rather than the mainland, and in both cases exchange
networks were established between dispersed communities. Harding (1967) describes three
different trade networks that existed in the Vitiaz Straits region, centring on Bilibili, the
Siassi group and Tami Is., respectively. Local specialisation yielded tradeable goods (e.g.
workable stone, baskets, bowls, mats and pots) that were carried by large outrigger canoes.
Village populations generally did not exceed 200 and marriage partners were often sought
outside the village, in the communities of trading partners.

30    Andrew Pawley

    All this is not to say that earlier stages of Oceanic were not spoken along the north coast
of New Guinea. But it is important to distinguish between Proto Oceanic and Pre-Oceanic.
Pre-Oceanic is that period in the development of the Oceanic branch between the time of
its separation from its nearest relative (South Halmahera-West New Guinea) and the time
when it broke up. We need to bear this distinction in mind when considering the following
remarks by Blust (1998a:185–186):

|      it is very unlikely that [Proto Broad Oceanic] was spoken either in the Admiralty
|      islands or in the nearest part of the Bismarck Archipelago in which [Oceanic]
|      languages are found today (Mussau). From the nesting of Oceanic within high-level
|      AN subgroups, it is reasonably clear that AN languages entered the Pacific by passing
|      along the north coast of Irian. … To reach the Admiralty Islands from the closest
|      point on the north coast of New Guinea requires an open sea passage of about 180
|      miles. While this distance could have been spanned in a single voyage …, there is no
|      reason why it would have been. Many small islands off the coast of New Guinea
|      would have been encountered earlier, and by following the coast of the main island,
|      the first transition to another major landmass would have taken the settlers to New
|      Britain and New Ireland before they encountered the Admiralties … From the
|      probable settlement route, we would expect the greatest diversity within [Broad
|      Oceanic] to be found on the north coast of New Guinea. But what we find is actually
|      quite different: languages that reflect the merger of PMP _*j_ and _*s_ are found as far
|      west as the Sarmi Coast of Irian.

|      … This observation suggests that the linguistic history of Austronesian speakers in
|      western Melanesia must have included episodes of extinction as well as episodes of
|      expansion. At an earlier time, languages that preserved PMP *j as a distinct phoneme
|      almost certainly were found on the north coast of New Guinea and in some other parts
|      of the Bismarck Archipelago, in addition to the Admiralties.

   Blust’s argument that Austronesian speakers probably moved along the north coast of
New Guinea before reaching the Bismarcks but left no surviving daughter languages on the
north coast is reasonable.[9] However, we should not assume that these speakers spoke
Proto Oceanic (or what Blust calls Proto Broad Oceanic). Instead, they spoke Pre-Oceanic.
Proto Oceanic is a later stage, immediately ancestral to those languages that make up the
Oceanic subgroup.

   But there remains another boundary problem. Languages are seldom regionally
homogeneous. Suppose that during the several centuries after Pre Oceanic speakers arrived
in the Bismarcks, a chain of mutually intelligible but gradually diverging dialects
developed. Is there a single point in this period when we can say that the chain broke up—
and which thus can be equated with Proto Oceanic? When does a collection of dialects
cease to be one language? The orthodox answer to the latter question is: when innovations
cease to flow between the dialects. However, problems arise in applying this principle
because innovations tend to spread across a dialect chain in irregular patterns, such that
some changes appear in dialects AB, others in BC, others in CD, and so on.

[9] See Ross (1988:21) for some traces of ancient loans from a Pre-Oceanic source in Papuan languages of
  Madang Province.

                                                              Locating Proto Oceanic      31

    As it happens, there are reasonably satisfactory operational grounds for defining a
latest-possible time for the breakup of Proto Oceanic. It must have occurred no later than
the first permanent Lapita settlements of Remote Oceania, which on present evidence
occurred around 3100 BP (Green pers. comm.). It is almost inconceivable that such
settlements could have maintained a level of interaction with communities in the
Bismarcks that would have been sufficient for linguistic innovations to flow between them.
It is possible that, by this time or earlier, such a degree of separation existed between the
Admiralties and the rest of the Bismarcks, but it is impossible to be confident about this.
Ross (1988) has discussed at some length the evidence for dialect variation in late Proto
Oceanic.

    There are good reasons to think that the speech of colonists who first settled Vanuatu,
New Caledonia, Fiji and West Polynesia had changed little from Proto Nuclear Oceanic as
it was spoken in the Bismarcks. First, a representative sample of languages from Remote
Oceania yields reconstructions of a proto-phonology and a proto-morphosyntax
(Pawley 1972, Clark 1973) that differ only slightly from reconstructions based on a sample
representing the entire Oceanic subgroup (Blust 1978b, Evans 2003, Lynch,
Ross & Crowley 2002, Ross 1998a). Second, the internal classification of Oceanic points to a rapid
linguistic movement from Near Oceania across the southwest Pacific as far east as Fiji and
Western Polynesia. There are no well-defined higher-order groups of Oceanic whose
distribution points to a significant pause in the chain of expansion from the Bismarcks to
West Polynesia. That is to say, there is no well-defined higher order subgroup of Oceanic
that embraces both some languages of Near Oceania and some of Remote Oceania. Instead
we find several high-order subgroups of Oceanic probably coordinate with Western
Oceanic (Pawley & Ross 1995). Such a subgroup might have developed had there been
pauses on the way—say in the Solomons—long enough for a significant body of
innovations to accumulate. The archaeological record shows clearly that there were no
such long pauses in the spread of Lapita.


2.5 On the physical geography of the Bismarck Archipelago

   The location of the Proto Oceanic speech community can be inferred with reasonable
confidence without considering evidence provided by lexical reconstructions. Even so, it is
of interest to see what Proto Oceanic lexical reconstructions can tell us about Proto
Oceanic speakers’ perceptions and use of their physical environment. With that concern in
mind, it is worth taking a closer look at the physical geography of the Bismarck
Archipelago (see Map 7).

    The archipelago is richly endowed with reefs and almost every type of reef and reef
island is present. The region contains a great variety of volcanic landforms ranging from
the dominant strato-volcano to lava shield, ash cone, scoria cone and mound, mamelon,
spine and caldera. There are two chains of volcanoes in the Bismarck Sea which together
contain the largest number of active, dormant and extinct volcanoes in Papua New Guinea.
The larger islands all have sizeable rivers and marshlands. Large lakes are comparatively
rare, although New Britain has a number, including several crater lakes.

32   Andrew Pawley

Map 7: The Bismarck Archipelago, Bougainville and the adjacent coast of New Guinea

                                                               Locating Proto Oceanic      33

    Cyclones are common in the southeast Solomons and occur as far north as
Bougainville. However, the Bismarck Archipelago lies in a sheltered band between N and
S tropical cyclone belts (Irwin 1992). SE Trade winds blow consistently from May to
September, but between December and March the more erratic NW Monsoon winds
prevail.

    The NW monsoons bring very high rainfall (up to six metres a year in some regions) in
the months of the southern hemisphere summer. SE Trades bring drier weather in the
winter months. Rain forests cover much of the land. On high islands altitude differences
correlate with marked changes in the flora and in the character of the forest. The lowland
forests typically contain large trees of 30–45 m in height, with large leaves and large
buttresses, and there are many woody climbers. Higher up, trees are shorter, have smaller
leaves, and trees carry mosses and ferns. There are strand forests, mangrove forests and
man-made grasslands.

    New Britain is the largest island in Melanesia other than New Guinea. Much of the
shoreline is bounded by coral reefs. Along the coast there are a number of protected bays
and harbours and beaches. Other parts of the shoreline are cliff-lined and still others are
under mangrove swamps. Many more or less active volcanoes are present on the northern
side of the island. Concomitant with these are crater lakes, beaches of black sand, hot
springs and geysers. A rugged central mountain chain separates the north and south coasts,
and much of the interior is uninhabited or thinly populated. The south coast differs in
appearance and structure from the north, being composed predominantly of raised coral
and other marine deposits of varying age, with narrow coastal plains or coraline cliffs that
fall steeply into the sea. Because the central mountain range acts as a barrier to the NW
Monsoon winds, creating a rain shadow, the leeward south coast of New Britain gets less
than half the rainfall of windward north coast.

    Numerous small islands lie immediately offshore from New Britain. More distant are
the larger, densely forested, volcanic islands of the Vitu group, Garove and Unea, which
are visible from the Willaumez Peninsula.

    New Ireland with New Hanover as its northern extension is a little over 350 km long,
but never more than 50 km across. It has a mountainous spine that broadens out in the
south to a plateau rising to 2400 metres. On the west side mountains rise steeply from the
coast and there is little flat land. A coastal plain is more in evidence along the east coast,
with mountains rising fairly sharply at its western limit. There are limited stretches of reef
along the east coast. Four substantial island groups, Tabar, Lihir, Tangga and Anir
(formerly Feni), lie in a chain to the east of New Ireland. All four are volcanic, with some
fringing reef.

    The Mussau or St Matthias group is located about 100 km north of New Ireland and 230
km east of Manus. The largest island of the group, Mussau, has a volcanic core remnant
rising to 650 m. There are eleven small upraised coral islands clustered south of the main
island. Eloaua and Emananus together form the east and west sides of an atoll with
extensive fringing and barrier reefs which enclose a lagoon.

    The Admiralty group consists of one large island, Manus, ringed by many small islands.
Manus is 100 km long by 30 km wide, with mountainous terrain, dissected by many
streams which have cut deep valleys. The island is covered by rainforest of the lowland
type and by sago and mangrove swamps. Soil fertility is generally poor. Heavy rainfail has
washed away the topsoil and this factor and the broken nature of the land renders most of
the island unsuitable for agriculture. Situated just off the north coast of Manus are a
number of small coral atolls and sand cays whose inhabitants live mainly by fishing and
trading in foodstuffs, their environment providing only limited opportunities for cultivating
crops. To the south and east of Manus, and further offshore than the coral atolls are a
number of high islands of volcanic origin, including Lou, Rambutjo, Baluan and M’Buke,
whose soils are fertile and intensively cultivated. Far to the west of Manus lie several
clusters of atolls: the Hermit group, the Anchorites (Kaniet) and west of these, the Ninigo
group. Still further west are the atolls of Wuvulu and Aua.

34   Andrew Pawley

   The reader is referred to subsequent chapters to see how consistent the reconstructed
Proto Oceanic lexicon for the geophysical environment is with the assumption that the
speech community was located in the Bismarck Archipelago. Most of the relevant lexical
reconstructions will be found in Chapters 3–5, dealing with landscape, seascape and
meteorology. As few if any of the reconstructed geomorphological and meteorological
referents are unique to the Bismarcks, it is unlikely that the lexical reconstructions will
identify the Bismarcks as the only possible location of Proto Oceanic. However, it is of
interest to see whether the reconstructions include any referents that are missing from the
Bismarcks, or whether they fail to include names for some salient items that are present
there.



3               The landscape


3.1 Introduction

   This chapter and the following one are an attempt to discover something of the way in
which Proto Oceanic speakers experienced and conceptualised their environment. We
begin by giving examples taken from the ethnographic literature of how several different
Oceanic-speaking peoples describe parts of their environment. We then examine evidence,
provided by cognate sets and lexical reconstructions, concerning details of the inanimate
land environment known to speakers of Proto Oceanic and certain of its daughter
languages. We deal first with the land and landforms, and include vegetation cover only
when it is part of a topographical feature.[1] Seascape is dealt with in the following chapter.

   Malinowski (1922, 1935) has provided us with a detailed account of the Kiriwina
people of the Trobriand Islands, a coral atoll system consisting of one big island
(Kiriwina), two of moderate size, and a number of smaller ones surrounding a shallow
lagoon. Kiriwina is flat, with no hills or mountains. The Kiriwina word for ‘mountain’ is
_koya_, usually in reference to distant mountains on D’Entrecasteaux Islands occasionally
visible in the south. Malinowski’s description of the settled environment is centred on an
origin myth ‘hole of emergence’ [_bwala_], which is the basis of their land tenure system.
Terms or descriptions in square brackets have been added from elsewhere in the text.

|       With such a hole of emergence there is always connected a village [_valu_], or part of a
|       village, and a territory, or what we might call an assortment of lands, both of which
|       belong to the people who came out of the hole. As a rule this comprises some waste
|       land [_kaibutia_ ‘barren land, useless for gardening’], a tabooed grove or two [_boma_], a
|       portion of the _rayboag_ [the narrow coral ridge] and perhaps one or two fields in the
|       _dumya_ ([inland] swamps); in every case it includes a large portion of cultivable bush
|       (_odila_), divided into a number of fields [_kubila_], which are subdivided into plots.
|       Those villages which are near the open sea own a part of the eastern seashore
|       (_momola_) with a fishing and bathing beach and a few sheds for their canoes. On the
|       lagoon the beach is called _kavolawa_ and here canoes are kept. Thus a hole of
|       emergence is always the centre of a contingent territory which encloses a village or
|       part of it, and affords the following economic opportunities to its members: access to
|       fertile, cultivable soil, invariably; at times access to navigation and fishing areas; a
|       certain district for recreation and, of course, a system of roads communicating with
|       other villages. (1935:343)

[1] Thanks are due to Ann Chowning, Ralph Lawton, John Lynch, Françoise Ozanne-Rivierre and Ian Scales
  who have all made useful suggestions and contributed additional data to this chapter.

36     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   A second example is from Edvard Hviding’s _Guardians of Marovo Lagoon_, an account
of the way of life of the Marovo speaking people from New Georgia in the western
Solomons (Hviding 1996). The lagoon itself is vast, a largely enclosed area of shallow sea
strewn with islands and reef patches and rimmed by barrier reef islands. It lies on the
eastern edge of a high volcanic island covered in lush tropical rainforest and fringed with
mangrove swamps. For their livelihood the people depend on a system of shifting
agriculture and marine fishing. ‘Important dietary supplements are provided by hunting,
focused on feral pigs, birds and marsupials in the rainforest, and by gathering shellfish
from the reefs and mangroves, as well as nuts, fruits and leafy greens from garden fallows
and forests’ (p.42). The main zones of local environmental classification are shown in
Figure 2. They represent the _puava_ or ancestral territories of a kinship group (_butubutu_) to
which Marovo people belong. _Puava_ has both a restricted sense, ‘soil, ground’ and a
general one, the latter encompassing the total ancestral estate, reaching ‘from the peaks and
ridges of the mainland upper mountains to the open sea outside the barrier reef’ (p.137).

Figure 2: Marovo coastal profile
     (reproduced from Hviding 1996:138 with the permission of the University of Hawai’i Press)

   The next two examples are from Malaita in the Southeast Solomons. Walter Ivens
writes about the salt-water people of Lau and Sa’a, two environments not unlike the
Marovo one above, with both descriptions being limited to the land close to the coast that
is used intensively. One is a description of the Lau people who live on artificially
constructed islands in the Lau lagoon. Fishing forms the basis of their subsistence.
Although the islands themselves have no cultivable land, the people have access to limited
adjacent land on Malaita for their gardens. Ivens writes (1930:266):

                                                                                The landscape       37

|     Land in the vicinity of the beach is called _hara_. Flat sandy land just above the beach is
|     called _nuu_. Breadfruit and certain other fruit trees grow there. The lower foothills are
|     known as _fafo asi_ (lit. ‘above the sea’), and it is there that people have their taro
|     gardens. Garden ground, as distinct from uncleared forest, is called _gano_; _gano alu_ is
|     old garden ground that is not yet ready for planting, ground … that has not yet been
|     rested sufficiently. Virgin forest is _kʷaena_.

Ivens’ second example is that of Sa’a, and its close neighbour, Ulawa, in the south-east of
Malaita. The two share an almost identical language. Ivens writes (1927 [reissued
1972]:357–358):

|     The sandy soil just above the beach is called _uluone_ [_ulu_ ‘head’ + _one_ ‘sand’], and on
|     this soil the coconuts grow best … At the back of this tract of sandy soil is the _pwainaa_,
|     subject to flooding and with a black soil … The fruit trees abound in this tract. Ulawa
|     calls the upper part of this by the name _akohu_; it is less wet in character. The land rises
|     immediately behind the _pwainaa_ … to the next district, _pwaʔu_. The meaning of this word
|     is ‘smoke’ … At Sa’a, the upper division of _pwaʔu_ is called _lapwa_, from the undergrowth
|     there of the fern of the same name. The land up higher still is called in Sa’a _ano mola_
|     [‘earth’ + ‘only’, i.e. earth with no rocks or stones], and in Ulawa _kalona_ … Another
|     term applied to the sandy soil of the old beaches is _ʔoʔu_. In some places the land
|     immediately under the first ridge of upheaved coral rocks is called _ote_; the trees in the
|     _ote_ grow to a very large size, especially the teak, _nau_, and the _awa_,
|     Nephelium pinnatum. The _ote_ ground is generally wet owing to soakage from the hills.

   Our last example is of the small high island of Tikopia, as described by Raymond Firth
in his volume _We, the Tikopia_ (1957). Tikopia is one of the Polynesian outliers, lying
northeast of the Banks and Torres Islands, Vanuatu. In form it is a small, compact oval
roughly four kilometres by three, and at the time of Firth’s fieldwork in 1928–29 it
supported a population of just under 1300. It is likely that every surface feature of any
significance would be known in detail. Firth provides two maps, reproduced here as Map
8(a), showing topographical features, and Map 8(b), which shows settlement features such
as villages, springs and tracks.

   From Map 8(a) we can see that the mountains in the north of the island are simply
_Mauŋa_, ‘mountain’, with the bulk of the tallest, Reani, labelled _Mauŋa Lasi_ (‘great
mountain’). The crest itself is termed _Te Uru o te Fenua_ (‘the head of the land’) (p.27).
The large lake in the centre of the island, a former crater lake and not a lagoon, is simply
_Te Roto_ (literally ‘middle, interior’), or more familiarly _Te Vai_ (‘fresh water’) (p.23). Firth
explains that the water is fresh because the apparent channel linking the lake to the sea is
normally silted up, but may be dug out at certain seasons of the year when the lake is full
from rain and the tide is high, to allow excess lake waters to flow down to the sea (p.25).
The sand bar separating the lake from the sea on its eastern side is _Te Koro_ (‘barrier of
sand or stone against the sea’). Two rocky pinnacles which are all that remain of the
former eastern wall of the crater, are _Foŋa te Koro_ (‘top of the Koro’) and _Foŋa Nuku_ (‘top
of the settlement’). Breaks in the reef which enable canoes to pass to the open ocean are
simply _Te Ava_ (‘channels in the reef’). A large rock off the west coast is _Fatu roa_ (‘tall
rock’), while two small rocky outcrops in the east are _Rua motu_ (‘two islets’). Sometimes
included in place names are modifying terms like _tua_ ‘back’, _tafa_ ‘side’, _foŋa_ ‘top, crown’
and _muri_ ‘behind’. There are a number of springs named in both maps. These are referred
to as _Vai_ followed by a diferentiating name. The swampy area to the south is _Te Ropera_, a
word whose etymology, Firth suggests (p.332) is _roto pela_ [or _pera_], literally ‘middle
mud’. Along the northern coast are cliffs, _mato_, (p.27) and caves or rock shelters, _ana_
(p.23) (these last not shown on the map).

38    Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


    On Map 8(b) are names which loosely denote localities or districts, treated by Firth as
proper names. For _Ravenga_ and _Faea_, the two major divisions of the island, we can offer
no explanation. But for three others, _Namo_, the point at which the lake exits to the sea, _Uta_
at the western edge of the lake, and _Tai_, the flat plain of alluvial soil in the south which is
largely taken up by swamp, we can posit POc origins based on their physical nature
(_*namo_ ‘lagoon; enclosed water’, _*qutan_ ‘bushland, hinterland’, _*tasik_ ‘sea, salt water’).

    In his discussion of land tenure (p.332), Firth refers to the _tofi_, areas of mixed woodland
and clearing of varying size for which he adopts the translation ‘orchard’. Then there are
the _vao_, open stretches of ground which are planted in taro, which he refers to as ‘gardens’.
Paths, _ara_, run through orchards and gardens.

    Although these examples include many terms for which we can find no cognates, the
features they label have much in common. They represent the places where most of the
daily activities of their inhabitants are centred, from the forested areas where they hunt, to
garden land in its various stages, to coastal swamp and sand, to the lagoon and reef, to
islands and the open sea beyond.

    A number of the nouns reconstructed in this chapter and the next functioned as both
common nouns and as local nouns, as their modern reflexes continue to do. For example,
_*qutan_ as a common noun denoted the bush or bushland, while its local-noun use in the
prepositional phrase _*i qutan_ could have either the expected sense ‘in the bush’ or the
directional sense ‘(up) inland’. For further discussion and reconstruction of local-noun
senses, see Chapter 8, §2.

    The rest of this chapter is organised under the following headings: land mass, coastal
features, inland topographical features, land defined by vegetation, inland water features,
mineral substances, fire, and destructive natural events. Details of seascape will be dealt
with in Chapter 4.


3.2 Land mass

3.2.1 Land, mainland


   Reflexes of both POc *panua (vol. 1, p.62) and _*tanoq_[2] are widely used to refer to the
extent or physical state (rocky, flat, dry etc.) of the land, and may also be used to contrast
land with sea. The two reconstructions, however, differed in their broader meanings. POc
*panua had several senses, outlined below, while POc *tanoq referred particularly to
ground or soil. Large islands, the major land masses of a region, are often denoted by
reflexes of *panua, and this term appears in proper names for major islands, e.g. Hanua
To’o ‘San Cristobal’ (lit. ‘solid land’), as used in Arosi, of the Southeast Solomons, Vanua
Levu and Vanua Balavu (lit. ‘big land’ and ‘long land’) in Fijian. Note also the Tongan
form fonua lahi (lit. ‘big land’) for ‘mainland’. In ’Are’are, the land–sea contrast is
expressed in riu i hanua ‘travel overland’ and riu i āsi ‘travel by sea’. In Arosi, the land is
either henua hū or ano hū (hū ‘dry’) while the sea is asi. In nearby Sa’a the contrast is
between ano hū ‘dry land’ and esi ‘sea’.

[2] The form POc *tano(q) given in vol. 1, p.119 has now been revised to *tanoq. Evidence supporting final
  *-q lies in the retention of a final vowel in Kwamera (John Lynch, pers. comm.) and Iaai (Françoise
  Ozanne-Rivierre, pers. comm.) .

                                         The landscape   39


Map 8: Tikopia (after Firth 1936:xxii)

40   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *banua ‘inhabited territory, where a community’s gardens, houses and other possessions are’ (Blust 1987)
POc *panua (1) ‘inhabited area or territory’; (2) ‘community together with its land and things on it’; (3) ‘land, not sea’; (4) ‘(with reference to weather and the day/night cycle) the visible world, land and sky’ (Pawley 1985)
 Adm: Mussau             anua                 ‘land’
 Adm: Penchal            panu                 ‘village’
 NNG: Gedaged            panu                 ‘village, settlement, hamlet’
 NNG: Manam              anua                 ‘village’
 NNG: Tami               panu                 ‘house’
 PT:     Motu            hanua                ‘village, town’
 PT:     Molima          vanua                ‘house’
 PT:     Kiriwina        valu                 ‘land; any open space which may be inhabited’
 MM: Vitu                vanua                ‘garden’
 MM: Tabar               vanua                ‘house’
 MM: Taiof               fan                  ‘village’
 SES: Bugotu             vanua                ‘land, island’
 SES: Lau                fanua                ‘land, the earth, world; weather’
 SES: 'Are'are           hanua                ‘land, country, village place, country; the area where a person lives, where his possessions are’
 NCV: Mota               vanua                ‘land, island, village, place’
 SV: Lenakel             na-uanu              ‘village’
 SV: Anejom              in-henou             ‘taro swamp’
 NCal: Nemi              bʷan(guc)           ‘soil’ (guc ‘earth’)
 Mic: Woleaian           farɨw                ‘land, island’
 Fij:    Rotuman         hanua                ‘land, country, place; native land or place, home’
 Fij:    Bauan           vanua                ‘land (not sea), territory, region, place, community, country; (in expressions for weather) the visible world, land, sea and sky’
 Pn:     Tongan          fonua                ‘land, country, territory, place; people (of the land)’
 Pn:     Samoan          fanua                ‘land; afterbirth’
 Pn:     Tahitian        fenua                ‘land’
 Pn:     Hawaiian        honua                ‘land, earth’
 cf. also: Examples of phrasal expressions containing reflexes of *panua
 PT:   Kiriwina     | vilouwokuva valu |  ‘uninhabited land’
 PT:   Kiriwina     | kabinai valu |      ‘good garden land’
 SES: Sa’a          | henue hū |          ‘solid land, dry land, heritage’
 SES: Sa’a          | tolona henue |      ‘hill country’
 Fij:  Wayan        | udu ni vanua |      ‘headland’
 Fij:  Bauan        | vanua liwa  |       ‘land far away from settlements’
 Pn:   Anutan       | puŋa penua |        ‘summit; highest point of an island’
 Pn:   Tongan       | fonua lahi  |       ‘mainland’
 cf. also: Other examples refer to more planetary aspects, such as the day/night cycle and weather
 NNG: Manam           | anua izara |        ‘dawn’
 NNG: Manam           | anua idaradara |    ‘evening glow’
 PT:    Motu          | hanua boi |         ‘night’
 SES: Lau             | fanua gʷari |       ‘cold weather’
 SES: Lau             | fanua sato |        ‘sunny weather’
 Fij:   Bauan         | boŋi na vanua |     ‘become night’ (lit. ‘land is nighted’)
 Fij:   Bauan         | siŋa na vanua |     ‘become daylight’ (lit. ‘land is sunned’)
 Pn:    Rennellese    | henua pō |          ‘night time’
>

                                                                        The landscape      41

   POc *tanoq ‘earth, ground, soil; land’ has already been reconstructed in vol. 1, p.119, as
a term relevant to horticulture. As a common noun its denotations ranged from the soil
beneath one’s feet to the total land mass on which one lived. Besides its use as a common
noun, it was also used as a local noun with meanings like ‘down on the ground, down
below’ (Ch.8, §2.2.5).

<
PMP *taneq ‘earth, land’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *tanoq ‘earth, ground, soil; land’
 Adm: Loniu           (ko)tan           ‘earth’
 Adm: Lou             tan               ‘loose soil’
 NNG: Gedaged         tan               ‘soil, ground, land, garden, earth, world’
 NNG: Takia           tan               ‘ground, earth, land’
 NNG: Kove            tano              ‘earth, sand’
 NNG: Kove            tano(pu)          ‘mainland (of New Britain)’ (pu ‘base, basis’)
 PT:   Motu           tano              ‘earth, soil, country, land’
 PT:   Minaveha       tano              ‘dirt’ (tanopi ‘earth, ground, world’)
 SES: Bugotu          tano              ‘earth, ground’
 SES: Sa’a            ano               ‘ground, garden ground’
 SES: Arosi           ano               ‘ground, earth, soil, the land’
 NCV: Raga            tano              ‘earth’
 NCV: Lewo            tano              ‘earth, land’
 SV: Kwamera          təna              ‘earth, ground; land, island, country’
 NCal: Iaai           kono              ‘earth, ground’
 Mic: Kiribati        tano              ‘earth, ground, soil’
 Mic: Woleaian        tar               ‘earth, ground, soil’
 cf. also: Certain conventional phrases, such as the following, indicate the semantic range of reflexes of *tanoq
 NNG: Gedaged        |  tan wululu  |         ‘fine soil’
 NNG: Gedaged        |  tan fufulek |         ‘planet earth’
 PT:     Minaveha    |  tano bigana |         ‘fertile land’
 PT:     Motu          tanobada             ‘land as distinguished from sky and sea’ (lit. ‘big land’)
 SES: Sa’a           |  ano hū |              ‘land as opposed to sea’
 SES: Arosi          |  ano sada |            ‘flat country’
 SES: Arosi          |  ano mamata |          ‘land as opposed to sea’ (lit. ‘dry land’)
>

The term *tanoq disappears in Fiji and Polynesia, where the concept of ‘earth, soil’ is
denoted by reflexes of PCP *gwele, PPn *kele (see §7.6).

42   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


3.2.2 Island

   Two POc terms are glossed ‘island’. These were probably reserved for small islands. Of
our reconstructions, it seems that *nusa was a common noun in POc, but Southeast
Solomonic, Fijian and Polynesian reflexes seem to reflect *qa-nusa, with the local adverb
formative *qa- (Ch.8, §2.1). The expected meaning of *qa-nusa is something like ‘at our
own island’, and this is in accord with the use of its reflexes in placenames. The
Micronesian reflexes, however, suggest that the prefixed form has also come to be used as
a common noun.

<
PMP *nusa ‘island’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *nusa ‘island’
POc *qa-nusa ‘at our own island’
 NNG: Bariai           (i)nu            ‘island’ (< POc *i nusa ‘at (our) island’)
 NNG: Takia            nui              ‘island, reef’
 NNG: Gedaged          nui              ‘island’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa       nua              ‘island’
 PT:   Dobu            nua              ‘coral reef, coral patch’
 MM: Nduke             nusa             ‘island’
 MM: Roviana           nusa             ‘island’
 SES: Arosi            (a)nuta          ‘the name of a small island’
 SES: Arosi            nu-nuta          ‘island’
 SES: Lau              (a)nuta          ‘island (only in names)’
 NCal: Xârâcùù         nii              ‘island’
 Mic: Satawalese       (a)lit           ‘small island’
 Mic: Woleaian         (ya)rita         ‘small uninhabited island’
 Fij:  Bauan           (a)nuða          ‘element in place names of small offshore islands’
>

Anuta, the name of a very small Polynesian island near Tikopia, is probably also cognate.

   The primary role of *motus in POc appears to have been as a stative verb, ‘be broken
off, severed’ (see vol.1, p.247 for likely derivation from PMP *utus ‘break under tension’).
*motus may have been applied only to islets, isolated rocks and detached reefs, and not to
larger islands more suitable for habitation.

<
POc *motus (N) ‘island, detached reef; (V) become, be broken off, severed’ (vol. 1, p.247)
 NNG: Bing              mōt             ‘island’
 NNG: Manam             motu             ‘island’
 NNG: Yabem             meʔ             ‘reef’
 NNG: Numbami           motu             ‘reef’
 PT:   Motu             motu-motu        ‘island; detached portion of reef’ (motu ‘to break, as a string’)
 PT:   Hula             mou              ‘island’
 SES:   Sa’a            mou            ‘be broken off’ (malau mou ‘an islet’, hau mou ‘an isolated rock’)
 NCV: Mota              (vanua)mʷot    ‘island’ (lit. ‘land broken off’)
 SV: Lenakel            (tən)murh      ‘island’ (tən ‘earth, land’)
 Fij: Rotuman           mofu           ‘rock (in the sea)’
 Fij: Bauan             motu, (ya)motu ‘small detached reef’
 Pn:  Niuean            motu           ‘island’
 Pn:  Tongan            motu           ‘island; break, become separated’
 Pn:  Rennellese        motu           ‘to break, sever’
 Pn:  Rennellese       | motu hatu |     ‘reef rock island’ (hatu ‘rock’)
 Pn:    Samoan          motu           ‘island; severed’
 Pn:    Tahitian        motu           ‘islet; be cut, severed’
 Pn:    Maori           motu           ‘island’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        moku           ‘island; sever, cut’
>

                                                                       The landscape     43

   Cognates of PWOc *(s,t)imuR (below) may reflect POc *timu(R) ‘wind bringing light
rain’ (from PMP *timuR ‘south or east wind’) (cf. Ch. 5, §4.2). Waruno Mahdi suggests
(pers. comm.) that there has been semantic drift from wind to cloud to cloud over island, a
traditional navigator’s way of locating islands. Alternatively, there may be an unrelated
word, at least in PWOc:

<
PWOc *(s,t)imuR ‘island’
 PT:  Muyuw            sim, simulan
 PT:  Iduna            himula
 PT:  Dobu             simula
 PT:  Kiriwina         simla
 MM: Sursurunga        sim
>

  Although the next reconstructed form is traceable back to PMP as a verb, its use as a
noun is a later development, with its application to a chain of islands apparent only in the
Central Pacific.

<
PMP *qatuR (V) ‘pave with stones; pile or stack up, arrange, order, put in sequence’ (ACD)
POc *qatu(R) (N) (?) ‘number of things in a line, row’
 SV: Anejom             n-at(hat)        ‘line of stones’ (inhat ‘stone’)
PCP *qatu ‘number of things in a line, row, as a chain of islands’
 Fij:  Rotuman         afu               ‘number of things in a line, row’
 Fij:  Wayan           atu               ‘first element in name of island chain, e.g. atu Yasawa’
  Fij: Bauan           yatu              ‘first element in name of island chain’ (e.g. Yatu Lau ‘the Lau islands’)
 Pn:   Tongan          ʔotu            ‘row, line, series, chain or long group (e.g. of islands)’
 Pn:   Niuean         atu               ‘row of things, group’
 Pn:   Niuean         | atu motu |         ‘group of islands’
 Pn:     Rennellese     ʔatu             (N) ‘generation; row, column, group, as of islands, stones, posts, people’; (V) ‘be of the same generation’
 Pn:     Samoan         atu              ‘row (as of chairs); range (as of hills); chain (as of lakes); set, row (as of teeth)’
 Pn:     Samoan        | atu motu |        ‘group of islands, archipelago’
 Pn:     Nanumean       atu              ‘group or chain of islands’ (atu fenua elise ‘the whole Ellice group’, atu paipai ‘the whole world’)
>

44     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


3.3 Coastal features

   This section treats named features of the coastal landscape other than shore reefs and
tides, which are dealt with in the next chapter.


3.3.1 Beach, shore

   Two POc reconstructions can be made for ‘beach’. One, *qone, seems primarily to have
meant ‘sand’, but the sense ‘sandy beach’ is also quite widely reflected (see §7.5). The
other reconstruction, *biker, is less firmly based. However, it is possible that the terms
from Huon Gulf languages listed below may also be reflexes. If they are, then the
reconstruction should be *bwiker.

<
POc *b(w)iker ‘beach, esp. sandy beach’
 MM: Bali               bikere          ‘beach’
 MM: Bulu               bike            ‘beach’
 SV: Kwamera            nə-pəkər        ‘sand, sandy beach’
 Mic: Kiribati          bike            ‘beach, sand, sand bank, sandy soil’
 Mic: Mortlockese       ppɛ             ‘beach, sand’
 Mic: Puluwatese        ppi             ‘sand, sand beach, sand spit’
 Mic: Ponapean          pīk             ‘sand’
 Mic: Ponapean          pika-pik        ‘sandy’
 Mic: Woleaian          pix(a)          ‘small island, islet’
 cf. also the following Huon Gulf terms:
 NNG: Adzera             ŋiʔ           ‘salt’
 NNG: Dangal             ᵑgik            ‘salt’
 NNG: Yabem              gʷeʔ            ‘sea’
 NNG: Kaiwa              gielk           ‘sea’
 NNG: Hote (Misim)       ɣek             ‘sea’
 NNG: Vehes              ɣek             ‘sea’
 NNG: Patep              ɣek             ‘sea’
>

                                                                      The landscape     45

   The reflexes of POc *nuku are semantically diverse, ranging from ‘sand’, ‘sandbar at
river mouth’, ‘island’, and ‘settlement’ to ‘land, country’. However, the agreement
between the Southeast Solomonic languages and Bauan Fijian indicates that POc *nuku
referred to sandy ground. It may have been used figuratively for land or settlement,
especially in place names, bearing in mind that settlements are often located on flat sandy
ground just above the beach.

<
POc *nuku ‘sandy ground, sand bank, sand spit’
 NNG: Kove            nū              ‘small offshore island’
 MM: Vaghua           nəɣə             ‘island’
 MM: Varisi           nuɣu             ‘island’
 MM: Babatana         nu-nu            ‘island’
 SES: Gela            nuɣu             (i) ‘a flat and sandy place near the beach’; (ii) ‘a reef far out at sea, larger than sembe mbuto’
 SES: Gela            nu-nuɣu          (i) ‘quicksand’; (ii) ‘a river bar’
 SES: Gela            (mu)nuɣu         ‘sand bar at river mouth; island in river’
 SES: Lau             nū              (i) ‘flat ground near the shore’; (ii) ‘coral reef where it juts out, seaward part of reef’; ‘flat sandy land just above the beach’
 SES: Kwaio           nuʔu             ‘margins of sand, area of strand immediately above the beach’
 SES: Arosi           nu-nuʔu          ‘sand on the beach, sandy soil’
 SES: Arosi           (mara)nuʔu       ‘a river flat, plain made by river, sandy level ground near the shore’
 Fij:  Bauan          nuku             ‘sand’ (nuku-nuku ‘sandy’)
 Fij:  Bauan         | uðu ni nuku |     ‘sandbank jutting out into the sea’ (u'u ‘nose’)
 Pn:   Niuean         nuku             ‘land, country, place’ (obsolete)
 Pn:   Tongan         nuku             ‘element in place names’
 Pn:   Rennellese     nuku             ‘legendary isles or settlements of the gods; a part of place names’
 Pn:   Samoan         nuʔu             ‘village, home’ (nuʔutūloto ‘islet’)
 Pn:   Tikopia        nuku             ‘dwelling, settlement, island where settlement situated. Used in many Tikopia house names’
 Pn:   Marquesan      nuku-            ‘first element in many place names’
 Pn:   Tahitian       nuʔu             ‘earth, land (only as part of place names)’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan      nuku             ‘earth, land’
 Pn:   Maori          nuku             ‘the earth, generally personified; wide extent of the land, fenua’
>

   Coastlines, particularly island coastlines, may be characterised as ‘windward coast’ or
‘leeward coast’ in latitudes where tradewinds blow for most of the year. Marovo (MM), for
instance, has parallel terms for the ocean-facing side of a barrier island, kale-lupa (kale
‘side’, lupa ‘the beaches, reefs and seascape on the outer or windward side of the barrier
reef’) and the lagoon-facing side, kale-kogu (kogu ‘lagoon’). Roviana (MM) refers to the
ocean side of an island as vuragarena, which Waterhouse (1949) contrasts with tutupeka.
Kia (MM) adapts body part terms for ‘back’ and ‘belly’, taguru-mo ‘windward side of
island’ and tia-mo ‘leeward side of island’. Sa’a (SES) has asi matawa ‘weather shore’ and
asi mae ‘lee shore’.

46   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   In Chapter 4 we have reconstructed PEOc *tasik maquri(p) ‘open sea; ocean on the
weather side; weather shore’ (literally ‘live sea’) and PEOc *tasi mate ‘sheltered sea, lee
shore’ (literally ‘dead sea’), terms which, from their reflexes, may apply both to the sea or
to the affected coastline.

   The reconstruction below, PEOc *liku, is glossed ‘windward side’, but it seems likely
that its reflexes are members of a larger set reflecting PMP *likuD, POc *liku(r) ‘person’s
back’ whose reflexes are used in a number of languages with the senses ‘back of s.t.’,
‘outside’ (Ch.8, §2.3.5). The use of reflexes of this term for ‘windward side’ reflects the
fact that the outside of a barrier reef is its windward side.

<
PEOc *liku ‘windward side’
 Mic: Marshallese     liki                ‘ocean side of; outside’
 Mic: Kiribati        (āi)niku            ‘ocean side of coral islands’
 Fij:  Wayan          liku                ‘windward side’
 Pn:    Niuatoputapu liku                 ‘windward side’
>

Similarly, terms located for the leeward or sheltered side include reflexes of an apparently
more general term, PMP *duŋduŋ, POc *ruru.

<
PMP *duŋduŋ ‘sheltered as from wind, rain or sun’ (ACD)
POc *ruru ‘calm, sheltered’
 Fij:  Bauan            rūrū         ‘calm’
 Pn:   Rennellese       gugu           ‘be calm, sheltered, to leeward’
 Pn:   Hawaiian         lulu           ‘calm area leeward of an island’
>

   References to ‘shore’ occur also in locative expressions (see Chapter 8). To a person at
sea, reflexes of POc *qutan will refer to the shore, while to a person inland, reflexes of
*laur can carry the same interpretation.


3.3.2 Bay

   The gloss of our next reconstruction, POc *tobwa is soundly based for PEOc, but
depends for promotion to POc on reinterpretation of the name given to the barrier reef
islands which enclose Marovo Lagoon. POc *tobwa is also the reconstructed form for
‘belly, stomach, bag’ and it is possible that ‘bay’ is a metaphorical extension of the term.

<
POc *tobʷa ‘bay, harbour; belly, stomach’
 Adm: Tench            tova             ‘belly’
 MM: Marovo            toba             ‘elevated barrier reefs’ (i.e. islands enclosing sheltered water)
 MM: Roviana           toba             ‘name of barrier island’
PEOc *tobʷa ‘bay’
 SES: Tolo               tobana           ‘abdomen, belly’
 SES: Sa’a               apʷa-apʷa        ‘bay, indentation in coast’
 SES: Arosi              obʷa-obʷa        ‘bay, harbour’
 NCV: Mota               toqa(i)          ‘belly’
 Fij:  Bauan             toba             ‘bay or gulf’
>

                                                                          The landscape     47

The next set has specific reference to ‘bay’ only in Polynesia. As a POc term, it is a verb
used descriptively.

<
POc *paŋa ‘be open, gape’
 PT:   Motu            haga                (ADJ) ‘open’
 MM: Tolai             paŋaŋa              ‘be open, yawn, gape’
 SES: Lau              (a)faŋa             ‘open wide, gape’
 SES: Tolo             (o)vana             ‘opening’
 NCV: Mota             waŋa                ‘gape’
PPn *faŋa ‘bay’
 Pn:    Tongan           faŋa              ‘small or private beach’
 Pn:    Samoan           faŋa              ‘bay’ (_matā-faŋa_ ‘beach, shore’)
 Pn:    Tahitian         faʔa              ‘valley, low place among the hills’
 Pn:    Maori            ɸaŋa              ‘bay, harbour, estuary’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         hana              ‘bay, valley (in place names)’
>

3.3.3 River mouth

   Polynesian languages use a compound for the mouth of a river, with elements derived
from POc forms *muri ‘behind’ + *waiR ‘river, fresh water’.

<
PPn *muri-wai ‘mouth of river’
 Pn:   Tongan         mui-vai              ‘mouth of river’
 Pn:   Samoan         muli-vai             ‘mouth of river’
 Pn:   E Futunan      muli-vai             ‘mouth of river’
 Pn:   Maori          muri-wai             ‘backwater, lagoon at mouth of river’
 Pn:   Hawaiian       muli-wai             ‘mouth of river; pool near river mouth (as behind sandbar)’
>

No POc reconstruction is available for ‘river mouth’. This concept was probably named by
a compound connecting ‘river’ or ‘fresh water’ with a body part. The most widespread
label is ‘leg’ or more likely, ‘foot of river’, and this may well reflect a POc collocation. We
find:

__pre__
 NNG: Mapos Buang        bel vaɣa          (bel ‘water’, vaɣa ‘leg/foot’)
 NNG: Takia              you ŋe-n          (you ‘water’, ŋe- ‘leg/foot’)
 PT:  Iduna              gufa wa-ʔage      (gufa ‘river’, ʔage- ‘leg/foot’)
 PT:  Molima             goʔila ae(na)     (goʔila ‘fresh water’, ae ‘leg/foot’)
 SES: Lau                ʔae-na kafo       (ʔae- ‘foot/leg’, kafo ‘water’)


3.3.4 Cape, prominent land

48    Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   POc terms that can be glossed ‘cape, headland’ are all words for a body part or part of
an object conceived of as similar in shape. The first is *(i,u)cuŋ ‘nose’. It seems likely that
PCP *uju, which refers to ‘projecting or exposed land’ also reflects POc *ucuŋ ‘nose’.

The suffixed -a of PPn *utu-a below reflects the POc locative nominalising suffix *-an
(vol. 1, pp.33–34).

<
PMP *ijuŋ, *ujuŋ ‘nose’ (ACD)
POc *(i,u)cuŋ ‘nose; cape’[3]
 NNG: Awad Bing         uyu                     ‘headland, point, nose’
 PT:    Motu            idu(ka)                 ‘headland’
 MM: Nakanai            (ma)isu                 ‘nose; cape’
 MM: Tinputz            ihun                    ‘nose; cape, point’
 SES: Gela              ihu                     ‘nose; cape’
 Fij:   Bauan           uðu                     ‘nose; cape, mountain peak’
 Pn:    Rapanui         ihu                     ‘nose; headland, point’
PCP *uju (V) ‘project’
PPn *utu-a ‘projecting land’
 Fij:  Wayan             udu             ‘stick out, project’
 Fij:  Wayan            | udu ni vanua |   ‘headland’
 Pn:   Tongan            utua            ‘be conspicuous’
 Pn:   E Uvean           utua            ‘point, promontory’
 Pn:   Rennellese        utua            ‘point, cape’
 Pn:   K’marangi         utua            ‘projecting point in reef’
 Pn:   Tuvalu            utua            ‘that part of shore visible at low tide’
 Pn:   Takuu             utua            ‘land normally under sea but exposed by low tide’
 Pn:   Tokelauan         utua            ‘shelving reef’
>

The last four Pn reflexes restrict the sense to a part of reef exposed at low tide, but retain
the sense of projection/prominence.

[3] In vol. 1, p.189 the form POc *ijuŋ ‘projecting headboard of prow’ is erroneously given for *(i,u)cuŋ.
  This is almost certainly the same etymon as that reconstructed here.

   Reflexes of the next item, POc *ŋoro-ŋorok with the gloss ‘cape’ are few and are not
well distributed, but more careful inspection of the data reveals that these reflexes belong
to the same cognate set as another word for ‘nose’. We give the reflexes in two sets: those
with the gloss ‘cape’ or ‘headland’ first and then those for ‘nose’. Alone, the first set
suggests a reconstruction *ŋora-ŋora, but comparision with the terms glossed ‘nose’
reveals that final -a is simply the reflex that occurs in certain Southeast Solomonic
languages. POc *ŋoro-ŋorok ‘nose, cape’ in its turn was originally probably a colloquial
word for ‘nose’ derived from POc *ŋorok ‘snore’.

<
POc *ŋoro-ŋorok ‘cape’
 MM: Sursurunga        ŋor-ŋor                  ‘headland, point of land jutting out into the sea’
 SES: Longgu           ñora-ñora                ‘headland, point’
 SES: Lau              ŋo-ŋora                  ‘nose; point, headland, cape’
 SES: Sa’a             ŋora-ŋora                ‘cape’
 SES: Arosi            ŋora-ŋora                ‘cape, isthmus’
>


                                                                                       The landscape        49

<
POc *ŋoro-ŋorok ‘nose’
 NNG: Sio              i-ŋo-ŋoro
 NNG: Amara            (s)ŋorek(a)
 NNG: Kairiru          ŋaRi(-)
 NNG: Notsi            ŋul-ŋul
 MM: Madak             ŋo-ŋo                           ‘nasal mucus’
 MM: Tangga            ŋoro-ŋoro
 MM: Patpatar          ŋar-ŋaro
 MM: Ramoaaina         ŋir-ŋiro
 MM: Selau             ŋor-ŋoro
 MM: Varisi            i-ŋoro
 MM: Ririo             ni-ŋir
 SES: Lau              ŋo-ŋora-
 SES: N Malaitan       ŋo-ŋoro-
>

   The final reconstruction, PEOc *mata ‘point of land, headland’ is evidently an
extension of the more basic meanings attributed to POc *(m,mʷ)ata, namely ‘point, blade,
cutting-edge (of a weapon or instrument)’ (vol. 1, p.89).

<
PEOc *mata ‘point of land, headland’
 NCal: Nyelâyu        | mā(lã pʰwēmʷa) |                 ‘point of the mainland (= south)’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa         mā(wamʷa)                       ‘point of the mainland (= south)’
PPn *mata ‘point of land, headland; point, blade, cutting-edge (of a weapon or instrument)’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Niuean         mata          ‘a point of land’
 Pn:    E Futunan      mata          ‘point of land, cape’
 Pn:    Rennellese    | mata henua |   ‘western end of Rennell Island’
 Pn:    Maori          mata          ‘point of land, headland’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan      mata          ‘point of land, headland’
>

3.4 Inland topographical features

3.4.1 Hill, mountain

   Even quite small islands can be dominated by high peaks. While a number of peaks in
New Britain and New Ireland reach 2000m, the much smaller islands of Manam and
Karkar have peaks of 1800m, and Goodenough Island in the d’Entrecasteaux group has
one of 2500m. Of the reconstructions below, POc _*koro_[4] and POc *solos have meanings
centred on mountain or mountainous country. POc *puŋa-puŋa may have also denoted
‘mountain’ but its reflexes in Pn have come to refer to ‘upper surface’. Of the other
reconstructions, *buku and *pwotu referred rather to a protuberance or a bulge-shaped
object.

[4] It is tempting to decide that this is the same term as POc *koro (i) any fenced-in area’, (ii) settlement
    fortified by a palisade or ditch’ (Pawley 2005), on the basis that fortifications were typically situated on
    high ground. But there is strong evidence that there were two distinct terms at least as far back as POc.

50     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
POc *koro ‘mountain, hill’
 NNG: Manam            oro                ‘go landwards (away from the sea)’
 NNG: Lamogai          oro                ‘mountain’
 NNG: Sissano          ol                 ‘mountain’
 PT:   Motu            oro-ro             ‘mountain’
 PT:   Balawaia        ɣolo               ‘mountain’
 PT:   Kiriwina        koya               ‘mountain’
 MM: Mono-Alu          olo                ‘hill’
 SES: Gela             ɣoro               ‘back country, forest-covered interior hills’
 SES: Lengo            ɣo-ɣoro            ‘mountain’
 SES: Arosi            oro                ‘high’
 Mic: Kosraean         ɔl                 ‘mountain’
 Fij:  Bauan           koro               (i) ‘an eminence’; (ii) ‘fortified village’
 Pn:   Rennellese      ogo                ‘mountain, hill, slope’ (loss of initial k- irreg.)
 Pn:   Tikopia         koro               (i) ‘fort’; (ii) ‘barrier of sand or stone against sea’
 Pn:     Hawaiian       olo               ‘hill’ (obsolete now except in place names)
>

<
POc *solos ‘inland mountain country, highlands interior’
 MM: Kia               soloso           ‘mountainous interior, bush’
 MM: Marovo            soloso           ‘remote interior of large islands; the world’
 MM: Roviana           soloso           ‘inland, away from the beach’
 SES: Tolo             solo             ‘isolated areas in the middle of the island (Guadalcanal), the middle of the bush’
 SES: Lau              tolo             ‘mountain, hill country, interior of island; land’
 SES: Kwaio            tolo             ‘mountains, mountainous’
 SES: Sa’a             tolo             ‘hill’
 SES: Arosi            toro             ‘a hill (rare use); the interior, inland country of the hills’
 Mic: Marshallese      tɔḷʷ           ‘mountain’
 Mic: Ponapean         tōl              ‘small mountain’
 Fij:  Wayan           ðolo             ‘highland country’
 Fij:   Bauan          ðolo             ‘inland country, mountain country’
>

<
POc *puŋa-puŋa ‘mountain’
 MM: Sursurunga      puŋ-puŋ              ‘mountain’
 SES: Ulawa          huŋa-huŋa(ʔa)        ‘mound, hillock’
 SES: Arosi          huŋa-huŋa            ‘hill, mountain’
PPn *fuŋa ‘upper surface’
 Pn:    Niuean         fuŋa               ‘surface, top’ (e.g. fuŋavai ‘surface of water’)
 Pn:    Tongan         fuŋa               ‘top, upper surface’ (e.g. fuŋavaka ‘deck of boat’)
 Pn:     Anutan         puŋa(penua)       ‘summit; the highest point of an island’
>

                                                                     The landscape     51

<
PMP *buku ‘node (as in bamboo or sugarcane); joint; knuckle; knot in wood, string or rope’ (ACD, Dempwolff 1938)
POc *buku ‘mound, knob, joint; hill (?)’
 NNG: Manam            buku             ‘mountain; knuckle’
 NNG: Wogeo            buku             ‘knee’
 NNG: Mangap           bukū-nu          ‘knob, joint, hump’
 NNG: Gedaged          buku-n           ‘knot, on tree or cord’
 MM: Notsi             buk              ‘mountain’
 MM: Patpatar          buku             ‘knee’
 MM: Nakanai           buku             (V) ‘swell’
 MM: Nakanai           bu-buku          ‘knot in a tree’
 MM: Minigir           buku-buku        ‘elbow, knee’
 MM: Siar              buk              ‘elbow’
 MM: Tolai             buk              ‘boil, lump, corner’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa         bū-              ‘mound, hillock’
 Fij:   Bauan          buku             ‘anything knotted or humped’
 Pn:    Tikopia        puku-puku        ‘rounded, blunt-headed’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       puʔu             ‘any kind of protuberance, from a pimple to a hill’
>

Reflexes of *pwotu refer consistently to ‘mountain’ only in MM languages, while some
SES languages adopt the ‘knot, swelling’ meaning.

<
POc *pwotu ‘protuberance, bulge; mountain(?)’
 MM: Bali-Vitu         potu              ‘mountain’
 MM: Lavongai          put               ‘mountain’
 MM: Tigak             put               ‘mountain’
 MM: Kara (West) fut                     ‘mountain’
 MM: Nalik             fut               ‘mountain’
 MM: Tabar             potu              ‘mountain’
 MM: Lihir             pot-pot           ‘mountain’
 MM: Madak             put               ‘mountain’
 MM: Marovo            botu              ‘hill, top of hill’
 MM: Roviana           botu-botu         ‘mounds for planting yams; hillocks’
 SES: Gela             pou-potu          ‘bulge, swell’
 SES: Arosi            pou-pou           ‘round object; knot of bowstring, knot in wood’
 SV: Anejom            (no)pte-          ‘node (bamboo, sugarcane)’
>

In Polynesia the typical term for mountain is a reflex of *maquŋa.

<
PPn *maquŋa ‘mountain’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:   Niuean        mouŋa            ‘mountain’
 Pn:   Rennellese    maʔuŋa           ‘hill, residence’
 Pn:   Tongan        moʔuŋa           ‘hill, mountain’
 Pn:   E Futunan     maʔuŋa           ‘mountain’
 Pn:   Samoan        mauŋa            ‘hill, mountain’
 Pn:   Tikopia       mauŋa            ‘hill, mountain peak’
 Pn:     Maori          mauŋa            ‘mountain’
 Pn:     Hawaiian       mauna            ‘mountain’
>

52     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


Note also the following PEOc reconstruction:

<
PEOc *|qulu ni panua| ‘headland, mountain peak’ (POc *qulu ‘head’, ni ‘of’, *panua ‘land’)
 Mic: Chuukese     | wɨɾɨ-ɾ fəɾɨ |   ‘cape, point (of an island)’
 Fij:    Bauan     | ulu ni vanua |  ‘mountain’
>

A compound term for mountain ridge (‘back’ + ‘bone’) is reconstructable for PPn:

<
PPn *tuqa-siwi ‘mountain ridge’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Tongan         tuʔa-hivi        ‘ridge’
 Pn:    Rennellese     tuʔa-sivi        ‘coastal ridge, mountain ridge; backbone’
 Pn:    Samoan         tua-sivi         ‘ridge (of backbone, chain of hills etc.)’
 Pn:    Tokelauan      tua-hivi         ‘ridge (of mountain, house etc)’
 Pn:    Maori          tua-hiwi         ‘ridge of a hill, rising ground’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       kua-hiwi         ‘mountain, high hill’
>

3.4.2 Valley

   We have included two POc reconstructions glossed ‘valley’, although the second is
reflected in only two languages.

<
POc *mala ‘valley, ravine’
 Adm: Mussau         mala(le)         ‘valley’
 NNG: Takia          mal(paon)        ‘cliff’
 MM: Ramoaaina mala                   ‘valley, gorge, gully, ravine’
 MM: Tolai           male             ‘valley’
 MM: Babatana        mala(ku)         ‘valley’
 SES: Arosi          mara(rohiana)    ‘narrow waterless pass, ravine, valley between high hills’ (rohi ‘groove’)
 SES: Arosi          mara(wai)       ‘river course, valley’ (wai ‘water, river’)
 SES: Arosi          mara(gohu-gohu) ‘slopes of a river valley’ (gohu ‘river flat, lower valley’)
>

<
POc *salil ‘valley’
 MM: Patpatar         salil              ‘valley’
 SES: ’Are’are        tari               ‘valley’
 cf. also:
 NNG: Yabem           saliʔ              ‘abyss, cliff’ (possibly ‘edge of valley’)
>

3.4.3 Cliff

  We have one POc reconstruction for ‘cliff’. Two further reconstructions are at PCP and
PPn level. The two last may distinguish coastal and inland cliffs.

                                                                        The landscape   53

<
POc *pwaka(r,R) ‘steep rocky ground, cliff’
 Adm: Lou               pwak            ‘cave’
 NNG: Buang             pkɛ             ‘cliff; a steep rocky place’
 NNG: Bariai            per-per         ‘cliff’
 PT:   Molima           vakala          ‘steep rocky ground, cliff’
 PT:   Motu             haga-haga       ‘cliff’ (g for exp. ɣ)
 MM: Patpatar           par-para        ‘cliff’
>

<
PCP *bari ‘coastal cliff’
 Fij:  Bauan             | bari (ni vatu) |  ‘(rock) cliff, precipice’
PPn *pali ‘cliff’
 Pn:   Rarotongan         pari             ‘cliff’
 Pn:   Tahitian           pari             ‘cliff overhanging sea’
 Pn:   Maori              pari             ‘cliff’
 Pn:   Hawaiian           pali             ‘cliff’
>

<
PPn *mato ‘precipice, steep place, cliff’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:   Tongan           mato               ‘precipice, cliff face’
 Pn:   Samoan           mato               ‘deep narrow gorge, inland precipice’
 Pn:   E Uvean          mato               ‘very steep slope’
 Pn:   Tikopia          mato               ‘cliff, rock face’
 Pn:   Rarotongan       mato               ‘cliff, face of a precipice’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan        mato               ‘steep, precipitous, a cliff’
 Pn:   Anutan           mato               ‘cliff’
 Pn:   Tahitian         mato               ‘a craggy rock or precipice’
 Pn:   Maori            mato               ‘deep valley’
>


3.4.4 Cave

   Although terms exist in many languages for cave, we have no evidence of cognacy
outside Polynesia.

<
PPn *qana ‘cave’
 Pn:   Tongan             ʔana             ‘cave, cavern, den’
 Pn:   Niuean             ana              ‘cave, den’
 Pn:   Samoan             ana              ‘cave’
 Pn:   Rennellese         ʔana             ‘cave’
 Pn:   Tikopia            ana              ‘cave, rock shelter’
 Pn:   Tahitian           ana              ‘cave’
>

3.4.5 Flat land

54     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   Almost every language for which we have extensive lexical data has a term meaning
‘flat land’, but cognates have been difficult to find. Our only reconstruction is based on
cognates from Papuan Tip and Polynesia, with Polynesia using the same term in compound
form for ‘lowland’. This is probably the same word as POc *raun ‘leaf’, which occurs in
many languages as a kind of classifier for flat things.

<
POc *rau(n) ‘flat land’
 PT:   Bwaidoga         (awa)lau        ‘flat area; plain (where the airstrip is); (any) flat area in the mountains as well as on the coast’
 PT:   Bwaidoga         lau(beù)       ‘flat land, plain (used of town)’
 PT:   Bwaidoga         lau(beùmanata) ‘flat area without any mountains’
 PT:   Bwaidoga         lau(beùya)     ‘(on the) plain (of flat coastal strip)’
PPn *rau ‘flat land’
PPn *rau-lalo ‘lowland’
 Pn:    Tongan         | āu lalo |         ‘low-lying land’ (lalo ‘place lower down’)
 Pn:    Samoan          lau              ‘level area of land, plain’
 Pn:    Samoan          lau(fanua)       ‘flat land’
 Pn:   Tikopia          rau-rau          ‘flat expanse’
 Pn:   Tikopia         | rau raro |        ‘lowland in vicinity of shore’ (lalo LOC ‘down, below’)
>

3.5 Land defined by vegetation

   The following reconstructions include terms for particular kinds of land, identified
primarily by vegetation. POc *nuku ‘sandy ground’ may also be included here (see §3.1
for cognate set)


3.5.1 Uncultivated land

     The three following cognate sets are repeated from vol. 1, pp.118–119.

<
PAn *quCaN ‘scrubland, bush’ (ACD)
PMP *qutan ‘small wild herbaceous plants; scrubland, bush’ (ACD; Dempwolff 1938)
POc *qutan ‘bushland, hinterland’ (vol. 1, p.118)
 Adm: Mussau           utana             ‘garden’
 NNG: Manam            (a)uta            ‘inland’ (< POc *qa-qutan)
 PT:   Motu            uda               ‘bush, forest’
 PT:   Bwaidoga        ɣudana            ‘forest’
 PT:   Misima          ulan              ‘forest’
 MM: Nakanai           huta-huta         ‘general term for small plants and leaves; trash’
 SES: Tolo             uta               ‘garden’
 NCV: Mota             uta               ‘bush, forest, unoccupied land; the inland country’
 NCV: Nguna            uta               ‘inland’
 NCV: SE Ambrym ut                       ‘place, area, land, shore, island, homeland, weather’
 NCV: Paamese          ut                ‘shore, when contrasted with sea’
 NCal: Nemi            kuc               ‘forest’
 Mic:   Kosraean         wʌt             ‘area inland or towards the mountains’
 Fij:   Rotuman          ufa             ‘land (from the sea); interior (from the coast)’
 Pn:    Tongan           ʔuta            ‘land (not sea); interior or inland (not coast)’
 Pn:    Niuean           uta             ‘inland, shore, ashore’
 Pn:    Samoan           uta             ‘ashore; on the side towards the land’
 Pn:    Tikopia          uta             ‘inland area’
>

The Mussau and Tolo reflexes mean ‘garden’: this change of meaning is probably due to
the fact that, in Melanesia, gardens are often remote from the village and surrounded by
bushland, so that to go to the garden is to go into the bush. POc *qutan was also a local
noun for the direction of the bush, namely ‘inland’ (Ch.8, §2.2.1).

                                                                        The landscape       55


<
PEOc *wao ‘forest, bushland, scrub, land in its natural uncultivated state’ (vol. 1, p.119)
 SES: Gela             ao               (N) ‘forest, land never brought under cultivation’; (V) ‘be overgrown, become forest’
 Fij:  Rotuman         vao              ‘forest, large number of trees or big plants growing together’ (poss. Pn loan)
 Pn:   Tongan          vao              ‘forest, bushland, scrub, land in its natural uncultivated state’
 Pn:   Samoan          vao              (N) ‘bush, forest; weeds; tall grass’; (ADJ) ‘of the forest, wild’
 Pn:   Tahitian        vao              ‘wilds, wilderness’
 Pn:   Maori           wao              ‘forest’
>

It is tempting to associate the set above with PMP *waRej, POc *waRoc ‘vine, creeper,
rope’, a reconstruction with many widespread reflexes. The implication here is that
uncultivated rain forest was a place of tangled vines. However, Gela has two terms, ao
‘forest’ (> *wao) and alo ‘creeper, string’ (> *waRoc), indicating that there were two
distinct terms at the time of POc or a little later, albeit with a possible common origin.

    The next POc reconstruction contrasts with *quma ‘garden, cultivated land’ (vol. 1,
p.117)

<
PMP *talun ‘fallow land’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *talu(n) ‘old garden, fallow land, land returning to secondary growth’ (vol. 1, p.118)
 SES: Gela              talu             ‘forest land which has been previously cultivated’
 SES: Kwaio             alu              ‘garden of second or third crop’
 SES: Kwaio            | alu (sīsī) |      ‘an old garden plot returning to secondary growth, beginning to be overgrown’
 SES: Lau               alu              ‘garden ground, last year’s garden’
 SES: Sa’a              elu              ‘last year’s yam garden’
 SES: Arosi             aru              ‘an overgrown garden; land formerly used for a garden; a dug garden’
PPn *talu-talu ‘weeds, fallow’
 Pn:    Niuean          talu-talu        ‘land out of cultivation’
 Pn:    Rennellese      tagu-tagu        ‘begin to be brush-covered, of a fallow garden’
 Pn:    Samoan          talu-talu        ‘fresh growth of weeds’
 Pn:     Tikopia             taru-taru       ‘cultivation plot’
 Pn:     Maori               taru-taru       ‘weeds, herbs’
 Pn:     Hawaiian            kalu-kalu       ‘k.o. fern’
>

56     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


3.5.2 Swamp

   A number of reconstructions are loosely glossed ‘swamp’. In wordlists these may be
defined further as saltwater or freshwater swamps, or by their vegetation. Nipa palm and
mangrove swamps are found in inter-tidal zones along the coast and in river estuaries,
while lowland freshwater swamps, often dominated by sago, are found inland. However,
few wordlists distinguish more than one kind of swamp, and we are unable to be more
specific in our reconstructions.[5] Two further reconstructions, POc [dr,r]ano ‘lake, swamp’
and POc *[g,k]opu ‘pond, lagoon, swamp’ blur the distinction between water hole/lagoon
and swamp.

[5] Languages where kinds of swamp are lexically distinguished include Kiriwina dumia ‘inland swamp’,
  pasa, vamova ‘mangrove swamp’ and Kwaio kunu, kū-kunu ‘saltwater mud’, kunu-kunu ‘freshwater mud,
  swamp’. Also Ulawa lo-lolo ‘swamp in which sago palms grow’ and closely related language Sa’a which
  has lo-loŋo ‘mangrove swamp’.

<
PAn *danaw ‘inland lake, pond’ (Blust 1999)
POc *[dr,r]ano ‘lake, swamp’
 NNG: Bam                dano          ‘lagoon’
 MM: Kia                 rano          ‘swamp’
 SES: ’Are’are           ro-rono       ‘mangrove swamp’
 NCal: Nemi              dan           ‘lake, pond’
 NCal: Xârâcùù           ne-dɛ̃        ‘lake, marsh’
 Mic: Woleaian           ẓano         ‘lake, large swamp’
 Fij:  Rotuman           rano          ‘swamp, marsh’
 Fij:  Bauan             drano         ‘lake, freshwater swamp’
 Fij:  Wayan             drano         ‘lake, pond’
 Pn:   Rennellese        gano          ‘lake’
 Pn:   Samoan            lano          ‘lake’
 Pn:   Rapanui           rano          ‘swamp’
 Pn:   Mangareva         rano          ‘swamp’
>

<
PMP *paja ‘swamp’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *pwaca ‘swamp’
 PT:   Kiriwina       pasa         ‘mangrove swamp’
 MM: Sursurunga       pesa         ‘swamp’
 Mic: Marshallese     pat          ‘swamp’
 Mic: Puluwatese      pāt, pata-   ‘swamp’
>

   The next term is reconstructable in two forms, as either *gopu or *kopu. The MM terms
and Lau reflect *k, Motu and Arosi reflect *g, while the remainder, from PT and SES,
reflect either.

                                                                       The landscape     57

<
POc *[g,k]opu ‘pond, lagoon, swamp’
 PT:    Hula           kovu              ‘pond, lake’
 PT:    Motu           gohu              ‘lake, lagoon’
 PT:    Roro           obu               ‘lagoon, pond’
 PT:    Lala           ovu               ‘swamp’
 MM: Teop              kopu(a)           ‘deep’
 MM: Solos             kopu-kopu         ‘lagoon’
 MM: Marovo            kopi              ‘lake, pool (any size)’
 MM: Roviana           kopi              ‘pond, lake’
 SES: Lau              ʔofu              ‘brackish water’
 SES: ’Are’are         (a)kohu           ‘swamp, swampy ground’
 SES: Arosi            gohu              ‘river flat, lower valley; flat between coast and hills’
 cf. also:
 MM: Nduke              koɣu             ‘lagoon’
>

   In the next two sets, emphasis is perhaps on the mud itself rather than on a muddy water
feature.

<
PMP *pitak ‘mud’ (ACD)
POc *p(w)ita(k) ‘mud’
 Adm: Lou             pwi-pwire          ‘mud, swamp’
 PT:   Wedau          biɣa-biɣa          ‘swamp, mud’
 MM: Nakanai          pita               ‘mud’
 SES: Sa’a            pwī-pwī            ‘mud, slush’
>

<
POc *poŋa-poŋa ‘swamp, mud’
 Adm: Seimat        pona-pon             ‘bog, esp. sago swamp’ (Smythe)
 NNG: Kove          paŋa-paŋa            ‘swamp, mud’
 NNG: Lusi          paŋ-paŋa             ‘swamp, mud’
 NNG: Kilenge       pa-paŋa              ‘swamp, mud’
 NNG: Bariai        paŋa-paŋa            ‘mud’
 SES: ‘Are’are      pona                 ‘swamp, swampy ground’

>

   The final two reconstructed forms in this section probably referred to wet taro swamp
gardens.

<
PEOc *bʷela ‘taro swamp’
 SES: Kwaio           gʷele-gʷele(na) ‘bottom of taro corm’
 SES: Arosi           bʷera           ‘swamp’
 NCal: Cèmuhî         bʷɛ̄lɛ̄         ‘irrigated taro field’
 NCal: Pwapwâ         gʷala           ‘irrigated taro field’
 Mic: Mokilese        pʷɛl            ‘taro swamp’
 Mic: Puluwatese      pʷə̄l           ‘swamp garden’
 Mic: Ponapean        (lɛ̄)pʷɛl       ‘taro patch, bog; large swamp’
 Pn:   Rennellese     pega            ‘mud, mud puddle, swamp’
 Pn:      Tikopia            pera               ‘mud; swampy lake shore land in which taro planted’
 Pn:      W Futunan          pera               ‘mud, mire’
>

58     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PCP *vusi ‘swamp; taro swamp’ (see vol. 1, p.139)[6]
 Fij:  Bauan           vuði             ‘taro garden under wet cultivation’
 Pn:   Rennellese      husi             ‘swamp, esp. wet-land taro patch’
 Pn:   Samoan          (tau)fusi        ‘swamp, marsh; patch of ground irrigated for purpose of growing taro’
 Pn:   E Futunan       vusi(ga)         ‘pondfield’
 Pn:   Maori           hūhi             (N) ‘swamp’
>

[6] In vol. 1, p.139 the form PCP *pusi is erroneously given for *vusi (POc *p split into PCP *p and *v).


3.6 Inland water features

3.6.1 Fresh water

   In POc a single word, *waiR, evidently denoted both ‘fresh water’ and ‘river, stream’.
A second term, *(dr,r)anum, specifically denoted ‘fresh water’. Both forms continue PMP
etyma reconstructed with the same meaning, and both are well represented across Oceanic
subgroups.

<
PMP *wahiR ‘fresh water; stream, river’
POc *waiR ‘fresh water; river, stream’
 Adm: Lou                wei            ‘fresh water’
 Adm: Baluan             wei            ‘fresh water’
 Adm: Nali               (polo)way      ‘river’
 Adm: Likum             gʷay           ‘fresh water’
 Adm: Likum            | gʷway (selo) |   ‘river’
 Adm: Sori-Harengan gay                 ‘fresh water; river’
 PT:   Motu              (sina)vai      ‘river’ (lit. ‘mother of waters’; as a single word, _vai_ has been replaced by _ranu_ ‘water’)
 PT:   Hula              wai            ‘river’
 SES: Lau                kʷai           ‘water’
 SES: Kwaio              kʷai           ‘river; water’
 SES: ’Are’are           wai            ‘fresh water; moisture, sap, juice; river’
 SES: Sa’a               wei            ‘fresh water; stream, river’
 SES: Arosi              wai            ‘water’
 NCV: Raga               wai            ‘fresh water’
 NCV: Tangoa             wai            ‘water’
 NCV: Paamese            oai            ‘fresh water’
 SV: Kwamera             n-ui           ‘fresh water’
 SV: Anejom              in-wai         ‘fresh water’
 NCal: Nemi              we             ‘fresh water’
 NCal: Xârâcùù           kʷwe            ‘fresh water’
 Fij:   Rotuman          vai            ‘water; natural water-hole or bathing pool; well’
 Fij:   Bauan            wai            ‘water, liquid of any kind’
 Pn:    Tongan           vai            ‘liquid, esp. fresh water’ (as opposed to tahi ‘saltwater’)
 Pn:    Tongan           vai(tupu)      ‘spring, well, or water from a spring or well’ (tupu ‘to spring up, come into existence’)
 Pn:    Samoan           vai            ‘water (esp. fresh water as opposed to salt water)’
 Pn:    Rennellese       bai            ‘water (usually fresh, although salt water found inland may be called bai, as may the lake in the centre of Rennell Island); juice, sauce, liquid’
 Pn:    Tikopia          vai            ‘water, esp. fresh running’ (as opp. to _nupu_ ‘pool of still water’)
 Pn:    Maori            wai            ‘water; liquid, oil, etc.’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         wai            ‘water, liquid of any kind other than sea water; juice, sap, honey; any liquid discharged from the body, as blood, semen; river, stream (in place-names)’
>

                                                                      The landscape     59

The form *dranum below is reflected by most witnesses, but some languages (Motu,
Nakanai, Namakir) reflect *ranum, and the Admiralties languages may reflect either *dr or
*r.

<
PAn *daNum ‘water — potable, drinking, fresh’ (Blust 1999)
POc *[dr,r]anum ‘fresh water’
 Adm: Lou               ronu-n       ‘juice’
 Adm: Loniu             an           ‘fresh water, lake, river’
 Adm: Seimat            kanu         ‘fresh water, rain water’
 PT:   Motu             ranu         ‘water, juice, liquid’
 MM: Sursurunga         dan          ‘fresh water, river’
 MM: Vitu               dranu        ‘fresh water’
 MM: Nakanai            lalu         ‘fresh water’
 MM: Tolai              danim        ‘water; river, creek, pool of fresh water’
 MM: Teop               ran          ‘stream’
 MM: Halia              ramun        ‘fresh water’ (metathesis)
 SES: Bugotu            lanu         (V) ‘bale’; ‘a baler’
 SES: Arosi             danu         ‘bale out water’
 NCV: Raga              danu         ‘brackish spring water’
 NCV: Uripiv            dranu        ‘muddy water’
 NCV: Namakir           ran          ‘water’
 Mic: Puluwatese        rān          ‘water, liquid of any kind, pond’
 Mic: Woleaian          ṣarɨ        ‘liquid, fresh water, water well, lake’
 Fij:  Bauan            dranu        (V) ‘be fresh, of water’ (wai dranu ‘fresh water’)
 Fij:  Wayan            dranu        (ADJ) ‘fresh, pure, of water’
 Pn:   Niuean           lanu         ‘clear liquid’
 Pn:   Tongan           lanu         ‘wash in fresh water’
 Pn:     Tikopia           ranu            ‘flow, of water’
 Pn:     Tuvalu            lanu            ‘amniotic fluid’
>

60     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   No POc term has been reconstructed for ‘river’ as distinct from the term for ‘fresh
water’. Speakers of Oceanic languages would probably lack the map-based view of a river
thought of primarily in terms of an entity with length. Rather, they seem to conceive of it
simply as fresh water that flows. Tolai speakers refer to a river as tava alir, literally ‘fresh
water flowing’, and Halia speakers use a semantically parallel compound, ramun olo.
Dobu uses ʔawa bwasi, literally ‘channel of water’.

   We have one lower-level reconstruction for a river branch.

<
PEOc *maŋa ‘river branch, tributary’
 SES: Arosi             maŋa                ‘V-shaped bend where a tributary meets the main stream’
 Mic:    Kiribati          mwāŋa            ‘branching off, branch road, limb of a tree’
 Pn:     Tongan            maŋa             (V) ‘fork, branch out, divide’; (N) ‘branch, fork’
 Pn:     Maori             maŋa             ‘branch of a river’
>

3.6.2 Spring

   For coastal dwellers, fresh water is often obtained from springs. PAn *Cebuj ‘spring’ is
continued in POc by doublets, *topu(R) and *tupu(R). Oceanic reflexes refer mainly to
springs on a beach or shoreline, or to brackish water. Doublets are found in some Southeast
Solomonic languages.

<
PAn *Cebuj ‘spring of water’ (ACD)
PMP *tebuR, *tubuR ‘spring of water’ (ACD)
POc *topu(R), *tupu(R) ‘freshwater spring on the beach, often brackish’
 PT:   Kukuya          tovo(ha)         ‘spring of water’
 MM: Kia               futu             ‘water spring’ (metathesis)
 SES: Gela             tuvu             ‘a well’
 SES: Lau              ʔufu             ‘mixed fresh and sea water in the lagoon’ (initial glottal unexpected)
 SES: Kwaio            ufu              ‘spring, flowing stream’
 SES: ’Are’are         ohu-ohu(a)       ‘brackish water’
 SES: ’Are’are         uhu              ‘a backwater, brackish water; spring of fresh water on the sea shore’
 SES: Sa’a             (mara)ohu        ‘pool with salt and fresh water mixed’
 SES: Sa’a             uhu              ‘backwater, brackish water’
 SES: Arosi            (mara)ohu(a) ‘brackish, of water on shore’
 SES: Arosi            uhu              ‘a well dug by the shore; rivulets of salt water from reef to sea; brackish water on the reef’
 NCV: Mota             tov              ‘spring below high water mark; the brackish water of such a spring’
 Fij:  Bauan           tuvu             (N) ‘spring of fresh water on the beach’
 Fij:  Bauan           tuvu-ca          (V) ‘add fresh water to s.t.’
 Pn:    Tongan           tufu            ‘spring of water, esp. one on the beach’
 Pn:    E Futunan        tufu            ‘spring of water, usually on the beach’
 Pn:    Rennellese       tuhu            ‘natural salt-water ponds connected underground with the sea’
 Pn:    Samoan           tufu            ‘pool or spring of fresh water near the shore’
 Pn:    Tikopia          tufu            ‘spring of brackish water’
>

                                                                      The landscape    61


   Polynesian languages have a well-attested term for ‘spring’ which continues a PMP
form meaning ‘source’. Curiously, no reflexes have been found in other Oceanic
languages.

<
PMP *punaŋ ‘source, origin’ (ACD)
POc *buna(ŋ) ‘spring of water’
PPn *puna (N) ‘a spring’; (V) ‘bubble or well up (of water)’
 Pn:   Niuean             puna           ‘spring up, bubble up’
 Pn:   Tongan             puna           ‘spurt forth’
 Pn:   Tongan             (vai)puna      ‘spring of water. Used instead of _vaitupu_ if the water rises up like a fountain’
 Pn:   E Futunan          puna           ‘(water) spring, spurt forth’
 Pn:   Pukapukan          puna           ‘water spring’
 Pn:   Samoan             puna           ‘spring, source’
 Pn:   Tuvalu             puna           ‘(water) bubble or boil’
 Pn:   Rarotongan         puna           ‘spring’
 Pn:   Tokelauan          puna           ‘spring’
 Pn:   Anutan             puna           ‘spring of water’ (Yen)
 Pn:   Maori              puna           ‘spring, well up, flow’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan          puna           ‘spring, well up, flow’
 Pn:   Hawaiian           puna           ‘spring (of water)’
>

   The next reconstruction, in its simple form *pura(q), was primarily a verb ‘bubble up’.
Its reduplicated form may have served as a noun denoting a spring as it does in several
Southeast Solomonic witnesses and in Bauan Fijian. Among several similar forms (see
Ch.4, §2.5), Blust (ACD) lists PMP *budaq ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’, continued
as POc *pura-puraq ‘foam, bubbles, bubble up’. The related forms include POc *puro
‘bubble up, (hot spring) boil’ (p.83).

<
PMP *budaq ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’ (ACD)
POc *pura(q), *pura-pura(q) (V) ‘bubble up, as spring of water’; (N) ‘spring; foam, bubbles, bubble up’ (ACD)
 Adm: Mussau            ula-ula        ‘bubble up’
 PT:    Kiriwina        ūla            ‘source’
 SES: Gela              vura           ‘bubble up’
 SES: Gela             | vuraɣa ni beti | (N) ‘spring’ (beti ‘water’)
 SES: Tolo              vura-vura(na) ‘fountain, spring of water’
 SES: Longgu            vula-vula      ‘spring’
 SES: Kwaio             fula-fula      ‘spring of water’
 SES: Arosi              hura              ‘(water from a spring) gush out’
 SES: Arosi              hura-hura         ‘a spring’
 NCV: Mota               vura              ‘(water) spring forth, rise up’
 NCV: Mota               vuro              ‘volcanic vent, hot spring’
 Fij:     Bauan          vure              ‘(water) spring up’
 Fij:     Bauan          i-vure-vure       ‘a spring, source of water’
 Fij:     Wayan          vure              (V) ‘spring up, well up’; (N) (i) ‘spring’; (ii) ‘source of things’
>

62      Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   A number of languages use a compound, translatable literally as ‘eye of water’ or
similar to refer to a spring. A POc reconstruction is possible given the existence of
Indonesian mata air ‘spring’, reflecting PMP *mata WahiR ‘spring of water’. Other
compounds with similar meaning are found throughout the wider Oceanic region.

<
PMP *|mata WahiR| ‘spring of water’
POc *|mata waiR| ‘spring of water, source of a river’
 SV: Anejom           nemta-n-wai
 Fij: Wayan          | mata ni wai |
 Pn:  Tongan          mata-vai
 Pn:  Samoan          mata-vai
>

Other compounds retaining reflexes of POc *mata ‘eye’ but varying in their term for
‘water’ include the following:

__pre__
 NNG: Kaulong            eki maran
 NNG: Yabem              bu mata
 PT:     Iduna           gufa wa-mata
 MM: Tolai               mətə nə tavə
 SES: Lau                mā-fulafula


3.6.3 Waterfall

  The following reconstruction, POc *sa[p,b]u(q), is used both as a verb ‘fall, trickle
down, of water’ and a noun ‘waterfall’.

<
PMP *sabuq ‘drop, fall’ (Blust 1989:162)
POc *sa[p,b]u(q) (N) ‘waterfall’; (V) ‘(water) fall’
 NNG: Buang            | (bel) rabu |       ‘waterfall’ (bel ‘water)
 SES: Ghari             sa-savu           ‘waterfall’
 NCV: Fortsenal         sevu              ‘waterfall’
 Fij:  Bauan            savu              ‘waterfall’
 Fij:  Wayan            savu              (V) ‘(liquid) flow or run down, fall like a waterfall’; (N) ‘waterfall’
 Pn:   Tongan           hafu              ‘trickle down; small waterfall’
 Pn:   Rennellese       sahu              ‘to drip, flow, as water or blood’
 Pn:   Samoan           āfu               ‘waterfall’
>

                                                                        The landscape     63

   POc *tape has been reconstructed in Chapter 4 as both a noun and verb meaning ‘flow’,
with reference to ocean currents. However, it is also reconstructable, possibly reduplicated,
with the meaning ‘waterfall’.

<
POc *tape-tape ‘waterfall; flow’
 Adm: Lou              tapet              ‘waterfall’
 PT:    Tawala         tapa-tapana        ‘waterfall/rapids’
 MM: Tolai             tavit              (VI) ‘to run, of water’ (tava ‘water’)
>

3.7 Mineral substances (stone, obsidian, lime, pumice, sand, earth, salt)

   The mineral substance most highly valued by POc speakers would have been hard,
easily flakeable stone, ideally obsidian or flint, used to make razors, axes and knives.
Obsidian was traded in the Bismarck Archipelago even in pre-Lapita times, but the range
of the trade increased dramatically when Lapita settlements appeared in the late second
millennium BC (Kirch 1997, Spriggs 1997a, Summerhayes 2000a).


3.7.1 Stone

  The generic term for ‘stone’ or ‘rock’ was POc *patu.

<
PAn *batu ‘stone’ (Blust 1999)
POc *patu ‘stone, rock’
 Adm: Mussau            atu               ‘stone, rock’
 Adm: Seimat            hatu              ‘stone, rock’
 Adm: Kaniet            fatu              ‘stone, rock’
 NNG: Takia             pat               ‘stone, rock’
 NNG: Gedaged           pat               ‘stone, rock, pebble’
 NNG: Kove              patu              ‘stone, rock’
 PT:   Kiriwina         vatu              ‘big stone, rock’
 MM: Sursurunga         batu              ‘k.o. coral rock found in the ocean and only underwater’
 MM: Tolai               vat              ‘stone, rock’
 MM: Halia               hatu             ‘stone (coral, limestone)’
 MM: Teop                vasu             ‘stone, rock’
 MM: Roviana             patu             ‘stone, rock’
 SES: Gela               vatu             ‘stone, rock’
 SES: Lau                fou, fau         ‘stone, rock’
 SES: ’Are’are           hau              ‘stone, rock’
 SES: Sa’a               heu              ‘stone, rock’
 SES: Arosi              hau              ‘stone, rock; coral’
 NCV: Mota               vat, vatu        ‘stone, rock’
 NCV: Tamambo            vatu             ‘stone, rock’
 NCV: Paamese            a-hatu           ‘stone, rock’
 SV: Sye                 n-vat            ‘stone, rock’
 SV: Anejom              in-hat           ‘stone, rock’
 NCal: Nemi              paik             ‘stone, rock’
 NCal: Iaai              veto             ‘stone, rock’
 NCal: Cèmuhî            pei              ‘stone, rock’
 Mic: Kiribati           ati-             ‘prefix for stone, rocks in compounds’
 Mic: Puluwatese         fawi-            ‘stone, coral, rock’
 Mic: Woleaian           fai-             ‘stone, rock’
 Fij:  Bauan             fatu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Niuean            patu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Rennellese        hatu             ‘stone, rock, coral’
 Pn:   Samoan            fatu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Takuu             fatu             ‘stone, rock, coral’
 Pn:   Tikopia           fatu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Mele-Fila         fatu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Maori             ɸatu             ‘stone, rock’
 Pn:   Hawaiian          haku             ‘stone, rock’
>

64   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   The form below is a reduplication of POc *maga ‘stone; slingshot’ (vol. 1, p.227). It
probably referred to gravel or pebbles, as its reflexes do in Polynesian and Micronesian
languages. Western Oceanic cognates show a semantic shift to ‘sand’.

<
POc *maga-maga ‘small stones, pebbles, gravel’
 NNG: Mangap         maŋ-māŋga         ‘fine sand by the river’
 NNG: Kove           maɣa-maɣa         ‘mixed firm and soft ground, as at the edge of a swamp’
 NNG: Kilenge        (na)maɣa          ‘sand’
 NNG: Adzera         maga-maŋk         ‘sand’
 PT:   Kukuya        maga-ma           ‘sand’
 MM: Vitu            maga-maga         ‘sand’
 MM: Meramera        maga-maga         ‘sand, earth’ (tumaga ‘sling’)
 MM: Nakanai         maga(sa)          ‘earth, ground’
 Mic: Woleaian       (faɨ̈)mwaxa        ‘gravel’ (faü ‘numeral classifier for round objects such as stones, balls, nuts’)
 Mic: Sonsorolese    (fatü)maka        ‘gravel, pebble’
 Pn:   Tongan        maka-maka         ‘little stones, pebbles’
 Pn:   Samoan        maʔa-maʔa         ‘small stones, pebbles’
>

3.7.2 Flint, obsidian

  Two reconstructions for obsidian were proposed in volume 1 (p.93), one at POc level
and one at PWOc. They are:

<
POc *na[d,dr]i ‘flint, obsidian, stone with a cutting edge’
 NNG: Takia              nad               ‘obsidian, volcanic glass’
 PT:   Motu              nadi              ‘stone’
 PT:   Dobu              nadi-nadi         ‘rock, stone’
 SES:    Gela            nadi              ‘flint’
 SES:    Bugotu          nadi              ‘flint’
 SES:    Lau             (fou)nagi         ‘flint’
 SES:    Arosi           nagi              ‘flint, obsidian’
>

<
PWOc *qa[r,R]iŋ ‘obsidian’
 NNG: Kove            ali-ali              ‘obsidian’
 NNG: Lusi            ali-ali              ‘obsidian’
 NNG: Gedaged         yaliŋ                ‘obsidian (a splinter of it serves as a razor)’
 PT:  Duau            kalilia              ‘arrow’
 PT:  Sudest          kayina               ‘knife’
 MM: Nakanai          hali                 ‘obsidian; razor formerly made from obsidian’
 MM: Meramera         ali                  ‘obsidian’
>

                                                                            The landscape   65


3.7.3 Coral, limestone

   POc *laje was the general term for coral as the substance from which reefs are formed.
It was also used to refer more specifically to living coral of the branching kind, in contrast
with, for instance, POc *buŋa ‘smooth, round coral’. The cognate sets for *laje and *buŋa
are included in Chapter 4, §3.1.

   Dead coral was evidently valued as coral rubble (POc *giri-giri), and as a source of the
lime (POc *qapu(R)), taken with betel nut.

<
POc *giri-giri ‘coral, coral rubble’
 PT:    Motu              giri-giri        ‘coral’
 PT:    Iduna             gili-gili        ‘coral’
 PT:    Dobu              gili-gili        ‘coral, broken’ (gili ‘coral’)
 PT:    Daui              gili             ‘coral’
 Fij:   Bauan             gere-gere        ‘gravel’
 Pn:    Niuean            kili-kili        ‘gravel’
 Pn:    Tongan            kili-kili        ‘gravel’
 Pn:    Rennellese        kigi-kigi        ‘pebble, gravel, coral rubble’
 Pn:    Pukapukan         kili-kili        ‘coral gravel’
 Pn:    Samoan            ʔili-ʔili        ‘gravel’
 Pn:    Maori             kiri-kiri        ‘gravel’
 Pn:    Hawaiian          ʔili-ʔili        ‘pebble’
>

The chewing of betel nut, combined with lime and pepper as a stimulant, is widespread in
northwest Melanesia and the Solomons, but is not practised further east. Lime could be
obtained by burning shells as well as coral.

<
PAn *qapuR ‘lime, calcium’ (ACD)
POc *qapu(R) ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 Adm: Likum            ah                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 Adm: Lou              knp               ‘lime; lime gourd’
 Adm: Wuvulu           afu               ‘lime in lime gourd’
 Adm: Seimat           wapu              ‘lime, prepared coral’ (Smythe)
 NNG: Gitua             avu                ‘lime (calcium oxide)’
 NNG: Lukep             kau                ‘lime: made of cooked and crushed coral’
 NNG: Takia             kau                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 PT:  Mekeo             apu                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 PT:  Roro              abu                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 PT:  Motu              ahu                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 MM: Bali               kavu               ‘betel lime’ (k for ɣ unexpected)
 MM: Nakanai            havu               ‘lime for chewing with areca nut, made from clam shell’
 SES:   Gela            avu                ‘lime holder; slaked lime’
 SES:   Lau             safu               ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 SES:   ’Are’are        sahu               ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
 SES:   Arosi           ahu                ‘lime; branching coral’
 SES:   Bauro           ahu                ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’
>

66   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


3.7.4 Pumice

  Pumice is a porous solidified lava that floats and is also useful as an abrasive. A
compound term reflecting POc *patu + maqañur (‘stone’ + ‘float’) is reconstructable for
PEOc.

<
PEOc *|patu maqañur| ‘pumice’ (lit. ‘floating stone’)
 SES: Kwaio        | fou manu-manu |        ‘pumice’
 SES: ’Are’are     | hau manu-manu | ‘pumice’
 SES: Lau          | fou manu-manu |        ‘pumice’
 SES: Arosi        | hau manu-manu | ‘pumice’
 Pn:   Tikopia     | fatu manu |            ‘pumice’
>

Other compound terms include Roviana (MM) patu ale and Gela (SES) vatu ali, exhibiting
reflexes of POc *qaliR ‘drift, float’ rather than POc *maqañur ‘floating, adrift’.

   Proto Micronesian had its own term for pumice, probably preposed by *fatu ‘stone’.

<
PMic *|(fatu) wāni| ‘pumice’ (Marck 1994)
 Mic: Kiribati         wān              ‘pumice’
 Mic: Kosraean         yot-wen          ‘basalt’
 Mic: Mokilese         wɛ̄n             ‘pumice’
 Mic: Satawalese       (wu)wan          ‘pumice’
 Mic: Woleaian         (u)wāri          ‘lava rock’
>

 A distinctive term, PCP *vuqa(i)ŋa, is reflected in Fijian and Polynesian. This term also
referred to grindstones, reflecting the use of pumice as an abrasive.

<
PCP *vuqa(i)ŋa ‘pumice; whetstone, grindstone’ (vol. 1, p.94)
 Fij:  Wayan          vuaiŋō             ‘pumicestone, pumice; used for scouring coconut-shell cups’
 Pn:   Tongan         fuʔo-fuʔaŋa        ‘pumice’
 Pn:   E Futunan      fuʔaŋa             ‘grindstone, whetstone’
 Pn:    Tikopia        fuaŋa           ‘whetstone’
 Pn:    Mele-Fila      foaŋa           ‘pumice’
 Pn:    Mangareva      hoaŋa           ‘volcanic stone used as hone or sharpener’
 Pn:    Maori          hōaŋa           ‘sandstone used in grinding stone’
>

                                                                     The landscape    67


3.7.5 Sand

  There is a well-attested POc term for ‘sand’ which continues a PAn etymon (see also
POc *nuku ‘sandy ground’, p.45).

<
PAn *qenay ‘sand’ (ACD)
POc *qone ‘sand, sandy beach’ (ACD)
 Adm: Lou              kone            ‘sand, beach’
 Adm: Loniu            (teʔe)won       ‘sand, sandy soil’
 Adm: Bipi             won             ‘sand’
 Adm: Nyindrou         on              ‘sand’
 SJ:   Bongo           on              ‘sand’
 NNG: Wogeo            one             ‘beach’
 NNG: Kairiru          un              ‘beach’
 PT:   Motu            kone            ‘beach; sea coast’
 MM: Tabar             kone            ‘beach’
 MM: Nduke             (kara)kone      ‘sand’
 SES: ’Are’are         ōne             ‘sand, beach sand, beach’
 SES: Lau              one             ‘sand’
 SES: Kwaio            one             ‘sand; beach’
 SES: Sa’a             one             ‘sand’
 SES: Arosi            one             ‘shore, beach’
 NCV: Mota             one             ‘sand’
 NCV: Raga             one             ‘sand, beach’
 NCV: Lonwolwol        won             ‘sand’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa         on              ‘sand’
 NCal: Nemi            kon             ‘sand’
 Pn:   Tongan          ʔone            ‘sand’ (in compounds)
 Pn:   Nanumean        one             ‘sand, soil’
 Pn:   Rennellese      ʔone            ‘sand, sand or rubble beach; to be plentiful as sands (poetic)’
 Pn:    Tikopia        one             ‘sand, sandy beach’
 Pn:    Rarotongan     one             ‘general name for soil, earth, sand, gravel’
 Pn:    Maori          one             ‘beach; sand, mud; in various names for different kinds of soil’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       one             ‘sand; sandy; silt; poetic name for land’
>

68     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

A reduplicated form of the above can also be reconstructed. This may have denoted the
property ‘sandy’ as well as ‘sand’.

<
PMP *|qenay qenay| ‘sandy’ (ACD)
POc *|qone qone| ‘sand, sandy’
 MM: Roviana           on-one                ‘sand’
 SES: Gela             one-one               ‘black sand’
 SES: Kwaio            one-one               ‘sandy soil’
 NCV: Mota             one-one               ‘a sandy beach’
 NCV: Tamambo          one-one               ‘sand’
 Pn:   Tongan          ʔone-ʔone             ‘sand’
 Pn:   Niuean          one-one               ‘sand’
 Pn:   Samoan          one-one               ‘sand’ (one-onea ‘sandy, be sandy’)
 Pn:   Rennellese      ʔone-ʔone             ‘sandy, dry, crumbling, powdery, as over-dry grated coconuts’
 Pn:     Tikopia          one-one            ‘sandy; sand-coloured’
 Pn:     Rarotongan       one-one            ‘sandy, dirty, gritty’
 Pn:     Maori            one-one            ‘earth, soil; land’
>

3.7.6 Earth, soil

    Two POc terms meaning ‘soil’ are well-supported: *tanoq appears to have had three
senses, (i) ‘earth, soil (as substance)’; (ii) ‘land, ground (as area or as opposed to sea)’ (this
chapter, §2.1 and vol. 1, p.119), and (iii) ‘down on the ground, down below (as location)’
(Ch.8, §2.2.5). POc *pway(a) was probably limited to the first meaning.

    Some soils contained pigments useful in both body and pot decoration. Although
various wordlists include terms for red, white or yellow clay, we have not been able to
reconstruct terms. Teeth-blackening was practised among Western Oceanic speakers
(PWOc *tapal ‘substance used to blacken teeth’; vol. 1, p.101), but it is unclear from the
literature whether the substance was mineral or vegetable matter .

<
POc *pʷay(a) ‘soil, earth’
 Adm: Titan              pwa(ñ)              ‘ground, down, land’
 NNG: Poeng              pae                 ‘soil used to blacken teeth’
 PT:   Kiriwina          pʷai-pʷaia          ‘real soil’
 PT:   Gumawana          poya-poya           ‘ground, dirt, earth’
 PT:   Muyuw             pʷe-pʷay            ‘ground, land, earth, soil, dirt’
 PT:   Molima            pʷaya-pʷaya         ‘dust’
 SES: Sa’a               pʷei(nā)            ‘the garden ground just above the beach’
>

In the cognate set above, final -a is reflected only in PT languages, where it is often added
after a POc final consonant. It is thus unclear whether *y was final in this POc item. The
Titan final -ñ and Sa’a final -nā are also not understood.

                                                                        The landscape    69

   There is also a POc form, *pʷiRa, whose reflexes are, geographically, apparently in
complementary distribution with the above set.

<
POc *pʷwiRa ‘earth’
 NNG: Numbami            puta
 NNG: Kela               puk
 NNG: Hote               pik
 NNG: Kis                bula
 NNG: Kaiep              bir
 MM: Notsi               pulə
 MM: Tabar               pira
 MM: Lihir               puol
 MM: Lamasong            pua
 MM: Barok               pu
 Fij:  Rotuman           pera             ‘earth, soil’ (Schmidt)
>

Central Pacific shows an innovation in replacing *tano(q) with gʷele.

<
PCP *gʷele ‘earth, soil’
 Fij:  Bauan             gele             ‘earth, soil’
 Fij:  Wayan             gʷele            ‘earth’
 Pn:   Niuean            kele-kele        ‘earth, soil’
 Pn:   Niuean            kele             ‘to be dirty, muddy; residue’
 Pn:   Tongan            kele             ‘mud, dirt or clay, in water or left behind as a sediment’
 Pn:   Tongan            kele-kele        ‘land, soil, dirt, earth, ground’
 Pn:    E Futunan        kele             ‘earth’
 Pn:    Rennellese       kege             ‘earth, ground, dirt, land, soil, world’
 Pn:    Samoan           ʔele             ‘k.o. compact brown or red soil or stone’
 Pn:    Samoan           ʔele-ʔele        ‘earth, soil’
 Pn:    Tikopia          kere             ‘earth, ground, soil; ritual uncleanliness’
 Pn:    Tikopia          kere-kere        ‘soiled, muddy’
 Pn:    Maori            kere-            ‘earth (in compounds only)’
>

Another cognate set may share ancestry with PCP *gʷele. It includes Dami (NNG) gele
‘swamp, soft ground’, certain Papuan Tip terms for ‘beach, sand’ (Wagawaga gele-gele
‘sand’, Suau (Daui) gele-gele ‘sand’, Nimoa kele-kele ‘sand’, Keapara (Hula) kele ‘beach’)
and, less plausibly, Choiseul Island (MM) terms for a headland (Vaghua kele-kele, Varisi,
Sisiqa, Babatana ke-kele). In this case PCP *gʷ- would be an irregular reflex (for expected
*g-) of POc *g-.


3.7.7 Clay

70   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   Clay was used in pot manufacture, which was practised by POc speakers (see vol. 1,
pp.67–71). Although non-Oceanic cognates of POc *raRo(q) refer to ground or earth, e.g.
Formosan Bunun dalaq ‘ground (earth, land, place, soil)’; WMP Ilocano daga ‘earth, land,
soil’, and CMP Buru rahe ‘ground’, we can infer that in POc, *raRo(q) referred
specifically to ‘clay’. In NNG and Papuan Tip witnesses, reflexes refer to clay. Meso-
Melanesian reflexes refer to clay cooking pots, but not, apparently, to the clay itself. New
Caledonian reflexes refer to both clay and pots.

<
PAn *daReq ‘soil, clay’
POc *raRo(q) ‘clay; cooking pot’ (Milke 1965, Ross 1996c gloss ‘clay’ only)
 NNG: Bing              rar             ‘clay’
 NNG: Gedaged           lal             ‘clay, used by the Yabob and Bilibil people to make pots’
 PT:   Motu             raro            ‘clay’
 MM: Haku               lolo            ‘cooking pot’
 MM: Uruava             raro            ‘cooking pot’
 MM: Roviana            raro            ‘pot, cooking vessel’
 NCal: Yuanga           ḍō             ‘soil, clay; cooking pot’
 NCal: Nyelâyu          dō              ‘soil, earth; cooking pot’
>

3.7.8 Salt

   POc *maqasin seems to have been both a stative verb meaning ‘be salty’ (vol. 1, p.159)
and a noun meaning ‘salt’. Its PMP antecedent *ma-qasin, however, was purely a stative
verb meaning ‘be salty’, derived from the noun *qasin ‘salty taste, salt’ (ACD). Like a
number of other PMP stative verbs derived with *ma- from nouns, the prefix of *maqasin
became fossilised in POc (Evans & Ross 2001).

<
PMP *ma-qasin ‘salty’ (PAn *qasiN, PMP *qasin ‘saltiness, salty taste) (ACD)
POc *maqasin (V) ‘be salty’; (N) ‘salt’
 Adm: Mussau           masini           ‘salty’
 NNG: Bing             mahas            ‘sea; seawater’
 NNG: Gedaged          mas              ‘sea, ocean, sea water, saltwater; salt’
 NNG: Kove             masi-masi        ‘salty’
 NNG: Sengseng          masiŋin          ‘salty’
 NNG: Manam            makasi           ‘ocean, saltwater, salt’
 MM: Nakanai           ma-masi          ‘salty’
 MM: Meramera          masi             ‘salt, sour’
 SES: Bugotu           mahi             ‘deep sea’
 NCal: Cèmuhî          màt, màlɛ̀       ‘salty’
 Fij:  Rotuman         mnsi             ‘salt’
 Fij:  Bauan           māsi(ma)         ‘salt obtained by evaporation from seawater’ (origin of -ma unknown)
 Pn:   Samoan          māsi(ma)         ‘salt’ (origin of -ma unknown)
 Pn:   Samoan          masi             ‘k.o. food made with breadfruit fermented in pit’
 Pn:   Tahitian        mahi             ‘acid, fermented; breadfruit preserved by fermenting’
>

                                                                          The landscape     71

   PAn *qasiRa ‘salt’ has Oceanic reflexes. Despite the formal resemblance to PAn
*qasiN/PMP *qasin ‘salt’, the supporting data in the ACD show clearly that these are
distinct etyma. Blust (ACD) interprets the SES reflexes as reflexes of *tasik ‘sea’ (see Ch.4, §2.1)
with an added suffix -la, but it seems far more likely that they reflect POc *qasiRa ‘salt’.

<
PAn *qasiRa ‘salt’ (ACD)
POc *qasiRa ‘salt’
 NNG: Gitua            asira               ‘residue of salt spray’
 SES: Lau              asila               ‘salt’
 SES: Kwaio            asila               ‘salt’
 NCV: Lewo             sī                  ‘salt’
>

3.8 Fire

   Oceanic languages generally have a sizeable vocabulary relating to fire. The present
discussion is concerned chiefly with the chemistry of fire, i.e. with terms for the processes
and products of burning. Cognate sets and reconstructed terms to do with human uses of
fire were dealt with in volume 1 and most of these items will not be discussed here. The
reconstructions presented in volume 1 (pp.143–157, 293–295) include Poc *api ‘fire’,
*rapu(R) ‘hearth, fireplace’, *suka, *suka-i ‘make fire with fire-plough’, *tutu(ŋ),*tuŋi-‘set
fire to, light (a fire)’, *tunu ‘roast on embers or in fire’, *sunu ‘singe’, *nasu(q) ‘boil’,
*pa[ka]-qasu ‘cure by smoking’, *tapa ‘dry food by heat to preserve it, smoke food’,
*raraŋ, raŋ-i ‘heat s.t. or warm oneself by fire’, *sokot-i ‘burn grass, rubbish +’, *sulu ‘dry
coconut leaf torch’,*qumun ‘oven made with hot stones’ and PEOc *papia ‘firewood’.

   Oceanic languages, by and large, make similar lexical distinctions to everyday English
when talking about chemistry of fire, but the matches are not exact. Many Oceanic primary
terms (single morpheme lexemes) are polysemous or have a rather broad range of
reference, e.g. in a given language the same term may denote both ‘ashes’ and ‘fireplace’,
or ‘ash’ and ‘soot’, or ‘live coals’ and ‘embers’. English too, is vague or general in many
of its primary terms, and relies on compounds and phrasal expressions to make finer
distinctions, for example embers has a broad range of reference, as shown by such
conventional descriptive expressions as live coals, glowing embers, dying embers, dull
black embers, hot ash, white ash.

   The kinds of lexical distinctions commonly made in Oceanic languages in this semantic
domain can be exemplified by comparing Mota, of the Banks Is., Vanuatu (Codrington and Palmer 1896)
and Kiriwina of the Trobriand Is., Milne Bay Province, Papua New Guinea
(Lawton pers. comm.).

   Mota has the general term av ‘fire’ and at least nine terms for kinds of burning and
emissions fom fire: gao ‘burn (intr.)’, gao-serlawalawa ‘burn with flame’, pepe-roworowo
‘(of sparks, flames) fly up, flare, flash’, malawo-av ‘fire flaming high’, gara-mwea-av (N)
‘flame’, lawa (V) ‘to blaze, flame’, lolowo ‘to flare, flame’, taŋaŋoi ‘(fire) almost gone
out’, asu (N) ‘smoke’, (V) ‘emit smoke, go up as smoke’. Mota also distinguishes the
following stages in the reduction of wood by burning: gar-taŋasul ‘firestick, burning log or
stick’, gao-searag ‘(of fuel) burn from middle to outside’, gao-taweraga ‘burn down into
embers’, mata-were-av ‘live embers’, tawene ‘a live coal, single live ember’, taweris ‘dull
black embers’, gar-taweris ‘black embers, charcoal’, taŋarnai ‘fine ashes’, tuwus ‘the
accumulation of ashes in a fireplace’, tarowo ‘ashes, white ashes of burnt out wood’. It can
be seen that about half of these 21 Mota terms are compounds. Some dictionaries of
Oceanic languages are weak in coverage of compounds and for this reason their listings of
fire terms are probably deficient.

72     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


    In Kiriwina, in addition to the three general terms kova (i) ‘fire’, (ii) ‘firestick’, kaimova
‘(fire) be alive’, and kaimata ‘(fire) be dead’, there are at least eight terms for burning and
emissions from fire: -gabu ‘burn (intr.)’, lulu ‘blaze’, mayela kova ‘tongues of fire’, kata
‘burn without flame’, kubowa ‘visible heat above a fire’, visiga ‘glow from (unseen) fire’,
mseu (N) ‘smoke’, and womi ‘(of smoke) drift, fill house’, and at least half a dozen terms
for stages in the reduction of wood: pwakova ‘hot coals’, kovagwaia ‘smouldering ember
or spark’, pwanosi ‘cold ashes, residue of white ash and charcoal left after a fire’, tubwaga
‘white ash from dead fire’, kainunukwa ‘partially burnt stick’, and vakatutu ‘burn up
completely’.


3.8.1 Fire

     The PAn name for fire, *Sapuy, is among the more stable terms in the lexicon.

<
PAn *Sapuy ‘fire’ (ACD)
POc *api ‘fire’
 Adm: Wuvulu                 afi
 NNG: Gitua                  yap
 NNG: Numbami                yawi
 PT:     Motu                lahi
 MM: Nakanai                 havi
 NCV: Mota                   av
 NCV: Merlav                 aı
 NCV: Tasmate                apu
 Mic:    Kiribati            ai
 Mic:    Woleaian            yaf
 Pn:     Tongan              afi
 Pn:     Hawaiian            ahi
>

In some Oceanic languages reflexes of POc *api are also used as a verb meaning ‘be on
fire, burn’. However, this does not appear to have been the case in POc. There are stronger
candidates for the verbal meaning (see §8.3 below).

3.8.2 Stages of reduction of wood by burning

    Blust (ACD) reconstructs PMP *luten ‘firewood’ based on WMP: LongWat luten ‘fire’,
Kayan luten ‘firebrand, partly burnt stick’, Bisaya Bukit luton ‘burning brand’, CMP:
Tetum haʔi lutan ‘burning brand’, SHWNG Sawai luten ‘fire’, Oceanic: Mota lito
‘firewood’. Blust (ACD) glosses the variants PMP *aluten and *aliten as (i) ‘firebrand’, (ii)
‘burning wood in a fire’, (iii) ‘charred wood’, but does not cite (iv) ‘firewood’. The
Oceanic evidence offers support for senses (i) and (less strongly) (iv).

<
PMP *luten ‘firewood’ (ACD)
PMP *aliten, *aluten (i) ‘firebrand’; (ii) ‘unconsumed wood in a fire’; (iii) ‘charred wood’ (ACD)
POc *alito(n) (N) ‘firebrand; piece of burning wood’
 NNG: Takia               yalit           ‘piece of wood with fire burning in it’
 NNG: Gedaged             yalit           ‘piece of charred wood’
 NNG: Swit                alit            ‘piece of charred wood’
PEOc *lito ‘(?) firebrand’
 NCV: Mota               lito             ‘firewood’
 NCV: Motlav             na-let           ‘firewood’
 SV: Anejom              (n)ijis          ‘torch’
 Fij:   Bauan            lito             ‘wave a firebrand to keep it alight’
 Fij:   Wayan            lito             ‘shake firebrand to keep it alight’
 Fij:   Wayan            lito-lito        ‘travel by light of burning stick’
 Pn:    E Futunan        lito             ‘shake a coconut leaf to make it burn’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         liko             ‘glowing, sparkling, burning’
 cf. also:
 NNG: Tami                kalit           ‘ashes’ (indicating earlier *(q,k)alitV)
 NNG: Dami                galit           ‘embers’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain          yalit           ‘grey ash’
>

                                                                        The landscape     73

   It appears that most Oceanic languages use a single term to refer to both ‘hot coals’ and
‘embers’. At any rate most dictionaries of Oceanic languages do not record such a
distinction. POc *koran appears to have been used both as a noun denoting ‘fragments of
burning wood’ and as a verb meaning something like ‘burn brightly’.

<
POc *koran (N) ‘(?) embers, glowing coals’; (V) ‘(?) burn brightly’
 MM: Tinputz          oran             ‘glowing embers’
 MM: Halia            korana           ‘live coal, ember’
 MM: Maringe          ɣo-ɣola          ‘scorched’
 SES: ’Are’are        kora             ‘charcoal, embers, ash’
 SES: ’Are’are        ora              ‘fireplace’
 SES: ’Are’are        ʔora-ʔora        ‘dust, ashes’
 SES: Ulawa           ora              (i) ‘ashes’; (ii) ‘to flame, burn brightly’
 SES: Arosi           ʔora, ʔora-ʔora ‘blaze’
 Pn:   Maori          kora             (N) ‘spark; fire, fuel’; (V) ‘gleam’
>

PMP *baRah ‘live coal’ may be reconstructed from, e.g. Tagalog baga, Malay bara,
Ngadju-Dayak barah ‘live coal’. This is possibly continued in Ramoaaina para ‘bake on
fire’, Motu hara-ia ‘light a fire; broil’, hara ‘platform of sticks on which meat is grilled’
but the meaning differences leave a question. There is already a distinct, well-established
POc reconstruction for ‘cook over an open fire, roast over embers’, namely *tunu (vol. 1, pp.293–294).

74   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   The following cognate set is tentatively attributed to a POc etymon glossed ‘low-
burning remnants of a fire’. The Meso-Melanesian reflexes suggest ‘ash’ or ‘charcoal’.
However, the meaning ‘ash’ can be eliminated because there are much stronger candidates
for this. The partial agreement between Tolai, Wayan Fijian and Gela points to low-burning residue of some sort.

<
POc *kapuru ‘low-burning remnants of a fire’
 MM: Vitu             ɣabulo           ‘grey ash’
 MM: Malasanga        gavura           ‘grey ash’
 MM: Malalamai        gawur            ‘grey ash’
 MM: Tolai            kavolo           ‘cinders’
 MM: Samasodu         kɔfuru           ‘ashes’
 MM: Kilokaka         kɔfru            ‘ashes’
 MM: Roviana          kavuru           ‘dust’
 MM: Maringe          kʰo-kobru        ‘charcoal’
 MM: Nduke            kavuru           ‘dust’
 SES: Gela            kou-kovuru       ‘embers’
 SES: Gela            ko-kovuru        ‘soot’
 SES: Bugotu          kou-kovuru       ‘ember’
 Fij:  Wayan          kavuru           ‘burning end of piece of wood’
>

   Charcoal is likely to have been distinctively named in Proto Oceanic. Carbonised wood
was widely used in Pacific Island communities for drawing marks or, pounded and mixed
with oil and water, for smearing on the skin. PMP *uRiŋ ‘charcoal, wood that is charred
(but no longer burning fiercely)’ has been reconstructed by Dempwolff and others, based
on e.g. Tagalog uliŋ, Bontok uriŋ, Ngadju-Dayak b/uriŋ, etc. but Oceanic cognates have
not been noted. There is a well supported reconstruction for Eastern Oceanic, *malala, but
this lacks clear cognates in Western Oceanic.

<
PEOc *malala ‘charcoal, charred wood’; ‘(?) coals, embers’
 SV: Anejom            (inhu)mala       ‘charcoal’
 Mic: Kiribati         marara           ‘charcoal’
 Mic: Marshallese      mælle            ‘embers, charcoal’
 Pn:     Tongan        malala           ‘charcoal, carbon’
 Pn:     Tongan       | malala-ʔi afi |   ‘embers’
 Pn:     Samoan        malala           (i)‘charcoal’; (ii) ‘(of firelight) glow’
 Pn:     Rennellese    magaga           ‘charcoal, soot’
 Pn:     Tikopia       mararā           ‘charcoal’
 Pn:     Takuu         malla            ‘red hot’
 Pn:      Rarotongan    mārara           ‘burn with a low, clear glow’
 Pn:     Mangaia       marara           ‘glowing coals’
 cf. also:
 MM: Bareke            ŋgalala          ‘flame’
 MM: Vangunu           ŋgalala          ‘flame’
 MM: Babatana          ŋgala            ‘flame’
 Fij:    Rotuman       mahala           ‘cinders, charcoal’
>

   POc used at least two terms to denote ashes. These had distinct but overlapping
meanings. It appears that *rapu(R) referred specifically to ‘ashes of a fire’; the same term
was also used for ‘hearth, fireplace’. A second term, *qapu or *kapu, denoted ‘ash, dust,
powder’ and its core meaning was probably ‘a mass of fine particles of matter’. The
second term may also have been applied to volcanic ash and cinders. Several Oceanic
languages reflect both *rapu(R) and a reduplicated form *rapu-rapu(R); but the
dictionaries generally specify no difference in meaning between reflexes of the two.

                                                                        The landscape   75

<
PMP *dapuR ‘hearth, fireplace’
POc *rapu(R) (i) ‘ashes’; (ii) ‘fireplace, hearth’
POc *rapu-rapu(R) ‘ashes’
 PT:   Motu             rahu-rahu           (i) ‘ashes’; (ii) ‘fireplace’
 SES: Gela              ravu                ‘ashes’
 SES: Longgu            ravu                ‘ashes’
 SES: Arosi              rahu(-na)           ‘ashes’
 Fij:  Bauan            dravu               ‘ashes, slacked lime’
 Fij:  Bauan            dravu(sā)           ‘ashes of wood’
 Fij:  Bauan            (mata)dravu         ‘fireplace, hearth’
 Fij:  Wayan            ravu                ‘ashes’
PPn *refu, *refurefu ‘ashes’
 Pn:    Tongan           efu-efu          ‘ashes’
 Pn:    Niuean           efu              ‘ash’
 Pn:    Niuean           efu-efu          ‘ashes’
 Pn:    Samoan           lefu-lefu        ‘ashes’
 Pn:    Maori            rehu             ‘fine dust, haze, mist, spray’
 Pn:    Maori            (puŋa)rehu       ‘ashes’
 Pn:    Maori            (ŋa)rahu         ‘charcoal; any black pigment; cinders’
>

Blust (ACD) attributes, to varying Austronesian interstages, a number of fairly similar
forms whose gloss includes one or more of the following: ‘ash’, ‘dust’, ‘cinders’,
‘powder’. These forms include PAn *qabu ‘ash, cinders, powder’, PMP *abus ‘ashes’,
*qabuk ‘dust’, and PWMP *abuR, *apuk, *qabug ‘dust’. PAn *qabu, by far the most
widely attested of these forms, is continued with regular reflexes in a number of Oceanic
languages.

<
PAn *qabu ‘ashes’ (ACD)
POc *qapu ‘ashes, dust’
 Adm: Mussau            au                ‘ashes’
 NNG: Gitua             avu-avu           ‘ashes’
 NNG: Sobei             afu               ‘ashes’
 PT:   Iduna            avu               ‘ashes’
 MM: Bali               ɣavu              ‘ashes’
 MM: Teop               avu               ‘ashes’
 NCV: Tamambo          | (batui) avu |      ‘ashes’
 NCV: Raga              avu               ‘ashes’
 NCV: Tolomako          avu               ‘ashes’
 Fij:  Bauan            yavu              ‘burnt up, consumed’
 Fij:  Wayan            (bula)avu         ‘consumed by fire’
 Pn:   Tongan           efu               ‘dust’
 Pn:   Samoan           efu-efu           ‘dust’
 Pn:   Hawaiian         ehu               ‘dust’
>

76   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

However, many Western Oceanic languages have forms that point to a form *kapu
meaning ‘ash, dust’, with initial *k rather than *q.

<
PWOc *kapu ‘ash, dust, cinders’
 NNG: Manam              gopu                 ‘ashes, dust’
 NNG: Kove              gavu-gavu            ‘ashes’
 NNG: Wogeo             gefu                 ‘ashes’
 NNG: Kairiru           kyaf                 ‘ashes’
 PT:  Motu              kahu                 ‘ashes’
 PT:  Hula              kavu                 ‘ashes’
 PT:  Dobu              kau                  ‘dust’
 PT:  Dobu              (kari)kau            ‘ashes’
 MM: Tolai              kabu                 ‘dust, ashes, cinders’
 MM: Sisiqa             kau                  ‘ashes’
 MM: Babatana           kau                  ‘dust’
 MM: Katazi             kau                  ‘ashes’
 MM: Ghanongga          kau                  ‘ashes’
 MM: Lungga             kavu                 ‘ashes’
>

It is noteworthy that in this set the NNG reflexes show initial *g-, whilst PT and MM
languages all show an unexpected fortis reflex of *k rather than the usual lenis reflex. One
possible explanation for this is that, at some stage, perhaps in PWOc, reflexes of POc
*qapu were contaminated by association with reflexes of POc *(g,k)abu ‘burn, firewood’
(see §8.3 below).

    In some Oceanic languages reflexes of POc *qapu ‘ashes, dust’ fell together formally
with reflexes of *qapu(R) ‘lime’ (see §7.3 above). Because lime is a powdery substance
(made by roasting calcerous rock, such as coral or limestone, and used in some Oceanic
societies for ritual and decorative purposes and for consumption with betel nut) this
meaning may have been regarded as related to ‘dust’ and ‘ashes’.


3.8.3 Burning, being on fire

   A number of terms for the general process of burning or being on fire can be
reconstructed.

<
POc *(k,g)abu (V) ‘burn, be on fire’; (N) ‘(?) firewood’
 NNG: Wab                gabu                ‘smoke’
 PT:    Motu             gabu-(a)            ‘burn’
 PT:    Dobu             gabu                ‘burn’
 PT:    Kiriwina         -gabu               ‘burn’
 PT:    Muyuw            gab, gob            ‘burn’
 SES: Lau                (sina)ʔabu          ‘glow (of fire)’
 NCV: Tolomako           ɣapu                ‘fire, firewood’
 NCV: Makura             (na)kam             ‘fire’
 NCV: Sesake             (na)kapu            ‘fire, firewood’
 SV: Kwamera             (N)apw              ‘fire’
 SV: Anejom              (N)ɣapʷ             ‘fire’
 cf. also:
 NNG: Dami             kau                ‘smoke’
 MM: Tolai             kabu               ‘ashes, cinders’
 Fij: Bauan            buka               ‘firewood’ (? metathesis)
>

                                                                          The landscape   77

<
POc *bula ‘(?) burn, be alight’
PEOc *bula ‘burn, be on fire, in flames’
 NNG: Manam            bula             (V) ‘light (a fire)’
 Mic: Puluwatese       pʷɨl             (V) ‘burn, be lighted, in flames’; (N) ‘flame’
 Mic: Woleaian         pʷura            ‘burn, light up’
 Mic: Woleaian         pʷupʷura         (N) ‘flame, blinking of light’
 Fij:    Bauan         bula             (V) ‘be on fire, burn’
 Fij:    Wayan         bula             (V) ‘be on fire, burn’; (N) ‘conflagration’
 Fij:    Wayan         bula-ni-a        ‘burn s.t., set s.t. ablaze’
 Fij:    Rotuman       pula             (V) ‘catch alight, burn, flare up suddenly’; (N) ‘flame, (lightning) flash’
 cf. also:
PPn *mula ‘burst into flame’
 Pn:   Niuean           mumula            ‘flare up’
 Pn:   Maori            mura              ‘flame, blaze’
 Pn:   Maori            mura-mura         ‘burst into flame’
 Pn:   Rarotongan mura                    ‘burn, glow, flame; show red’
PPn *pula ‘shine, glow’
 Pn:   Niuean         pula                ‘shine, glow (of new moon)’
 Pn:   Samoan         pula                ‘shine, glow’
 Pn:   Samoan         pupula              ‘shine, glow’
>

<
POc *udra ‘be on fire, alight, flaming’
 MM: Torau             uda                ‘fire’
 Mic: Kiribati         ura                (i) ‘flame’; (ii) ‘passion’
 Mic: Kiribati        | ura maka |          ‘flaming, blazing’
 Fij:  Bauan           (ða)udre           ‘alight, burning, flaming’
 Fij:  Bauan           (ða)udra(-va)      ‘set s.t. alight’
 Fij:  Wayan           udre               ‘alight, burning’
PPn *ula ‘burn brightly’
 Pn:    Tongan         ulo                ‘burn, be alight, catch fire; shine’
 Pn:    Rennellese     uga                (V) ‘flame; shine, flash; be very red’
 Pn:    Luangiua       ula                ‘flame’
 Pn:    Tikopia        ura                (V) ‘blaze, flame, burn brightly, glow’
>

78   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

3.8.4 Emissions from burning materials: smoke, vapour, flames, light

   POc, like some of its daughter languages, seems to have distinct terms for smoke as a
thing (*qasu) and the process of emitting smoke or vapour (*kupu(k)).

<
PMP *qasu ‘smoke’
POc *qasu ‘smoke’
 Adm: Mussau               asu
 Adm: Wuvulu               aku
 PT:   Dobu                ʔasu
 PT:   Mekeo (East)        aku
 NNG: Bukawa               (ya)wasu
 NNG: Mapos Buang          aru
 MM: Bali                  ɣazu
 MM: Torau                 asu
 MM: Amara                 aso
 SES: ’Are’are             rasu
 SES: Lau                  sasu
 SES: Arosi                asu-(na), asu-ʔasu
 Mic: Puluwatese           yāt
 NCV: Mota                 asu
 NCV: Tamambo              asu
 NCV: Paamese              (e)asu
 Pn:   Tongan              ʔahu
 Pn:   Niuean              ahu
 Pn:   Samoan              asu
 Pn:   Maori               au, au-ahi
 Pn:   Rarotongan          au
>

   In the following cognate set, Polynesian languages show unexpected o for *u in the first
syllable.

<
POc *kupu(k) (V) ‘emit smoke or steam’
 NNG: Bebeli             kuvuk             (N) ‘smoke’
 MM: Kia                 gufu(-na)         (N) ‘smoke’
 MM: Kilokaka            kufu              (N) ‘smoke’
 MM: Maringe             ɣuf(la)           ‘to steam, as from an earth oven’
 NCV: Nokuku             kuv-kuvu          ‘ashes’
 SES: Gela               gu-guvu           ‘steam; heat; hot; lukewarm’
 SES: Bugotu             gu-guvu           ‘be hot, heat’
 Fij:  Bauan             kuvu              ‘vapour: smoke, steam, dust, spray’
 Fij:  Wayan             kuvu              ‘steam, give off steam’
PPn *kofu (V)‘emit smoke’; (N) ‘(?) smoke’
 Pn:    Tongan           kofu             ‘emit smoke’
 Pn:    Rennellese       kohu             ‘emit smoke or steam’
 Pn:     Sikaiana         (au)kohu          (N) ‘smoke’
 Pn:     Tikopia          kofu              ‘emit smoke’
 Pn:     Anutan           ko-kopu           (N) ‘smoke’
>

                                                                           The landscape      79

   PCP *kobulu, possibly meaning ‘thick smoke or cloud’ is indicated by reflexes in Fijian
and Maori. The existence of a probable cognate in Javanese kəbul ‘smoke’ allows the
tentative reconstruction of PMP *kəbul, POc *kobul(u) ‘smoke’.

<
PCP *kobulu ‘(?) thick smoke, heavy cloud’
 Fij:    Bauan          kubou           (N) ‘smoke’ (metathesis and irregular loss of _l_ in context _oū_)
 Fij:    Wayan          kōbulu          (N) ‘smoke’
 Pn:     Maori          kōpuru          (i) ‘heavy passing clouds’; (ii) ‘fusty, mouldy’
 cf. also:
 MM: Ughele             ɣambuzu         ‘smoke’
 NCal: Ajie             kemnru          ‘fire’
>

   Widely scattered languages use a reflex of POc *maya ‘tongue’ (either alone, or in a
compound meaning ‘tongue of fire’) to refer to flames. Given that ‘flame’ is a natural
metaphorical extension of ‘tongue’ it is difficult to know whether *maya had this
polysemy in POc or whether daughter languages have from time to time independently
made the same extension.

<
POc (?) *|maya (ni) (api)| (N) ‘flame’ (lit. ‘tongue’ or ‘tongue of fire’)
 NNG: Mbula         | you mia-na |                      ‘flame’ (lit. ‘tongue of fire’)
 SES: Sa’a          | mea, mea-mea(hana hunge) | ‘flame’
 SES: ’Are’are       mea                              ‘spark’
 SES: Lau            mea                              ‘flame, tongue of fire, light of fire or torch’
 SV: Sye             (nelwa)me                        ‘tongue, flame’
 SV: Anejom          (nalua)me                        ‘flame’
 Fij:   Bauan       | yame-yame (ni buka) |             ‘flame’
cf. also: the following, where there is semantic correspondence even though one or more of the elements does not reflect the POc forms:
 PT:    Kiriwina       | mayela kova |       ‘flames’ (‘tongues of fire’)
 NNG: Takia            | yai bale-na |       ‘flame’ (‘tongue of fire’)
 NNG: Mapos Buang daɣen                    (i) ‘tongue’; (ii) ‘flame’
 SV: Kwamera           | nəami napw |        ‘flame’ (‘tongue of fire’)
>

<
POc *puruŋ, *puru-puruŋ ‘(?) glow or flame of fire’
 NNG: Adzera          bururuŋ           ‘burn, be on fire’
 PT:   Motu           hururu            ‘blaze’
 PT:   Motu           huru-hururu       ‘flare up’
 MM: Tolai            puluŋ             ‘flame’
 MM: Kia              buruŋu            ‘sparks’
 MM: Ghanongga        vuru-vuruŋu       ‘flame’
 SES:   Talise          vuru              ‘burn’
 SES:   Malagheti       vuru              ‘burn’
 Pn:    Maori           huru              (V & N) ‘glow’
 Pn:    Maori           huru-huru         ‘diffused glow’
>

Certain Papuan languages of the central and western Solomons show resemblant forms that
are presumably borrowed from an Oceanic source.

__pre__
  Papuan: Lavukaleve huluhuluru          ‘flame’
  Papuan: Baniata      vuvuru            ‘flame’

80   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   There are several cognate sets pointing to PEOc forms denoting burning with a
particular kind of light.

<
PEOc *maka ‘burn brightly’
 SES: Kwaio           mā                  ‘flame’
 Mic: Kiribati        maka                ‘power, force, ardour’
 Fij:  Bauan          kama                ‘burn’ (metathesis)
 Fij:  Bauan          maka(liva)          ‘flash upon’ (liva ‘lightning’)
 Fij:  Bauan          (rā)maka            ‘shining from a distance’
 Fij:  Wayan          maka                ‘alight with glow, burn without flame’
 Fij:  Wayan         | makalo maka |        ‘glowing embers’
 Pn:   Tahitian       ʔama                ‘burn’ (metathesis)
 cf. also:
 SES: Arosi             maga-raha         ‘glowing coals, live embers’
>

<
PEOc *makalo ‘burn with glow’ (cf. *kalo-kalo ‘glimmer’)
 Mic: Kiribati        mwākaro          ‘embers, live coals, charoal; burning without flames’
 Fij:  Wayan          makalo           ‘turn to embers; glow, be red hot’
PPn *makala (V) ‘(of fire) crackle and spark’
 Pn:   Tongan            makala           ‘emit sparks with a crackling noise’
 Pn:   E Uvean           makala           ‘(of fire) crackle’
 Pn:   Rennellese        makaga           ‘crackle, rattle, rumble’
 Pn:   Rennellese        makago-kago ‘emit sparks, as a fire’
 Pn:   Maori             makaro           ‘be dimly visible’
>

<
PEOc *kalo-kalo ‘glimmer’ (cf. *makalo ‘burn with glow’)
 Mic: Kiribati        -karo-karo       (base in 3 words, all meaning ‘glimmer, glow’)
 Fij:  Bauan          kalo-kalo        ‘star’
 Pn:   Pukapukan      kalo-kalo(awi) ‘sparks of fire’
 Pn:   Samoan         ʔalo-i-afi       ‘sparks’
 Pn:   Samoan         ʔalo-ʔalo        ‘(red) flower of Erythrina tree’
 Pn:   Tikopia        kalo-kalo        ‘(red) flower of Erythrina tree’
>

                                                                        The landscape    81

   Although contemporary languages generally have names for ‘soot’, ‘spark’ (V, N), and
‘burst into flame’ we have been unable to reconstruct POc terms for these concepts. In
contemporary languages the term for ‘soot’ is sometimes a subsense of a term that also
means ‘black’, or ‘dirty’ or ‘ash’ and sometimes a compound meaning ‘X of smoke’.


3.9 Destructive natural events

   Because of their location on an unstable part of the earth’s crust, many parts of the
Oceanic region experience earth movements and volcanic activity, sometimes on a
catastrophic scale. Minor earth tremors are commonplace. Earth tremors in turn can give
rise to such events as tidal waves and landslides, the latter sometimes triggered as well by
frequent heavy rain. In addition to these, fluctuations in climate sometimes result in
flooding or drought. In some Oceanic societies such destructive natural events were
attributed to supernatural forces, as were inexplicable events like whirlwinds and
whirlpools (Osmond 2000). Map 9 shows the location of earthquake areas and active
volcanoes in the region.


3.9.1 Volcanic activity

   Parts of New Guinea and Island Melanesia have a long history of volcanic activity.
Within recorded history the area of New Britain round Rabaul, for instance, has been the
scene of violent eruptions in 1850, 1878, 1937 and 1994, causing loss of life and enormous
environmental damage. Although we have collected a range of terms for volcanoes and
volcanic features, soundly based POc reconstructions for ‘volcano’ and features of
volcanic activity such as lava and volcanic ash, have eluded us. It may well be that
Melanesians had no separate concept for ‘volcano’, regarding it simply as a mountain that
produces fire. In Manam, Takia and Nehan, the word for ‘fire’ is used also to refer to a
volcano. Terms reconstructed in the section on fire above, such as POc *qapu ‘ash, dust,
powder’ and POc *kupu(k) ‘emit smoke or steam’, could readily have been applied to
volcanic features. A single lower-level reconstruction for ‘volcano’ comes from North
Central Vanuatu, with a possible cognate from North New Guinea which suggests a rather
tentative POc reconstruction.

<
POc *banoi ‘volcano’; ‘(?) matter emitted from volcano’
 NNG: Takia             banai            ‘to spring up out of a hole, of liquid’
PNCV *banoi ‘volcano, volcanic ash’ (Clark 1996)
 NCV: Mota            panoi            ‘Hades, the abode of the dead’
 NCV: Tamambo         banoi            ‘volcanic ash’
 NCV: Uripiv          benu             ‘fine volcanic ash’
 NCV: Paamese         vanei            ‘volcano’
 NCV: Namakura        bane             ‘volcano’
 NCV: Nguna           na-panoi         ‘volcano’
 NCV: SE Ambrym       venu             ‘volcano’
>

82   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

Map 9: Active volcanoes and earthquake areas in the south-west Pacific (after Brookfield and Hart 1971: 33)

                                                                          The landscape     83

   The next reconstruction belongs to a set of formally similar items with meanings
relating to bubbling, frothing and foaming (see *pura(q) on p.60). The semantic change
evident between the Tolai and Mota glosses may perhaps be explained as transfer of
meaning from ‘place/activity of emission’ to ‘matter emitted’.

<
POc *puro ‘bubble up, boil, as hot spring’
 NNG: Kove             pulou              ‘come up, as a spring’
 PT:   Molima          pulo               ‘bubbles’
 PT:   Kiriwina        polu               (V) ‘boil’
 MM: Tolai             vuru               ‘pumice, volvanic dust, lava’
 SES: Arosi            huro-huro          (V) ‘bubble, boil, be churned up’
 NCV: Mota             vuro               ‘volcanic vent, hot spring’
>

It is notable that in both cognate sets above, there is a tendency for the glosses to vary from
one volcanic feature to another.


3.9.2 Earthquake

   While the following two cognate sets are presumably related, we cannot unite them into
a single set.

<
POc *drike-drike ‘earthquake’
 Adm: Mussau            ruke-ruke          ‘earthquake’
 MM: Tinputz            rik-rik            ‘earthquake’; (V) ‘quake’
 cf. also:
 PT:     Molima          (mwa)niʔi-niʔi    ‘earthquake’
>

<
POc *Rike ‘earthquake’
 NNG: Manam            rike                ‘earthquake’
 NNG: Manam            (mwa)rike           (N, V) ‘earthquake, quake’
PPn *mafu-ike ‘earthquake’ (the etymology of mafu- is unknown)
 Pn:   Niuean          mafuike          ‘earthquake’
 Pn:   Tongan          mofuike          ‘earthquake’
 Pn:   Rennellese      mahuike          ‘deity who causes earthquakes’
 Pn:   Samoan          mafuiʔe          ‘earthquake; deity from whom fire was obtained’
 Pn:   E Futunan       mafuike          ‘earthquake’
 Pn:   Maori           mahuika          ‘deity from whom fire was obtained by Maaui-tikitiki’
>

   In several of the following cognate sets, the term for earthquake is closely related to the
verb meaning ‘to shake’. Some form of onomatopoeic wordplay may explain the similarity
of form between the various sets. For instance, Onin and Sekar, CEMP languages spoken
in West New Guinea, both record nuni ‘earthquake’ while Yotafa on the north coast lists
nioni ‘earthquake’ (Smits & Voorhoeve 1992:34).

84   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *ninih ‘shake, tremble, rock’ (ACD)
POc *[ni]nir (V) ‘shake, quake’
 NNG: Gedaged           nini            ‘swing, oscillate, shake, rock’
 NNG: Mapos Buang (i-)nɛl               ‘earthquake’
 NNG: Mumeng           | (zenag) nɛr |    ‘earthquake’
 MM: Patpatar           ninir           ‘shake, quake’
 Fij:  Bauan            nini            ‘tremble, quake with fear or anger’
 Pn:   Tongan           nini-nini       ‘shiver with cold’
>

In a number of northwest and southeast Solomons languages, the term for earthquake is
nunu. PMP _*uyuŋ_ ‘shake; earthquake’ would give POc _*iu(ŋ)_. The actor pivot PMP form
_*ŋ-uyuŋ_ would give POc _*ŋ-iu(ŋ)_. This may be ancestral to the form _niu_ or _ñu_ ‘to shake,
hence ‘an earthquake’, found in two MM languages, Hoava and Roviana, as well as to
_nunu_ by regular depalatalisation.

<
PMP *uyuŋ ‘shake; earthquake’ (ACD)
POc *ŋ-iu(ŋ) (V) ‘shake, quake’; (N) ‘earthquake’
 MM: Halia              nun               ‘earthquake’
 MM: Nduke              nunu              ‘earthquake’
 MM: Babatana           nunu              ‘earthquake’
 MM: Hoava              niu               ‘shake; earthquake’
 MM: Roviana            niu               ‘shake; earthquake’
 SES: ’Are’are          nu-nunu           ‘earthquake’
 SES: Sa’a              nunu              ‘earthquake’
 SES: Kwaio             nunu              ‘earthquake’
>

<
PSS *añu (V) ‘shake’
PSS *añu-añu (N) ‘earthquake’
 SES: Gela              anu              ‘shake’
 SES: Gela              anu-anu          ‘earthquake’
 SES: Bugotu            añu              ‘shake, of earthquake; earthquake’
 SES: Lau               anu              ‘shake, quake’
 SES: Lau               anu-anu          ‘earthquake’
 SES: Kwaio             anu(leʔeni)      ‘shake, jostle, knock down by shaking’
 SES: ’Are’are          anu(i)           ‘shake, move’
 SES: Sa’a              enu, enu-enu     ‘be loose, unstable’
 SES: Arosi             anu(kaʔa)        ‘tremble and go cold with fear’
>

<
PNCV *ruru (V) ‘shake’; (N) ‘earthquake’
 NCV: Mota            rir              (V) ‘quake’; ‘earthquake’
 NCV: Raga            ruru(i)          ‘shake’
 NCV: Paamese         (a)lū            ‘earthquake’
 NCV: Nguna           (na)ruru         ‘earthquake’
>

                                                                         The landscape     85

3.9.3 Landslide

   POc *solo was probably a verb, but its reflexes refer, inter alia, to landslides in several
daughter languages. They are also found in Puluwatese (Mic), linked to star names, to refer
to stars sinking towards the horizon (see Ch. 6, §5.4.2).

<
POc *solo ‘sink down, subside; landslide’
 MM: Marovo            (ta)ju-julu        ‘landslide’
 MM: Babatana          jolo               ‘subside’
 SES: Lau              to-toli(ŋi)        ‘landslide’
 Mic: Woleaian         toro               ‘disappear, submerge, go out of sight, vanish’
 Mic: Marshallese      tal                ‘sink, submerge’
 Mic: Satawalese       tol                ‘disappear from sight’
 Fij:   Rotuman        solo               ‘sink down’
 Pn:   Niuean          ho-holo            ‘slip’
 Pn:   Tongan          holo               ‘collapse, cave in’
 Pn:   E Futunan       solo               ‘collapse, cave in; landslide’
 Pn:   Samoan          solo               ‘slide, slip; landslide’
 Pn:   Tikopia         soro               ‘rub, grate; landslide’
 Pn:   Tahitian        horo               ‘landslide’
 Pn:   Maori           horo               ‘landslide’
 Pn:   Hawaiian        holo               ‘landslide’
>

<
PEOc *to(b,p)a (VI) ‘(land) slip’
PEOc *ma-to(b,p)a ‘landslip’
 SES: Gela              matoba            ‘landslip’
 SES: Bugotu            matoba            ‘landslip’
 SES: Longgu            toba              (VI) ‘(land) slip’
 SES: Arosi             maoba             ‘landslip’
 NCV: Raga              matova            ‘landslip, flood’
 NCV: Paamese           matehe            ‘landslide, slip’
>

3.9.4 Tidal wave

   No POc term denoting tidal wave has been reconstructed. In contemporary languages,
terms for tidal wave are compounds, with the first element often a reflex of *tasik ‘sea’
(Ch.4, §2.1) or *[u]Ruap ‘high tide’ (§2.6). These terms do not usually distinguish
tsunamis, caused by undersea earth movements, from floods caused by a combination of
high tide and strong wind. In any case, catastrophic tidal waves probably occur only once
or twice a century, and affect only localised places. Although a number of terms for ‘tidal
wave’ have been collected, and are listed below, cognates exist only within low level
subgroups.

__pre__
  Adm: Mussau            manu gagaga ‘tidal wave’ (manu ‘water’)
  Adm: Lou               ultum             ‘tidal wave’
  MM: Nakanai            karoro            ‘tidal wave’
  MM: Tolai              roro              ‘tidal wave’
  MM: Ramoaaina          tai-gugu          ‘tidal wave’ (tai ‘sea’)
 SES: Gela               gogo            ‘tidal wave’
 SES: Gela               lua-lua         ‘flood, tidal wave’ (lua ‘full tide’)
 SES: Bugotu             gogovi          ‘tidal wave’
 SES: Arosi              rua-rua         ‘flood of water’
 SES: Arosi              asi-ora         ‘tidal wave’ (ora ‘possessed by foul ghost’)
 NCV: Tamambo           | tasi wala-walau | ‘tidal wave’ (walau ‘to run’)
 Fij: Bauan             | ua tale-tale |   ‘tidal wave’ (ua ‘tide, wave’, tale-tale ‘repeated backwash of waves’)
 Fij:     Bauan         | ua loka |        ‘tidal wave (ua ‘tide, wave’, loka ‘very heavy breakers or high tides that flow inland’)
 Pn:      Tongan        | peau kula |      ‘tidal wave’ (lit. ‘wave red’)
 Pn:      Niuean        | peau afi |       ‘tidal wave’ (lit. ‘wave fire’)
 Pn:      Hawaiian      | kai hōʔeʔe |     ‘tidal wave’


86      Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


3.9.5 Flood, submerging tide

    A PMP term for ‘flood’ (V and N) is continued in two known Oceanic witnesses. In Sa’a
its reflex is a noun referring to a high spring tide. In Tongan it is a verb denoting the state
or process of a river being in flood.

<
PMP *bahaq ‘a flood; overflow, be in flood’ (ACD, Dempwolff 1938)
POc *pa(a)q ‘overflow, flood’ (ACD)
 SES: Sa’a            | (lua) hā |        ‘high spring tide’
 Pn:   Tongan          fā               ‘(of a river) to overflow, be in flood’
>

   As a compound with the term for fresh water, POc waiR pa(a)q ‘river floodwaters’, is
traceable back to PMP, although the Tongan form is our only Oceanic reflex.

<
PMP *|wahir bahaq| ‘floodwaters’ (ACD)
POc *|waiR pa(a)q| ‘river floodwaters’
 Pn:   Tongan         | vai fā |       ‘flood (from a river), river in flood’
>

   Flooding for coastal dwellers on small Oceanic islands is likely to be the result of an
unusually high tide (POc *[u]Ruap ‘high tide; to flow in of tide’, see Ch.4, §2.6), rather
than heavy rain. King tides or spring tides are phenomena which occur at regular intervals,
so are unlikely to be of more than nuisance value except when exacerbated by high winds.
Terms for tidal flooding may be compounds including reflexes of *[u]Ruap, or a related
form (*[ma-]uRua(p) ‘flood, be flooded’) (Sa’a lua hā ‘high spring tide’, Mota rue lava
‘large tide’, Bauan Fijian ua luvu ‘submerging tide’). Other POc terms include reflexes of
*lolo (V) ‘flood’, and *lomak (N,V) ‘flood, of sea’.

<
POc *[ma-]uRua(p) ‘flood, be flooded’
 NNG: Manam           urua                 ‘flood, torrent’
 PT:   Molima         moluva               ‘flood’
 PT:   Dobu           muluwa               ‘flood’
 NCV: Tamambo         moruae               ‘flood, big river’
>

                                                                        The landscape      87

<
PMP *lebleb (V) ‘flood’
POc *lolo (V) ‘flood’
 Adm: Andra             lolo(mat)        ‘windward part of reef flat, covered at high tide’
 NNG: Gedaged           lolo(ani)        (V) ‘inundate, flood, drown, stream over, flow over, cause to sink under water’
 Fij:   Bauan           lolo             ‘beginning to rise, of the tide’
 Pn:    Samoan          lolo             (V) ‘overflow’; (N) ‘flood’
>

<
POc *lomak (N,V) ‘flood, of sea’
 NNG: Takia             lom              ‘flood’
 NNG: Gedaged           lom, lom-lom     ‘the dirty water that flows off after rain, the water that lies around after rain’
 MM: Sursurunga         lom-lom          ‘high tide, flood’
PPn *lo(o)ma, *lo(o)maki ‘flood caused by high seas or tides’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Tongan          lōmaki           (N) ‘flood, deluge’
 Pn:    E Futunan       lōmaki           ‘flooded as by large waves’
 Pn:    W Uvean         lo-loma          ‘sea flood, tide’
 Pn:    Maori           roma             ‘flood, flood tide, stream, current’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan       roma             ‘flood’
>

The reconstruction below appears to have referred to flooding or gushing.

<
POc *ñoro ‘flood, gush, flow everywhere’ (Blust 1998b)
 Adm: Lou               noro           ‘flood’
 NNG: Mangap-M.         no-nor         ‘tidal wave, flood’
 MM: Halia              nolo           ‘flood’
 MM: Tolai              noro           ‘to pour forth, gush, flow quickly’
 SV: Anejom             ya             ‘flow everywhere, out of control’
>

3.9.6 Storm, hurricane

   Terms for destructive winds and storms are treated in Chapter 5. They include POc
*paRiu ‘cyclone’ (from PAn *baRiuS ‘typhoon’), POc *mal(i,e)u ‘wind’ which gives rise
to PMic *malu-malu ‘storm, typhoon’ and POc *apaRat ‘wet season when northwesterlies
blow and sea is rough’ from which come PCP *avā ‘storm’, PPn *afā ‘storm, hurricane’.


3.9.7 Whirlpools, waterspouts, whirlwinds

   Whirlpools and waterspouts and some other phenomena such as rainbows and echoes,
are regarded in many Austronesian-speaking communities as supernatural occurrences, and
are sometimes treated as a natural category, ‘taboo thing’ or similar. Accordingly we
sometimes find ‘rainbow’ and ‘whirlwind’ within the same cognate set, or even, as in
Mortlockese (Mic) awúniyar ‘whirlwind, tornado, rainbow’, referred to by the same word.

88   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   The meanings of the prefix *qā-, and the alternative form *pua- (blowing?) in the
following set are uncertain.

<
PEOc *siosio ‘(?) whirlwind, rainbow’
 NCV: Mota              ga-siosio        ‘rainbow’ (see note above)
PPn *qā-siosio ‘whirlwind, waterspout’
 Pn:   Niuean          hio-hio         ‘whirlwind, tornado’ (from McEwen. Sperlich gives tiotio.)
 Pn:   Tongan          ʔa-hiohio       ‘whirlwind’
 Pn:   E Futunan       ʔā-siosio       ‘waterspout’
 Pn:   Samoan          ā-siosio        ‘whirlwind’
 Pn:   Tokelauan       ā-hiohio        ‘whirlwind, waterspout’
 Pn:   Rarotongan      puā-ʔioʔio      ‘whirlwind’
 Pn:   Tahitian        pua-hiohio      ‘whirlwind, cyclone’
 Pn:   Maori           ā-fiofio        ‘whirlwind’
 Pn:   Hawaiian        pua-hiohio      ‘whirlwind’
>

   The next item may be associated in some way with POc *piro ‘twist together’ (vol. 1, p.287).

<
POc *piru-piru ‘whirlwind, waterspout’
 NNG: Kove             vili-viliu        ‘small whirlwind’
 PT:    Kiriwina       vi-vilu(wa)       ‘whirlwind, waterspout’
 PT:    Wedau          viri-viri(toto)   ‘whirlwind, waterspout’
 MM: Roviana           vi-viru(a)        ‘waterspout’
 SES: Ghari            viru              ‘waterspout’
PEOc *libo ‘eddy, whirlpool’
 SES: Kwaio            libo              ‘eddy in stream, whirlpool’
 Pn:    Niuean         lipo, lipo-lipo   ‘ripples’ (not incl. in Sperlich)
 Pn:   Tikopia         (mā)ripo-ripo     ‘whirl’
 Pn:    Tahitian       ripo-ripo         ‘wavelets in a ring’
 Pn:    Maori          ripo              ‘eddy, whirlpool’
>


3.10 Conclusion

   Proto Oceanic terms are readily reconstructable for a number of landscape features,
including land, island, beach, sandy ground, cape, bay, river, mountain, inland mountain
country, valley, flat land, bushland, cultivated land, fallow land, lake, swampy ground,
rock, and sand. Other reconstructable terms refer to fresh water sources and to the
productive or unproductive nature of the land, both matters of crucial importance to human
settlement. There are POc reconstructions for mineral substances, including obsidian and
other stone, sand and gravel, coral and lime, pumice, earth, salt and clay. Although
obsidian is found only in a few widely scattered locations, and clay suitable for potmaking
is also limited in its range, both were sought-after items, and archaeological evidence
indicates that POc speakers would have been familiar with either the raw material or its
manufactured form through well-established trade networks.

                                                                        The landscape     89

   But there are salient parts of Oceanic land environments for which we cannot
reconstruct a POc term (and often no PWOc or PEOc term either). Reconstructions for
features associated with volcanic action, such as hot springs and ash are tentative, based on
apparent reflexes which vary quite widely in meaning. There are reconstructions for
‘earthquake’ and ‘flood’, but not for ‘tidal wave’. What does this tell us? Probably not that
POc lacked these terms, but that they have been lost, or are not widely enough reflected for
us to be able to identify them as POc. It may be that POc had compound terms for certain
of these concepts, and it seems that compounds are less stable than simple lexemes.



4               The seascape

4.1 Introduction

    This chapter presents reconstructions pertaining to the inanimate marine environment,
the seascape.[1] As experienced sailors (see Chapter 6), Proto Oceanic speakers would have
possessed a vocabulary to express the physical details of their maritime world, of waves,
currents and swells, and, more locally, of tides, of treacherous rocks and reefs, of passages
through the reef and sheltered water. As fishermen and gatherers of reef foods their
descendants have demonstrated an extensive knowledge of the reef in all its parts
(McEldowney 1995, Hviding 1996, Akimichi 1978, Dye 1983). Data have been organized
within two main categories: (i) the sea and its features — currents, waves and tides; and
(ii) the reef environment.

    As in Chapter 3, some of the nouns reconstructed here had both a common-noun and a
local-noun sense. It is the common-noun senses that are treated here. For further discussion
and reconstruction of local-noun senses, see Chapter 8, §2.

[1] Thanks are due to Ann Chowning, Ralph Lawton, John Lynch, Françoise Ozanne-Rivierre and Ian Scales
  who have all made useful suggestions and contributed additional data to this chapter.


4.2 The sea and its features

4.2.1 Sea, salt water

   Four POc words denoting ‘sea’ have been reconstructed: *tasik, *masawa(n,ŋ), *laman
and *laur. Of these, *tasik has the most general reference. In addition to its sense of ‘sea’
as opposed to ‘land’, it has a second sense, ‘salt water, sea water’ contrasting with ‘fresh
water’. It also had a local-noun sense (see p.240). Its reflexes have wide distribution and
also occur frequently in compounds. Of the others, *masawa(n,ŋ) emphasized the sense of
open sea, *laman evidently denoted deep water in contrast to the shallow water on or
within the fringing reef, while *laur seems to have functioned primarily, and perhaps
exclusively, as a local noun meaning ‘seawards’, and is reconstructed in this sense in
Chapter 8, p.239. A few common-noun reflexes of *laur are given below.


92   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


<
PMP *tasik ‘sea’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *tasik ‘sea, salt water’
 Adm: Loniu               tas            ‘sea, ocean, salt water, salt’
 Adm: Seimat              tax            ‘sea’
 Adm: Titan               nras           ‘ocean, salt water’
 NNG: Manam               tari           ‘strong sea current’
 NNG: Bariai              tad            ‘ocean’
 NNG: Kove                tari           ‘sea, salt water’
 PT:    Bwaidoga          tagiga         ‘salt deposit on skin after bathing in sea’
 PT:    Motu              tadi           ‘sea water’
 MM: Patpatar             tes            ‘ocean’
 MM: Ramoaaina            tai            ‘sea’
 MM: Sursurunga           tas            ‘salt water; salt’
 MM: Tangga               tes            ‘salt water’
 MM: Tolai                ta             ‘sea, salt water’
 MM: Teop                 tahī           ‘sea, ocean’
 MM: Teop                 ta-tahi(ana)   ‘salty’
 SES: Gela                tahi           ‘sea’
 SES: Bugotu              tahi           ‘sea, salt water, salt’
 SES: Arosi               asi            ‘salt, salt water, the sea’
 SES: Lau                 asi            ‘sea, salt water’
 SES: Kwaio               asi            ‘sea, salt, seawater’
 NCV: Raga                tahi           ‘sea, salt water’
 NCV: Tamambo             tasi           ‘sea’ (old word)
 NCV: Nguna               na-tasi        ‘sea, salt water’
 SV:    Lenakel           tehe           ‘the sea’
 SV:    SW Tanna          tahik          ‘sea, salt water’
 NCal: Nemi               dalik          ‘sea’ (talik ‘seaside’ (locative))
 Mic: Kosraean            te             ‘beach, seaside’
 Mic: Mokilese            cɛt            ‘sea, salt’
 Mic: Puluwatese          hǣt           ‘sea, ocean, tide’
 Mic: Woleaian            tati           ‘sea, salt water’
 Fij:   Bauan             taði           ‘the sea’
PPn *tahi ‘shallow sea near shore or in lagoon, salt water; tide’
 Pn:    Tongan           tahi             ‘sea, sea-water, tide’
 Pn:    E Futunan        tai              ‘shallow sea over the reef as opposed to the open ocean (moana); the shore as opposed to inland (ʔuta); tide’
 Pn:    Pukapukan        tai              ‘sea, beach, tide’
 Pn:    Rennellese       tai              ‘ocean, lake, saltwater’
 Pn:    Samoan           tai               ‘tide, the sea’
 Pn:    Tikopia         tai               ‘sea, near the shore; coastal as opposed to inland’
 Pn:    Rarotongan      tai               ‘sea, sea water, coast bordering the sea, tide’
 Pn:    Maori           tai               ‘sea near shore, tide; shore as opposed to inland’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        kai               ‘sea, seawater, area near the sea’
>

                                                                        The seascape      93


In addition to these simple terms, a number of compound terms consisting of *tasik plus a
modifier probably existed in POc, denoting conditions or defined areas of sea. Many
contemporary languages possess such compounds. For example, Lau (SES) distinguishes
the following compounds whose first element is asi (< *tasik).

__pre__
         asiʔabua                        ‘deep blue sea’
         asidalafa                       ‘open ocean’
         asidaudau                       ‘open sea outside reef’
         asifolā, asimae                 ‘sea within reef’
         asimauri                        ‘sea outside reef’
         asinamo                         ‘lagoon within reef’
         asīle                           ‘where reef drops to deep water’
         asirū                           ‘sea where there is no reef’

In Polynesian languages reflexes of *tasik chiefly refer to the sea near the shore, the
shallow coastal waters, while another term, PPn *moana (see below) has been adopted to
refer to the open sea.

   POc *masawa(n,ŋ) has reflexes in both Western Oceanic and Eastern Oceanic meaning
‘deep ocean’ or ‘open sea’. It appears also to have had the sense ‘open space, clear space’
and to be etymologically related to POc *sawa(n,ŋ) ‘channel, passage’ (§3.5).

<
POc *masawa(n,ŋ) ‘open sea’
 NNG: Bariai         madaoan             ‘deep ocean’
 NNG: Manam          masaoa-saoa         ‘far, distant, remote’
 SES: Bugotu         maha                (V) ‘be deep of sea, (N) the deep sea’
 SES: ’Are’are       matāwa              ‘the open sea’
 SES: Sa’a           matawa              ‘the open sea’
 SES: Lau            matakwa             ‘open sea’
 SES: Arosi          matawa              ‘open sea far from land’
 NCV: Raga           mahava              ‘space (time or place)’
 NCV: Lonwolwol      meha                ‘clear place, sky, air, space, void, open sea’
 NCV: Atchin         masaw               ‘open sea’
 NCV: Nguna          masawa(ga)          ‘space between fingers’
 SV:   Kwamera       (kwán)mahan         ‘storage place, space, nothingness, an opening between the clouds’
 Mic:    Mokilese       mataw            ‘open sea’
 Mic:    Woleaian       metaw            ‘sea, ocean, lagoon, a big body of sea water’
 Mic:    Puluwatese     metaw            ‘deep sea, ocean’
>

     Polynesian languages reflect another term for ‘ocean’:

<
PPn *moana ‘sea beyond the reef, ocean’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:   Niuean         moana             ‘ocean, deep sea’
 Pn:   Tongan         moana             ‘deep sea, sea beyond the reef’
 Pn:   Rennellese     moana             ‘sea beyond the reef, ocean’
 Pn:   Samoan         moana             ‘deep sea, deep water’
 Pn:   Tikopia        moana             ‘sea, esp. deep sea, ocean, as distinct from inshore waters on and around reef’
 Pn:   Maori          moana             ‘sea’
 Pn:   Hawaiian       moana             ‘ocean, open sea’
>

Ross Clark (pers. comm.) hypothesises that *moana may be derived from POc
*masawa(n,ŋ), once the final consonant has been lost. He suggests that if we assume
*masawa could carry a possessive suffix (as a relational noun, ‘open sea between …’ or
‘open sea off …’), then *masawa-ña would have given PPn **mahawana. The reduction
of **-aw- to *-o- is a common sporadic change. Clark notes a parallel in the treatment of
*qasawa-na ‘spouse’, which becomes Nuclear Pn *qāwaŋa (unexplained *n > ŋ), but
Tongan ʔohoana, Niuean hoana.

94     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   The PCEMP reconstruction in the next set is supported by cognates in the Central
Malayo-Polynesian languages Yamdena, Fordata and Kei, and the South Halmahera/Irian
Jaya languages Buli and Numfor, all meaning ‘deep’ or ‘depth’. Cognates in Oceanic
languages fairly consistently refer to deep water, and most probably to deep water just
beyond the reef, i.e. where the sudden change of depth is significant.

<
PCEMP *laman ‘deep’ (Blust 1984)
POc *laman ‘deep sea beyond the reef’
 Adm: Mussau          lamana          ‘sea near the shore’ (cf. malioŋe ‘deep blue sea beyond the reef’)
 Adm: Penchal         lam             ‘deep sea beyond the reef’
 Adm: Loniu           laman           ‘deep sea just beyond the reef’
 NNG: Gitua           laman           ‘deep’
 MM: Ramoaaina        ləman           ‘sea, blue water close to shore’
 MM: Tolai            lamana          ‘deep, of the sea’
 MM: Tolai            lamana(na)      ‘the deep sea, the depth of the sea’
 MM: Patpatar         lam-lamana      ‘deep ocean’
 MM: Sursurunga       ləmən           ‘deep’
 MM: Teop             namana          ‘deep ocean’
 MM: Roviana          lamana          ‘the ocean; deep, of water’
 SES: Sa’a            lama            ‘lake’
 SES: Lau             lama            ‘pool at low tide in the reef’
 SES: Arosi           rama            ‘water between reef and shore; long deep channel in the open sea’
 SES: Arosi           rama-rama       ‘deep water beyond the edge of the reef’
 NCV: Mota            lama            ‘open sea’
 SV:    Lenakel       limwnān         ‘deep water’
>

                                                                         The seascape      95

   Listed below are common-noun reflexes of *laur. However, these are few and scattered,
and it is possible that this term had no common-noun use in POc. For local-noun uses, see
p.239.

<
PMP *lahud ‘downriver, towards the sea’ (Dempwolff 1938, Blust 1997)
POc *laur ‘sea, seawards’
 NNG: Gedaged          lau           ‘the high seas, an open unenclosed portion of the sea’
 MM: Tabar             ro-rau        ‘sea’
 MM: Tolai             lau           ‘open sea, horizon’; ‘any place out of sight’ (for bush people)
 MM: Nehan             laur          ‘water’
 SES: Gela             lau           ‘shore, sea; shorewards, seawards (from a speaker inland)’
 NCV: Mota             lau           ‘seashore as opposed to inland; beach as approached from land’
 NCV: Raga             (a)lau        ‘on beach, on lee side’
PMic *lau ‘pool, pond’ (Marck 1994:313)
 Mic: Kosraean          lʌ-lʌ        ‘pond, shallow lagoon’
 Mic: Kiribati          nei          ‘pond, pool, swamp, marsh’
 Mic: Satawalese        lə̄          ‘pool, pond’
 Mic: Carolinian        lə̄lə        ‘all manner of standing water (puddles, pools, ponds, lakes), typically in reference to fresh water’
>

4.2.2 Sheltered or open sea

   For sheltered or calm water, reflexes of POc *[ma-[d]]rapu ‘still, calm, windless’ or
POc *malino ‘calm’ were used (for the full cognate sets see Chapter 5, §5.1). In Proto
Eastern Oceanic, sheltered seas were referred to as ‘dead’ (*mate), while open or exposed
seas were described as ‘alive’ (*maqurip). Codrington and Palmer write that this
distinction also occurs in Malagasy (1896:205).

<
PEOc *|tasik mate| ‘sheltered sea, lee shore’
 SES: ’Are’are         | āsi mae |        ‘quiet sea in the lagoon’
 SES: Lau              | asi mae |        ‘area within reef’
 SES: Arosi            | asi mae |        ‘lee side of an island’
 SES: Sa’a             | esi mae |        ‘lee shore’
 NCV: Mota             | tas mate |       ‘a district of Mota to the leeward where the sea is quiet or dead’
 NCV: Raga             | tahi mate |      ‘calm sea, lee shore’
 NCV: Paamese          | tasi mat |       ‘calm sea’
 Pn:       Hawaiian    | kai make |       ‘ebb tide; calm sea’
 cf. also:
 Pn:      Tongan        mate-mate       ‘calm, of wind or sea’
>

96   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PEOc *|tasik maquri(p)| ‘open sea; ocean on the weather side; weather shore’
 SES: ’Are’are        | āsi mauri |      ‘open sea, as opposed to āsi mae’
 SES: Lau             | asi mauri |      ‘sea outside reef’
 SES: Arosi           | asi mauri |      ‘the weather side’
 NCV: Mota            | tas maur |       ‘the weather side where the sea is lively’
 NCV: Raga            | tahi mauri |     ‘ocean on the weather shore’
>

These compounds are echoed in Wayan (Fij) terms wai mate ‘quiet sea’ and wai ðola ‘sea
with free-flowing current’, with the reflex of POc *waiR ‘water’ replacing *tasik, and ðola
‘alive’ replacing *maqurip.

   In a number of languages, rough water is described by reflexes of POc *saqat ‘bad’.

__pre__
 PT:  Kiriwina           (ipai)saga       ‘rough, of sea, weather’
 SES: ’Are’are          | āsi taʔa |        ‘rough sea’
 SES: Arosi             | asi taʔa |        ‘confused sea’



4.2.3 Current

   Several terms denoting current or flow of water can be reconstructed for POc. Reflexes
of *qaRus and *tape occur as both noun and verb. A third term, POc *ma-qañur ‘floating,
adrift’ is a stative verb. There is also the doublet POc *qaliR/*saliR ‘to flow, drift, float’,
which has general application, i.e. to the movement of birds, winds and liquids.

<
PMP *qaRus (N) ‘current’; (V) ‘flow’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *qaRus (N) ‘current’; (V) ‘flow’
 PT:   Motu            aru             ‘current of river or sea’
 PT:   Tubetube        kalusi          ‘current (in the sea)’
 PT:   Kiriwina        yelu            ‘sea; current’
 PT:   Kukuya          anue            ‘float away’
 PT:   Molima          ʔaluwa          ‘float, be borne away by water or wind’
 PT:   Muyuw           yeiwl           ‘current’
 NCV: Mota             ar              ‘currents in the sea between Mota and Gaua’
 SV:   N Tanna         aeh             ‘flow’
 SV:   Kwamera         arəs            ‘flow’
 SV:   Anejom          areθ-raθ        ‘flow’
 SV:   Anejom          n-areθ          ‘current’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa         aut             ‘wave, swell’
 NCal: Nemi            kōt             ‘flow’
 NCal: Cèmuhî          ōot             ‘current’
 Mic: Kosraean         ɛṣ             ‘current, stream’
 Mic: Woleaian         yait            ‘current, tidal or nontidal movement of lake or ocean water’
 Mic: Puluwatese       yawit           ‘current; to flow, as a current’
 Fij:  Bauan           yau             ‘carry, bring’
 Pn:     Tongan          ʔau              ‘current, stream; (of pus) to ooze out, flow (but blood is said to tafe); (of a boil, etc.) to give out pus’
 Pn:     Rennellese      ʔau(a)           ‘float’
 Pn:     Samoan          au               ‘flow on, roll on; continue; current; stream; carry (in the hand)’
 Pn:     Samoan          au-au            ‘current’
 Pn:     Anutan          au               ‘ocean current’
 Pn:     Nukuoro         au               ‘the generic term for the major types of currents in the open sea’
 Pn:    Rarotongan       au               ‘a current, as of a river or of the ocean; the wake of a boat or ship’
 Pn:     Maori           au               ‘current, wake of a canoe; rapid; whirlpool’
 Pn:     Hawaiian        au               ‘current; movement, eddy, tide, motion; to move, drift, float, walk, hurry, stir’
>

                                                                           The seascape         97


  The bare PAn verb *qañud ‘drift on a current, carried away by flowing water’ does not
appear to have reflexes in Oceanic languages, but the form *ma-qañud is well represented:

<
PAn *ma-qañud ‘adrift’ (ACD)
POc *maqañur ‘float, be afloat or drifting’ (ACD has ‘floating, adrift’)
 Adm: Seimat           man               (VI) ‘drift, float on a current’
 SES: Sa’a             manu              ‘float’
 SES: Arosi            manu              ‘float in water or air, as pumice, the moon, frigate hawk’
 NCal: Nengone         nʰae              ‘float, be afloat or drifting’
 Mic: Chuukese         māɾ               ‘be becalmed, adrift; drift; soar (without flapping wings), glide; do a dance movement with outstretched arms’
 Mic: Puluwatese       mān               ‘drift, as a becalmed canoe’
 Mic: Woleaian         māri              ‘drift, be adrift (as a canoe)’
 Fij:  Rotuman         manu              ‘float’
 Pn:   Tongan          maʔanu            ‘be afloat, not to be resting on or touching the bottom’
 Pn:   E Uvean         maʔanu            ‘afloat, float’
 Pn:   Rennellese      maʔanu            ‘float, drift, soar; to leap, as in a dance’
 Pn:   Samoan          mānu              ‘come to the surface, emerge (as a turtle)’
 Pn:   Tikopia         mānū              ‘floating on water’
 Pn:   Maori           mānu              ‘float; be launched: so start, of an expedition by water; overflow; be flooded’
>

<
POc *tape (V) ‘(current) flow’; (N) ‘current, flow’
 PT:    Motu           | taha (i rame) |    ‘current in the sea’
 SES: Bugotu            tave              (V) ‘flow’
 SES: Gela              tave              (V) ‘(liquids, air) flow’
 SES:    Lau             afe            ‘current, wave, tide’ (also afea, afeafe, afela ‘current, tide rip’)
 SES:    Kwaio           afe            (V) ‘flow, drip, run down, dissolve’; (N) ‘current’
 SES:    Kwaio           afe-afe        ‘current’
 SES:    Sa’a            ahe            (N) ‘surf; currents from wind or tide’; (V) ‘flow’
 SES:    ’Are’are        ʔahe           ‘tidal current, tidal rip’
 SES:    Arosi           ahe            (V) ‘(current) flow’
 SES:    Arosi           ahe(ra)        ‘current’
 NCV: Paamese            tahe           (N) ‘wave’
 NCal: Nemi              davec          ‘flood’
 Fij:  Bauan             dave           (V) ‘(liquids in a small stream) flow’
 Pn:   Niuean            tafe           (V) ‘flow’
 Pn:   Tongan            tafe           ‘(liquids) flow, run’
 Pn:   Anutan            ta-tape        ‘for water to flow; particularly for an ocean current to run’ (Feinberg 1988:197)
 Pn:   Anutan            tape           ‘tide, current’
 Pn:     Samoan          tafe           ‘flow, run’
 Pn:     Rennellese      tahe           ‘float, drift’
 Pn:     Tikopia         tafe           (N) ‘current’; (V) ‘drift at sea; trickle’
 Pn:     W Futunan       tafe           ‘flow, melt’
 Pn:     Emae            tafe           (V) ‘flow’
 Pn:     Hawaiian        kahe           (V) ‘flow’
>

98     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PAn *qaluR(?) (V) ‘flow’ (Blust 1999)
POc *qaliR ‘flow, drift, float’ (doublet *saliR)
 MM: Tolai               alir(en)        ‘rivulet or small stream caused by the rain’
 MM: Tolai               alir            ‘swim, float, drift’
 MM: Ramoaaina           alir            ‘flow, float, drift, swim’
 MM: Roviana             ale             ‘float’
 SES: Lau                alilo           (V) ‘shift, of wind’; ‘an eddy’
 SES: ’Are’are           arir(oʔa)       (N,V) ‘eddy, of wind’
>

<
PMP *saliR ‘flow’
POc *saliR (V) ‘flow, float, drift’
 MM: Meramera           sali            (V) ‘flow’
 MM: Nakanai            sali            (V) ‘flow’
 NCV: Mota              sale            ‘float, drift, flow, run with water’
 NCV: Raga              hala            ‘float, drift, wave hands in dancing’
 NCV: Lonwolwol         hal             ‘(liquids) gush out; float, spread, flow, float’
 Pn:   Niuean           hili            ‘float’
>

4.2.4 Waves

                                                                       The seascape    99

   Two types of wave commonly distinguished in Oceanic languages are (a) surf, waves
breaking on the shore, and (b) ocean swells, typically unbroken although the wind can
whip up white caps. For instance, Mussau (Adm) has koto ‘surf, breakers’ and toŋe-toŋea
‘wave, swell in the open sea’, Motu (PT) has hure-hure ‘surf’ and sinaia ‘ocean swell,
high waves which do not break’. In Roviana (MM) the corresponding terms are tovovo
‘breakers, esp. on sea reef or exposed shore’ and bogusu ‘ocean swell’, and in Tongan
(Pn), ŋalu ‘surf’ and ākefua ‘to have an ocean swell (no breaking waves)’. Although we
can reconstruct three POc terms for types of wave, *napo(k) ‘breaking wave, surf’,
*ŋalu(n) ‘mounting wave, ocean wave’ and *bayau ‘ocean swell’, there is some crossover
of meaning in reflexes of the first two forms. POc *bayau is the only reconstruction which
appears to refer unambiguously to ocean swells. Three other reconstructions are relevant
here. POc *loka referred to ‘high sea or tide, heavy breakers’, while POc *[u]Ruap with
primary meaning ‘high tide’ (see §2.6 below) evidently referred also to ‘wave’. The term
*bari ‘(waves) pound the coast at high tide’ is reconstructable for Proto Central Pacific.

<
PAn *Nabek ‘breakers, surf, waves’ (ACD)
POc *napo(k) ‘breaking wave; surf’
 MM: Tabar             nava            ‘wave’
 MM: Lihir             i-nah           ‘tide’
 SES: Lau              nafo            ‘surf, wave’
 SES: Kwaio            nafo            ‘surf, waves’
 SES: ’Are’are         naho            ‘wave, surf’
 SES: Sa’a             naho            ‘surf, wave’
 SES: Arosi            naho            ‘surf, waves on the beach’
 NCV: Mota             nawo            ‘salt water, surf’
 NCV: Raga             navo            ‘wave, surf, salt’
 Mic: Kiribati         nao             ‘wave, swell’
 Mic: Mokilese         no              ‘wave’
 Mic: Puluwatese       no              ‘wave, be many waves, as in a strong sea’
 Mic: Woleaian         lo              ‘wave, surf’
>

   Reflexes of POc *ŋalu(n) in some languages refer to ocean waves in general and in
others to breaking waves or surf.

<
PMP *qalun ‘long rolling wave, swell, billow’ (ACD, Dempwolff 1938)
POc *ŋalu(n) ‘mounting wave, ocean wave’
 NNG: Manam            (ma)ŋalu          ‘breakers, surf’
 PT:   Tubetube        yalu              ‘backwash from wave breaking on the beach’
 SES: Lau              ŋalu-ŋalua        ‘a rough confused sea’
 Mic: Marshallese      ŋʌl               ‘ocean swell, mounting wave which does not break, billow’
 Mic: Mokilese         ŋal-ŋal           ‘low tide’
 Pn:   Tongan          ŋalu              ‘wave (when rolling in), breaker or surf’
 Pn:   Samoan          ŋalu              ‘wave, breaker; to be rough’
 Pn:   Tikopia         ŋaru              ‘wave, swell (normally used as collective in singular)’
 Pn:   Maori           ŋaru               ‘wave of the sea, corrugation’
 Pn:   Anutan          ŋaru               ‘wave (generic); breaker’ (Feinberg 1988:192)
 Pn:   Hawaiian        nalu               ‘surf’
>

100   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
POc *bayau ‘ocean wave, ocean swell’
 Adm: Nyindrou       bayau                ‘wave away from shore or reef’
 PT:     Motu        beu-beu              ‘wave of the sea, generally of swell inside reef’
 Fij:    Bauan       biau                 ‘wave, billow (not breaking)’
 Pn:     Tongan      peau                 ‘wave, billow’
 Pn:     Samoan      peau                 ‘wave, billow’
 Pn:     Rennellese  peau                 ‘wave, esp. white caps’
 Pn:     Tuvalu      peau                 ‘wave of sea’
 Pn:     Tokelauan   peau                 ‘billow, roller’
 Pn:     W Futunan   peau                 ‘white caps; swell in ocean’
 Pn:     Tikopia     peau                 ‘foam, spindrift at sea’
 cf. also:
 NNG: Dami           uyau                 ‘wave’
>

<
POc *loka (N) ‘high sea or tide, heavy breakers’; (V) ‘be high, rough, of sea or surf’
 Adm: Lou               loka              ‘high tide, flood’
 Fij:   Wayan           loka-loka         ‘of sea, be rough during calm weather, indicating strong winds will come later’
 Fij:   Bauan           loka              (N) ‘heavy breakers over a reef, very heavy tides that flow inland, floods’; (V) ‘break, of breakers, tidal wave’ (ua loka ‘tidal wave’)
 Pn:    Niuean          loka              ‘be rough, usually of sea’
 Pn:    Tongan          loka              ‘be rough’ (of harbour, lagoon, passage, or sea where it meets coast)
 Pn:    Tongan          loka-tau          ‘be rough and roaring’ (of sea near the coast)
 Pn:    Tikopia         roka              ‘rough of sea; great wave, as in heavy surf’
>

<
PCP *bari ‘(waves) pound the coast, as at high tide’
 Fij:  Bauan          bari               ‘nibble at a hard thing, as waves against a rock face’
PPn *pali ‘to pound the coast, as at high tide’
 Pn:   Tongareva        pari                ‘rough, of waves’
 Pn:   Rarotongan       pari                ‘high, full, as the tide’
 Pn:   Tahitian         pari-pari           ‘spray breaking on the shore’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan       pari                ‘(waves etc.) pound against and wear away; flow over, as the tide’
 Pn:   Maori            pari                ‘flowing, of tide; flow over s.t., of tide’
>

4.2.5 Foam

   Blust (ACD) has reconstructed several forms denoting ‘foam’ for PAn and lower-order
protolanguages, all showing some degree of formal similarity:

                                                                         The seascape   101

__pre__
 PAn        *buCaq         ‘foam, froth’
 PAn        *puCaq         ‘foam, froth, lather’
 PMP        *budaq         ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’
 POc        *puro          ‘foam, bubbles’
 PMP        *busa          ‘foam’
 PAn        *bujeq         ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’
 PAn        *bua           ‘foam, bubbles, froth’

PAn *buCaq and *puCaq are to our knowledge not reflected in Oceanic languages (the
expected POc reflexes of either would be **puta(q) and **buta(q)). Of the other forms,
PMP *budaq (POc *pura(q)) and POc *puro are discussed in Chapter 3 (see p.61 and p.83
respectively), whilst PMP *busa and PAn *bujeq are referred to below. Blust’s reflexes of
*bua are two from Taiwan, together with the Tolai and Maori reflexes that we prefer to
attribute to PMP *busa (the expected Maori form is **puha).

   No single contemporary Oceanic language we know of has reflexes of two of these
forms with identical meaning. However, Arosi has a contrast between ʔabuta ‘the break of
a wave, the foam and white of the crest of a wave’ and huto-huto ‘foam, froth’, while
’Are’are contrasts aputa ‘(surf) break’ with huto-huto ‘slime, saliva’. This suggests that
POc *busa and *puso may have differed in meaning, with the former perhaps denoting
foam of the sea and the latter a more general term for foaming or slimy substances.

   There is an additional formal complication, namely that PMP *bujeq seems to have two
sets of reflexes in Oceanic languages, pointing to two POc forms: *buso and POc *puso. It
may be that POc indeed had both, *buso perhaps a verb, *puso a verb or a noun (see vol. 1,
pp.30–31). Alternatively, forms apparently reflecting *buso may represent a conflation of
*busa and *puso, implying that *buso did not in fact occur in POc.

<
PMP *busa ‘foam’ (ACD)
POc *busa ‘foam, froth’
 MM: Sursurunga         bus-bus          ‘foam coming from the mouth; bubbles’
 MM: Tolai              bua              (N) ‘foam of the sea’; (V) ‘foam, bubble, boil’
 SES: Arosi             (ʔa)buta         ‘the break of a wave, surf’ (ʔabutasi ‘to break in foam upon’)
 SES: ’Are’are          (a)puta          ‘break, of surf’
 NCV: Namakir           buha             ‘foam’
 Pn:     Maori          pua              ‘foam of the sea; foaming, breaking’
 cf. also:
 Pn:     Samoan         pusa             ‘give out smoke, steam, vapour’
 Pn:     Tongan         pu-puha          ‘be hot and perspiring’
>

<
PMP *bujeq ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’ (ACD)
POc *buso ‘foam, froth’
 Adm: Mussau            bīso            ‘foam, froth, bubbles’
 NNG: Manam             buso            ‘foam’
 PT:   Dobu             buso-buso       ‘foam’
 NCV: Raga              buso            ‘foam’
 Mic: Kiribati          buro-buro       ‘froth, bubbles, foam, lather’
 Mic: Ponapean          pʷuto-pʷut      ‘foam, scum’
 Mic: Woleaian          ɸuẓo-ɸuẓ        (N,V) ‘bubbles, foam, froth’
>

102     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PAn *bujeq ‘foam, bubbles, lather, scum, froth’ (ACD)
POc *puso ‘foam, froth, slime’
 PT:   Kiriwina          polu            (N) ‘foam, spray’ (vowel metathesis)
 MM: Nakanai             pu-puso         ‘pumice’
 SES: Sa’a               huto-huto       (N) ‘froth, foam’
 SES: Arosi              huto-huto       ‘froth, foam’
 SES: ’Are’are           huto-huto       ‘slime, saliva’
 Fij:  Wayan             vuso            ‘froth, foam’
 Fij:  Bauan             vuso            (N,V) ‘froth, foam’
 Pn:   Niuean            fiho            (N) ‘froth, foam’
 Pn:   Tongan            fiho            ‘phlegm’
 Pn:   W Futunan         fiso            (V) ‘foam, bubble’
>

4.2.6 Tides

   Tidal patterns are an important regulator of the daily life of communities which obtain
much of their food by foraging on the reef, and by netting and trapping reef fish. They are
also important in localities where canoe access through the reef is only possible under
certain tidal conditions. Although we have reconstructed terms only for the high and low
points of tidal movement, communities evidently had names for a number of intermediate
tidal stages, for tides at particular times of day and for seasonal tides. The following
description of Lau (SES) terms is from Akimichi (1978:306). With one exception, these
are all descriptive compounds based on either lua (< POc *[u]Ruap) ‘high tide’ or mai
(< POc *maqati ‘low tide’).

|      Tide or tidal movement (afe) [from POc *tape ‘to flow’] is divided into lua (flux) and
|      mai (reflux), and these are further subdivided into several phases, given here in a
|      sequential order. The lowest phase is termed mai laŋa [dry], then the tide starts to
|      come up (lua kariabulo) [turn around]. Then the intertidal rocks become invisible or
|      submerged (lua e fakaelua), and soon disappear under the water (lua e dalafa). The
|      fullest phase is termed lua e hata. Then the tide begins to go out (gouna asi maŋoli),
|      and it ebbs to a slight degree (mai toli). The rocks emerge from under the water (mai
|      tarafafoa), and they come in sight completely (mai tete). Then the tide turns to be the
|      lowest phase (mai laŋa) again.

   In addition to their daily ebb and flow, tides have a seasonal cycle, with extreme highs
and lows at certain times of year that correspond to phases of the lunar and solar cycles.
Communities would have been aware of these spring or king tides, when there would be
possible flooding, and of the unusually small neap tides which might permit such activities
as the building and maintenance of stone fish traps on the reef. A detailed description of
the seasonal cycle of tides comes from McEldowney (1995) who has written about Andra,
a sand cay with surrounding reef just off the north coast of Manus in the Admiralties. She
describes a community which has built hundreds of stone fish traps along the northern reef
edge so that they form a nearly continuous wall. For Andra speakers, the times of neap
tides signal the opportunity for rebuilding the trap walls and are the most opportune time
for many fishing methods. McEldowney writes (p.283–284) that the lowest tides occur
over four consecutive days when

                                                                              The seascape       103


|     the reef is called matahun [perhaps *maqati ‘low tide’ + *puna ‘origin, beginning’]
|     and ‘new’ because the reef is becoming newly exposed. The low tides of matahun are
|     characterised as receding quickly and earlier than those on succeeding days; they do
|     not drop as far as on following days; their duration is relatively short; and they are
|     quickly replaced by the returning tide. This initial phase of the low water sequence is
|     seen as the most opportune time for many fishing methods.

   Hviding (1996:52) describes in some detail the seasonal variation in tides in Marovo,
NW Solomons, and the way in which this affects the activities of its community. He notes
how the time of the southeast tradewinds coincides with the occurrence of low tides during
daytime (mati rane), and the time of northwest monsoons with low tides at night (mati
ipu), and describes how these constitute predictable and distinct juxtaposed seasons. He
writes:

|     This recurring pattern, particularly the tidal one, is important for the yearly cycles of
|     fishing and shellfish gathering and is tied in with knowledge and observation of a
|     number of other cyclic events in nature. ... Within the general two-season pattern,
|     Marovo people recognize a number of predictable shorter-term fluctuations and
|     climatic extremes that act as markers of important ceremonial occasions and
|     productive activities. Among these are the particularly low tides occurring from mid-
|     morning around June, announcing the ripening of the Canarium nut trees and aptly
|     termed mati buruburu (low tide of nut trees). Mati buruburu also signifies the
|     beginning of the period during which marriages were traditionally concentrated, when
|     peak harvests from both fishing and gardening could be expected. The extreme low
|     tides in mid-morning provide ideal conditions on the barrier reef flats for kuarao
|     fishing, large communal efforts using an encircling line, yielding extraordinarily large
|     catches, and associated with large feasts.

   In Wayan (spoken in the Wasaya group, western Fiji), terms for spring and neap tides
include ua kurakura ‘spring tide, highest tide of the month, when moon is full’, ua qƝ
‘neap tide, very quickly turning high tide, a low high tide’, and ðere uaua ‘very quickly
turning low tide, a high low tide’. Wayan speakers also have a range of terms for high tides
occurring at different times of day: ua qwata ‘morning tide, be high tide in morning’, ua
siŋa ‘midday tide, be high tide at midday’, ua vakiavi ‘late afternoon tide, ua avi ‘evening
tide, be high tide at evening’ and ua boŋi ‘night tide, be high tide at night’. It is probable
that in POc also, there were a number of compounds based on *[u]Ruap and *maqati that
denoted specific kinds of high and low tide. However, on the evidence to hand we cannot
recover the precise forms of such compounds.

   The reconstruction for low tide, POc *maqati, which continues a PAn form, is a well-
supported one. The same form is also widely attested in the sense ‘dry reef, reef exposed at
low tide’.

<
PAn *ma-qaCi ‘ebb, of water in streams; low tide’ (ACD)
POc *maqati (N) ‘low tide; dry reef’; (V) ‘ebb; dry, of reef’
 Adm: Mussau           mati               ‘low tide; dry reef’
 Adm: Mussau           (poŋa)mati         ‘coral reef’
 Adm: Wuvulu           maʔi               ‘low tide’
 Adm: Seimat           mat                ‘tide’
 Adm: Lou              met                ‘low tide; reef; dry reef’
 Adm: Titan            mat                ‘beach, tide’
 Adm: Drehet           mʷak               ‘ebb tide, dry reef’
 Adm:     Nyindrou      mek             ‘reef; low tide’
 NNG:     Mangap        magat           ‘low tide; dry reef’
 NNG:     Manam         mati            ‘reef’ (_mati-ibara_ ‘ebb, ebb-tide; low water’)
 MM:      Nakanai       mahati          ‘be out, of the tide; low tide; dry season’
 MM:      Vitu          maɣati          ‘low tide, reef’
 MM:      Lavongai      mat             ‘low tide’ (kuli-mat ‘reef’)
 MM:      Tigak         mat             ‘low tide; reef’
 MM:      Kara (East)   mat             ‘reef’
 MM:      Tiang         mat             ‘low tide; reef’
 MM:      Nalik         (sara)mat       ‘low tide’
 MM:      Sursurunga    məs             ‘low tide/shallow; dry spot’
 MM:      Tolai        | mat (i marum) |  ‘low tide during darkness’ (_mat i qai_ ‘low tide during moonlight’)
 MM:      Siar          maiat           ‘reef’
 MM:      Teop          masi            ‘low tide with the reef visible’
 MM:      Simbo         mati            ‘low tide’
 MM:      Marovo        mati            ‘shallow reef; dry land; low tide; reef exposed by receding tide’
 MM:      Halia         mac             ‘coral reef; low tide’
 SES:     Lau           mai             ‘ebb tide; reef, dry reef; to ebb’
 SES:     Kwaio         mai             ‘low tide’
 SES:     ’Are’are      mai             ‘low tide, ebb tide’
 SES:     Sa’a          mei             ‘ebb tide, low tide’
 SES:     Arosi         mai             ‘low tide, ebb’
 SES:     Arosi         mairara         ‘dead low water at spring tide’
 SES:     Arosi         mainiharisi     ‘neap tide’ (harisi ‘season’)
 SES:     Arosi         maitē, maiuru   ‘very low tide’
 NCV:     Paamese       a-mati          ‘tide’
 NCV:     Nguna         māti            ‘low tide’
 NCV:     Namakir       maʔat           ‘shallow (water), low tide’
 SV:      Sye           mah             ‘low tide’
 SV:      Kwamera       maha            ‘low tide’
 SV:      Anejom        mas             ‘low tide’
 NCal:    Nemi          māc             ‘part of the reef exposed at low tide’
 Fij:     Rotuman       mafi            ‘low-tide water; tide in general’
 Fij:     Bauan         mati            (V) ‘ebb, of the tide, as opposed to the flow’; ‘part of the reef exposed at low tide’
>

104     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


                                                                                 The seascape       105

   POc *[ma]maca ‘dry up, evaporate’, has some reflexes which refer to low tide or to
exposure of the reef at low tide. These may represent parallel semantic specialisations.
(See also Chapter 7, §5.6)

<
PMP *maja ‘be dry’
POc *[ma]maca (V) ‘dry up, evaporate, be empty of liquid’; (N) ‘low tide’
 NNG: Kove            mamasa       ‘dry’
 PT:   Kiriwina       mamala       ‘low tide’
 PT:   Motu           (ko)mada     ‘low water’
 MM: Nakanai          mamara       ‘(water) partly dried up by sun; extremely low tide’
 MM: Ramoaaina        məma         ‘reef; low tide, shallow’
 MM: Tolai            mamā         ‘reef; low tide; coral; shallow’
 MM: Roviana          masa         ‘beach, sea shore’ (masa-masa ‘shallow’, masa herepata ‘very low tide’)
 SES: Gela            mamaha       ‘dry’
 SES: Sa’a            mamata       ‘be high and dry, of a reef; be dry at low water’
 SES: Arosi           mamata       ‘dry’
 NCV: Raga            mamasa       ‘dry’
 NCV: Paamese         mese         ‘dry; (of tide) low, go out’
 SV:   Anejom         mesei        ‘dry’
 SV:   Kwamera        maha         ‘low tide; empty, of liquid’
 NCal: Nemi           mat          ‘dry up; low tide’
 NCal: Iaai           mʰe [2]        ‘dry up, dry reef; low tide’
 Mic: Kiribati        mara         ‘moistened, soaked, softened’
 Mic: Kosraean        mɯes         ‘shallow place in reef’
 Mic: Mokilese        mat          ‘portion of reef exposed at low tide’
 Mic: Marshallese     mmat         ‘protrude from surface (water or land), emerge’
 Mic: Ponapean        mat          ‘dry’
 Mic: Carolinian      mmata        ‘low tide, dry’
 Mic: Puluwatese      mmat         ‘be low, of tide’
 Mic: Woleaian        mmata        ‘dry, low tide’
 Fij:  Rotuman        mamasa       ‘be dry’
 Fij:  Bauan          maða         ‘empty, dry of liquids’
 Pn:   Niuean         maha         ‘empty, dry’
 Pn:   Tongan         maha         ‘dry’
 Pn:   Tongan         mamaha       ‘shallow; (tide) be out’
 Pn:   E Futunan      masa         ‘dry’
 Pn:   E Uvean        maha         ‘empty, dry’
 Pn:   Rennellese     masa         ‘empty of liquid, (tide) shallow’
 Pn:   Samoan         masa         ‘be shallow’
 Pn:   Nukuoro        masa         ‘empty, low tide’
 Pn:   Emae           masa         ‘empty of liquid’
>

[2] In Iaai mh reflects PNCal *mm and POc *mam. (For a fuller discussion, see Ozanne-Rivierre 1986:39.)

106   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   POc *Ruap has been long-established as a term for high tide, with a PMP antecedent,
*Ruab. Further evidence in the form of the POc verb [*ma-]uRua(p) ‘flood, be flooded’
(see below) leads us to conclude that *Ruap had an alternant form *uRuap.

<
PMP *Ruab ‘high tide’ (Blust 1984–85)
POc *[u]Ruap (N) ‘high tide’; (V) ‘flow in, of tide’; (N) ‘wave’
 Adm: Lou             ua                 ‘high tide’
 NNG: Malasanga rua                      ‘flow’
 MM: Tolai            ruap               ‘breakers; break heavily, of the sea’
 SES: Gela            lua                ‘full tide’; (V) ‘flow, of tide’
 SES: Lau             lua                ‘high tide; flow in, of tide; heavy sea, big waves’ (lua-lua ‘breakers’, lua ni odu ‘a big swell’)
 SES: Sa’a            lue                ‘flood tide’
 SES: Kwaio           lua                ‘high tide’
 SES: Kwaio           lua-lua, lu-luafe ‘flood tide’ (lua + afe ‘flow’)
 SES: ’Are’are        rua                ‘flood tide, incoming tide’ (rua paina ‘high tide’)
 SES: Arosi           rua-rua            ‘flood of water’
 NCV: Mota            rue                ‘flow of tide, high tide, flood tide’
 NCV: Fortsenal       ua                 ‘make waves’
 NCV: Paamese         ue                 ‘high tide’
 SV:    Kwamera       a-rə-rukʷ         ‘be high tide’
 NCal: Nyelâyu        wap                ‘high tide’
 Fij:   Bauan         ua                 ‘the tide, a wave’ (ua levu ‘high tide’)
 Fij:   Wayan         ua                 ‘wave; tide’ (ua levu ‘high tide’)
>

  POc *ma-[u]Ruap and its counterpart, *ma-qati ‘low tide; be low tide, to ebb’ each had
both a dynamic and a stative sense (Evans & Ross 2001).

<
POc *[ma-]uRua(p) ‘flood, be flooded’ (from p.86)
 NNG: Manam          urua               ‘flood, torrent’
 PT:   Molima        moluva             ‘flood of river or stream’
 PT:   Dobu          muluwa             ‘flood’
 NCV: Tamambo        moruae             ‘flood, big river’
>

   Other reconstructions for high tide include the following (see also POc *lomak ‘flood,
of sea’ (Ch. 3, p.87)):

<
PMP *lubuk ‘deep pool in water’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *lubu(k) ‘high tide; deep water’
 Adm: Drehet          | (mwak) ulup |   ‘high tide’
 Adm: Drehet           lu-lup         ‘tidepool’
 NNG: Yabem            lop            ‘flood tide’
 MM: Vitu              lobo           ‘high tide’
 MM: Meramera          lubu-lubu      ‘high tide’
 MM: Tolai             lubu           ‘to rise, flow or flood, of the tide; full tide’
 MM: Ramoaaina         lubu           ‘deep water; full tide; the change of the monsoon’
 SES: Lau              lobo           ‘deep water in lagoon’ (Akimichi 1978)
 NCal: Nemi            nigi           ‘deep water’
>

                                                                          The seascape        107

<
PWOc *tunan ‘high tide’
 PT:  Molima            tunana              ‘high, of water’
 PT:  Muyuw             tan                 ‘high tide’
 MM: Notsi              tun                 ‘high tide’
 MM: Lihir              ton                 ‘high tide’
 MM: Sursurunga         tun                 ‘tide’
 MM: Tangga             tun                 ‘high tide’
 MM: Konomala           tun-tun             ‘high tide’
>

  Sometimes reflexes of POc *ponuq ‘full’ are used to refer to a high tide (SES: Sa’a asi e
honu ‘high spring tide’, Pn: Takuu fonu ‘deep; full, of tide’).


4.3 The reef environment

4.3.1 Coral

   POc *laje was both a generic term for coral and the name for branching coral in contrast
to *buŋa ‘smooth round or table coral’. The term *laje is widely attested in Oceanic but we
know of only one probable cognate outside Oceanic, Lauje (Tomini-Tolitoli, Sulawesi) lais
‘coral’. For *giri-giri ‘coral, coral rubble’, see Chapter 3, §7.3.

<
PMP *lajay ‘coral’
POc *laje (i) ‘coral’; (ii) ‘branching coral’
 Adm: Lou                  las                ‘limestone’
 Adm: Loniu                lac                ‘coral’
 NNG: Takia                lad                ‘coral’
 NNG: Gedaged              lad                ‘coral’
 PT:    Motu               lade               ‘k.o. coral; coral reef’
 PT:    Kukuya             nai                ‘reef; coral’
 PT:    Sudest             laje               ‘coral’
 PT:    Kiriwina           lai                ‘coral’
 MM: Babatana              laji               ‘coral’
 MM: Maringe               (glae)laje         ‘coral’
 SES: Gela                 lade               ‘all kinds of branching coral’
 SES: Arosi                rade               ‘coral’
 SES: Kwaio                lade-lade          ‘coral’
 SES: Lau                  lade               ‘branching coral’
 NCV: Mota                 las                ‘live coral, of the branching kinds’
 NCV: Namakir              les                ‘branching coral’
 SV:    Anejom             (n)las             ‘live coral on a reef’
 Mic: Kosraean             læs               ‘k.o. coral’
 Fij:   Wayan              lase               ‘coral (alive or dead), esp. branching coral; burnt coral, powdered coral, lime’
 Fij:   Wayan           | vatu lase-lase |    ‘brain coral, smooth round coral’
 Fij:   Wayan           | lase iviu |         ‘sea fan coral’
 Fij:    Bauan           lase               ‘common branchy coral and the lime made from it’
 Pn:     Tongan          lahe               ‘lime (coral)’
 Pn:     Rennellese      gase               ‘k.o. common branching coral’
>

108     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   POc *buŋa ‘smooth round coral’ is evidently derived from PMP *buŋa ‘blossom’
through the latter’s extension of meaning to PMP *buŋa ni batu ‘coral sponge’ (lit.
‘blossom of stone’), which then reduced simply to *buŋa in Oceanic.

<
PMP *buŋa ‘flower, blossom’
PMP *|buŋa ni batu| ‘coral sponge’ (ACD)
POc *buŋa ‘smooth, round coral’
 NNG: Takia           buŋ                ‘large white coral’
 NNG: Gedaged         buŋ                ‘a round coral growth’
 MM: Nakanai          buga               ‘plate-shaped coral’
 MM: Bola             buŋa               ‘k.o. coral’
 MM: Babatana         buŋa-na            ‘large whitish stones found on the reef, calcified coral’
 NCV: Mota            puŋa               ‘k.o. coral (madrepore)’
 Fij:  Bauan          vuŋa               ‘a porous coral rock in the sea’
PPn *puŋa ‘coral rock’
 Pn:   Niuean          puŋa              ‘limestone, coral rock’ (puŋa-puŋa ‘limestone platform on the reef’)
 Pn:     Tongan         puŋa, (mata)puŋa ‘k.o. rather soft rock or stone, apparently a compact form of coral’
 Pn:     Samoan         puŋa             ‘k.o. coral, used for polishing and as weights in breadfruit storage pits’
 Pn:     Rennellese     puŋa             ‘general name for flat or round sharp coral’
 Pn:     Tikopia        puŋa             ‘marine rock, prob. coral’
 Pn:     Tahitian       puʔa             ‘coral sp., lime, abrasive stone’
 Pn:     Maori          puŋa-puŋa        ‘pumice’
 Pn:     Hawaiian       puna             ‘coral’
>

In Polynesian languages, reflexes of *puŋa typically contrast with those of *feo.

<
PPn *feo ‘coral, possibly branching coral’
 Pn:    Niuean          feo                ‘coral’
 Pn:    Tongan          feo                ‘coral’
 Pn:    E Futunan       fe(o)-feo          ‘branching coral’
 Pn:    Samoan          feo-feo            ‘branching coral’
 Pn:    Tikopia         feo                ‘coral, generic’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan heo                      ‘k.o. coral rock’
>

                                                                        The seascape     109

4.3.2 Reefs

   Coral reefs are a dominant feature not only of atolls, but also of the coastal
environments of parts of mainland New Guinea and of many of the high islands of the
tropical Pacific. Reef systems can be loosely classified into atolls, fringing reefs which
border shores, and barrier reefs which are some distance offshore. Although many atolls
are in fact islands, some consist only of reef.


                                   Figure 3: Reef forms

   Coral reefs generally have a number of features in common, as shown in Figure 3.
These include a windward slope, with often a steep drop to the ocean floor on the seaward
side, a crest and a reef flat which is exposed at low tide and contains holes and channels.
Reef flats in general are easily accessible and support a wide variety of fish and shellfish.
A natural division is between the windward and leeward sides of the reef, with the
windward more heavily scoured by tides and wave action, and the leeward supporting a
much more varied and fragile coral community. Atolls and barrier reefs enclose a body of
sheltered water, the lagoon, within which occur patch reefs, coral heads and sand patches.
   Two POc reconstructions are glossed simply as ‘reef’,*sakaRu and *oda. Oceanic
reflexes of *sakaRu are extremely widespread. Outside Oceanic, we have located two
terms from Austronesian languages in the Cenderawasih Bay area, Yeretuar sʔaru ‘coral
stone’ and Iresim haru ‘coral reef’, both from the Anceaux collection of wordlists of Irian
Jaya languages (Smits & Voorhoeve 1992:228), which suggest a PEMP reconstruction.
Blust (ACD) has recorded Chamorro sahagu ‘deep water’ as cognate and thus proposes
promotion of the POc reconstruction to PMP, albeit with questionable gloss. In Tryon
(1995), which lists terms for ‘reef’ in around 50 non-Oceanic languages, the most common
terms are cognates of the compound *patu karaŋ, literally ‘coral rock’. It may be that reefs
were not as central to life in many parts of Indonesia as they are in Oceanic settlements.

110    Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *sakaRu ‘reef, shoal’
POc *sakaRu ‘reef, shoal’
 Adm: Baluan             suk             ‘beach’
 NNG: Dami               sā              ‘sky, reef’
 NNG: Mangap             sakar           ‘reef’
 NNG: Manam              sakaru          ‘reef’
 NNG: Sissano            saʔar           ‘reef’
 PT:   Motu              haɣaru          ‘rise, of the tide’
 MM: Bali                zaɣaru          ‘reef’
 MM: Nakanai             sakalu          ‘reef’
 MM: Bola                rakaru          ‘reef’
 MM: Teop                han             ‘a reef coming near the surface of the ocean, but is always under water’
 MM: Halia               sāl             ‘between the deep edge of the reef and where the surf breaks’
 MM: Roviana             saɣaru          ‘reef’
 SES: Bugotu             hagalu          ‘reef’
 SES: Sa’a               taʔalu          ‘shoal water, a coral patch under water’
 SES: Lau                taʔalu          ‘a shoal, shoalwater’
 SES: ’Are’are           taʔaru          ‘shoal, reef in shallow water’
 SES: Arosi              taʔaru          ‘shoal, shallow spot in the sea; coral reef’
 NCV: Mota               sakaru          ‘rough coral stones between surf and beach’
 NCV: Namakir            hako            ‘reef’
 Mic: Kiribati           rakai           ‘block of coral rocks; rock; reef’
 Mic: Kosraean           tʌka            ‘island, atoll’
 Mic: Marshallese        təkæ, təkɛṛ     ‘strip of reef; long reef between two islets’
 Mic: Ponapean           teke            ‘small island’
 Mic: Puluwatese         tə̄             ‘uninhabited reef island’
 Fij: Wayan              ðakau           ‘reef, shoal’
 Fij: Bauan              ðakau           ‘coral reef’
 Pn:  Tongan             hakau           ‘coral reef or rock which appears above the surface at low tide’
 Pn:    Samoan           aʔau            ‘coral reef’
 Pn:    Rennellese       akau            ‘coral reef in general’
 Pn:    Tikopia          akau            ‘reef fringing an island or in atoll form’
 Pn:    Tuvalu           akau            ‘reef formations in the lagoon’
 Pn:    Marquesan        akau            ‘coral outcrops’
>

   POc *oda ‘reef’ is widely reflected in Micronesian languages, but otherwise is retained
as a separate word (in our data) only in one Papuan Tip language.

<
POc *oda ‘reef’
 PT:   Kiriwina          oda(iaga)       ‘coral reef’
 Mic: Kiribati           ora             ‘low tide, expanse of beach, strand’
 Mic: Ponapean           ōt              ‘reef’ (archaic)
 Mic:    Marshallese        wəṛ              ‘coral reef’
 Mic:    Mokilese           wos               ‘reef’
 Mic:    Chuukese           wōc̣, woc̣o-      ‘reef’
 Mic:    Carolinian         wōṣ, woṣo-      ‘reef, esp. fringing barrier reef’
 Mic:    Woleaian           woṣ, woṣo       ‘reef, coral, lime’
 Mic:    Puluwatese         wɔ̄r              ‘reef’
>

However, further evidence supporting oda as a term for ‘reef’ lies in two reconstructions
made by Ross Clark (1991), POc *paŋ-oda ‘gather shellfish and other seafood on the reef’
and *p-in-aŋ-oda ‘shellfish, seafood gathered on the reef’ (where *paŋ- is the verbal suffix
(underlying form *paN-) and -in- the noun-deriving infix discussed in vol. 1, p.29 and p.33
respectively). A selection of reflexes follows:

__pre__
 PT:     Motu              haoda            (V) ‘fish’
 SES: Bugotu               vagoda           ‘hunt for shellfish on the reef’
 SES: Gela                 vaŋoda           ‘collect food on the reef; anything on the reef; gatherer of reef food’
 SES: Sa’a                 haŋoda           ‘haliotis (sea ear) used as bait for crayfish’
 NCV: Mota                 vaŋona           ‘catch fish with a line; get shellfish on the reef or in a canoe’
 NCV: Nguna                (pa)vagoda       ‘look for shellfish’
 NCV: Nguna                vinagoda         ‘shellfish’
 NCV: Lonwolwol            fogōr            ‘look for fish (on reef etc.)
 SV: Anejom                a-haŋeþ          ‘forage on reef’

                                                                             The seascape      111


   The following reconstruction is attested only in SE Solomonic languages and Rotuman.

<
PEOc *papo ‘shore reef, fringing reef’
 SES: ’Are’are           haho                 ‘the shore reef’
 SES: Sa’a               haho                 ‘the shore reef’
 SES: Arosi              haho                 ‘encircling reef’
 Fij:  Rotuman           haho                 ‘coral reef’
>

    In addition to a general term for the reef, communities have terms for various zones
within the reef. The Admiralties language spoken on Andra, a sand cay with fringing reef,
distinguishes five major reef zones (McEldowney 1995:484–488): the windward reef slope
(awea kontoh); the windward reef crest (name not given) which is the most elevated
portion of the reef, the reef flat (lomat); the leeward reef margin consisting of alternating
series of coral patches and sand chutes (lonpai ‘sand chute’), and the leeward reef slope
(chechen). These in turn are divided into eleven subzones. For instance, the reef flat
(lomat) consists of two segments, the windward two thirds (lolomat) dominated by live
coral and largely exposed during the lower tides, and the leeward third (lonpapi) mainly
covered by sand deposits which remain largely submerged even during the lowest tides.
Also scattered through the reef flat are some areas of sea grass, referred to as korekt, and
small deep pools known as lolu.

    Raymond Firth in his Tikopia–English dictionary (1985:613) provides an illustration,
reproduced here as Figure 4, of a reef profile with main features labelled. Tikopia is a high
island with fringing reef. The features labelled include the ocean side of the reef (tua akau,
lit. ‘back of reef’), the reef crest (foŋa te akau), that part of the reef dry at low tide (roto tai
or tafora, ‘middle salt water/reef waters’), the tide line (vae tai ‘foot of salt water’), the
sandy beach (one ‘sand’), and the land above the beach (tofua ‘sandy dunes’).

112    Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

   A second Polynesian example comes from Niuatoputapu, an island with a volcanic
ridge and fringing reef located halfway between Tonga and Samoa. Dye (1983:246)
records a local division of the marine environment into four major biotopes: the reef flat
(namo) including littoral zones, the shallow salt-water lagoon (tahi), the living fringing and
barrier reef fronts (mataʔuluʔulu) and the open ocean (moana). The reef flat and reef edge
are further divided into leeward and windward zones, although Dye gives the local name
only for the windward reef flat, lafo-lafo.


                               Figure 4: Tikopia reef profile
                         (Firth 1985:613, reproduced with permission)

   Although we can be confident that there were Proto Oceanic names for various reef
zones, we have reconstructions only at lower levels. PPn *tuqa-hakau (from *tuqa ‘back’
+ *hakau ‘reef’) refers variously to the reef’s outer edge or to the ocean just beyond.
Marovo (MM), spoken on New Georgia, has a term tabikale ‘steep reef dropoff, into deep
water’. Lau (SES) also has an unrelated term, fafo-ʔile, for the seaward side of the reef
translated by Ivens as literally ‘overhanging the precipice’.

<
PPn *tuqa-hakau ‘ocean side of the reef, ocean beyond the reef’ (from PPn *tuqa ‘back’ + *hakau ‘reef’)
 Pn:    Rennellese      tuʔā                ‘side of reef facing the ocean’
 Pn:    Samoan          tua-aʔau            ‘outside the reef in deep water’
 Pn:    Tikopia         tua-akau            ‘open sea just beyond the reef’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        kua-au              ‘basin inside the reef; lagoon’
>

   A PCP reconstruction that may also apply to the reef’s outer edge is *qulu-qulu,
(possibly from POc/PPn *qulu ‘head’).

<
PCP *qulu-qulu ‘outer edge of shore reef where waves break’
 Fij:  Wayan            ululu              ‘pool or sandbar at mouth of a stream’
 Pn:   Niuean           ulu-ulu            ‘reef’
 Pn:     Tongan            ʔulu-ʔulu          ‘low-lying rocks adjoining shore or inner reef’
 Pn:     Niuatoputapu      (mata)ʔulu-ʔulu    ‘reef front’
 Pn:     E Futunan         ʔulu-ʔulu          ‘outer edge of reef where waves break’
 Pn:     Pukapukan         ulu-ulu(akau)      ‘outer reef, reef shelf’
 Pn:     Rennellese        ʔugu-ʔugu          ‘outer barrier reef’
 Pn:     K’marangi        | (mata) uru-uru |    ‘reef where waves come in and immediately beyond’
>

                                                                         The seascape      113


   Reflexes of POc *mata with its extended meaning ‘edge’ are sometimes used in
compounds to refer to reef edge. They include Molima (PT) mata-ʔipi ‘edge of reef and
beyond’ and Tikopia mata akau ‘edge of reef’ as well as the Niuatoputapu and
Kapingamarangi forms cited above.

   The windward and leeward sides of the reef were possibly described by the terms
reconstructed in the previous chapter for windward and leeward coasts, PEOc *liku
‘windward side’ and POc *ruru ‘calm, sheltered’ or by the terms for rough and sheltered
water, PEOc *tasik maquri(p) and PEOc *tasik mate respectively, which evidently could
be used to include also the weather and lee coasts of barrier islands (p.95).


4.3.3 Submerged reefs, rocks and sandbanks

   Isolated patches of submerged reef occur in the open sea between the outer (barrier) reef
and islands with shore reefs. These submerged reefs are dangerous to boats but are
valuable fishing grounds. In some languages they are referred to by the generic word for
‘coral reef’, in others there is a separate term for a submerged patch of reef or rocks. In the
following reconstruction, retention of the final vowel in Anejom and Mota suggests POc
final *-q (John Lynch pers. comm.).

<
POc *mwaloq ‘submerged rock or coral reef, coral head’
 NNG: Takia           mal              ‘reef, a chain of rocks, coral, or a ridge of sand at or near the surface of water’
 NNG: Manam           mʷalo(bo)        ‘sink, submerge, be drowned’
 MM: Nakanai          malo             ‘wandering stones or reefs that chase and sink canoes’
 MM: Lamasong         mano             ‘reef’
 MM: Bola             malo             ‘steep face of reef that goes down into the deep’
 SES: Lau             walo             ‘coral reef’
 SES: Kwaio           walo             ‘reef’
 SES: ’Are’are        maro             ‘submerged coral reef’
 SES: Sa’a            mʷalo            ‘sunken rock, reef at sea’
 SES: Arosi           mʷaro            ‘hidden rock or shoal’
 NCV: Mota            mʷalo            ‘a sunken rock where the sea breaks’
 NCV: Raga            malo             ‘reef’
 NCV: Nguna           mʷālo            ‘coral head’
 SV:   Anejom         in-mʷwoče         ‘coral reef’
 Pn:   Tongan         ŋalo             (VI) ‘sink, submerge’
>

114   Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


   POc *nuku ‘sand bank, sand spit, sandy ground’ is listed with full cognate set in
Chapter 3 (p.45). From two of its cognates, Bugotu and Bauan Fijian, we can also
reconstruct PEOc *nuku potu ‘point of reef or sandbank (presumably one that appears at
low tide)’ (*potu ‘appear, emerge’).

<
PEOc *|nuku potu| ‘point of reef or sandbank (that appears at low tide)’
 SES: Bugotu           | nuɣu votu |      ‘point of a reef’
 Fij:  Bauan           | nuku votu |      ‘sandbank’
>

  Both the SE Solomonic and Micronesian reflexes of PEOc *baro refer to flat rocks in or
near the sea.

<
PEOc *baro ‘flat rock or ledge (in or near sea)’
 SES: Lau                 baro            ‘flat rock in the sea’
 SES: Kwaio               balo            ‘flat reef stones’
 Mic: Kiribati            ba              ‘rock or ledge, continuous and solid’
 Mic: Marshallese         pɯaṛɯ         ‘rock’
 Mic: Puluwatese          porōw           ‘sandstone, calcified coral’
 Mic: Woleaian            poẓou          ‘beach rock, huge flat rock’
>

<
PPn *toka ‘rock, as a submerged rock or reef’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Niuean            toka           ‘bedrock of sea’
 Pn:    E Futunan         toka           ‘reef rock’
 Pn:    Pukapukan         toka           ‘coral growth’
 Pn:    Samoan            toʔa           ‘sea rock, reef’
 Pn:    Tahitian          toʔa           ‘rock, coral rock variety’
 Pn:    Hawaiian          koʔa           ‘coral, coral head’
 Pn:    Anutan            toka           ‘rock in sea, visible at low tide’
>

Reflexes of POc *baban ‘flat; flat rock, any hard flat surface’ are also used in some
languages to refer to flat rock surfaces underwater (see vol. 1, p.58).


4.3.4 Lagoon, sheltered water

   A feature of coral atolls and of some high islands with barrier reefs is the enclosed or
sheltered water usually referred to as a lagoon. These can be very large, examples being
the Marovo and Lau lagoons in the Solomons within which are located a number of
inhabited islands. Reflexes of POc *namo refer at times to the lagoon within a reef, and at
others to a deep hole in the reef. The common meaning ‘enclosed water’ is retained.

<
PMP *namaw ‘sheltered water: deep place in a river; cove, harbour, lagoon’ (ACD)
POc *namo ‘lagoon inside a reef; deep pool or hole in reef’
 PT:   Motu            nomu             ‘deeper place on shore reef’ (irreg. vowel change)
 MM: Kara              nam              ‘lagoon’
 SES: ’Are’are         nāmo             ‘lake; crevice, deep places in between the reefs’
 SES: Sa’a              namo             ‘land-locked harbour’
 SES:    Arosi             namo             ‘a landlocked, shallow lagoon near the shore’
 SES:    Lau               namo             ‘the lagoon inside a reef, near the reef (the deep) pools towards the shore’
 SES: Kwaio                namo             ‘lake, pool, deep place in river’
 NCV: Mota                 namʷo            ‘lagoon within a reef’
 Mic: Kiribati             namo             ‘harbour’
 Mic: Ponapean             nāmʷ             ‘deep place within the barrier reef; lagoon’
 Mic: Puluwatese           nɔ̄mʷ            ‘lagoon’
 Mic: Woleaian             ramw             ‘lagoon, lake’
 Fij: Wayan                namo             ‘deep-water hole within reef’
 Pn:  Niuean               namo             ‘lake, lagoon’
 Pn:  Tongan               namo             ‘lagoon’
 Pn:  Niuatoputapu         namo             ‘the reef flat’
 Pn:  E Futunan            namo             ‘large shallow area on reef’
 Pn:  Tokelauan            namo             ‘lagoon’
>

                                                                            The seascape      115


   In languages where the community’s activities are centred on the lagoon there are
usually dozens of terms for particular features. For instance, Akimichi (1978:305–306)
reports that Lau has terms for shallow water (mai or fafo-mai ‘low water’ or ‘above low
water’); intermediate depths (fafo-buso) and deep water (lobo). He adds a host of other
terms for features of the lagoon and its boundaries:

|     Rarabala is applied to the places where the passes and the lagoon meet and the shelf
|     area between the ocean and the lagoon, and where the depth is 6–7 m. Fakana aba also
|     is applied between passages and the lagoon, but only to those 4–5 m deep. Areas of the
|     lagoon where the depth and the nature of the bottom changes are also named. For
|     instance, fakana matakwa indicates the area intermediate between rarabala ‘reef shelf’
|     and asi matakwa ‘ocean’, fakana lobo is the off-shore border between lobo ‘lagoon
|     deeps’ and fafobuso ‘intermediate’ (fakana ‘outer terminal’), raona lobo is the in-
|     shore border between lobo and fafobuso (raona ‘inner terminal’).

    Small deep holes are a feature of the reef flat, but the only reconstructable term we have
other than *namo is PPn *loto (see below). Ross in Chapter 8 has reconstructed POc *loto
‘space within a concave object’, and lists POc *lalo, *lo- and *la-, all as relational nouns
referring to the space within something. Non-cognate terms include Andra (Adm) lolu
‘small deep pools in reef’, Lau (SES) lobo ‘a pool in the reef or in a river’ and Niuean (Pn)
lili ‘small hollow in the reef, as opposed to pools or puddles elsewhere’ and to deeper holes
in the reef, which in Niuean are called pupuo.

<
POc *loto ‘space within a concave object’ (see p.248 for full cognate set)
PPn *loto ‘pool, depression in reef; inside’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Niuean          loto               ‘small pool on the reef’
 Pn:    Tongan          loto               ‘hole or depression in coral reef or sea bed’
 Pn:    Rennellese      goto               ‘lagoon inside reef’
 Pn:    Samoan          loto               ‘pool, stretch of deep (or deeper) water’
 Pn:    Tikopia         roto               ‘lake, in interior of island’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan       roto               ‘depression in reef, pool’
 Pn:    Tahitian        roto               ‘lagoon’
 Pn:    Maori           roto               ‘lake, pool’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        loko(kai)          ‘lagoon’ (loko-loko ‘puddles’)
>

116     Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross

4.3.5 Channel in fringing reef

   A typical coral-fringed coastline or atoll has breaks in the reef which permit canoes to
move from sheltered water to the open sea and back. The Lau people refer to passages
connecting the ocean and the lagoon as dari (lit. ‘gullets’), while canoe traffic at low tide
uses a channel in the lagoon known as tafaʔa (Akimichi 1978:306). According to Fox’s
Lau dictionary, tafaʔa can also be used for a pass in a mountain range. Two POc terms are
reconstructable; *sawa(n,ŋ) ‘channel, passage’ continues PMP *sawaq ‘channel’, while
*mata (qi/ni) *sawa(n,ŋ) ‘channel in fringing reef giving passage to boats; landing place’
refers specifically to a reef opening or channel associated with landing canoes. POc
*wasas may have had a more abstract meaning, ‘space between’ or similar, but in at least
one of its reflexes refers to the passageway through a reef.

   The final nasal of *sawa(n,ŋ) is unexpected but attested in languages that retain POc
final consonants.

<
PMP *sawaq ‘channel’ (ACD)
POc *sawa(n,ŋ) ‘channel, passage’
 Adm: Wuvulu          tawa                ‘channel, passage between islands’
 Adm: Mussau          soana               ‘channel, passage through the reef’
 NNG: Yabem           sawa                ‘space, empty area’; (ADJ) ‘empty’
 PT:   Dobu           ʔawa                ‘channel through reef’
 PT:   Kiriwina       sawa                ‘area of reef etc possessed by a village as its traditional fishing ground’
 PT: Kukuya              awa(haha)        ‘valley; gap between two peaks’
 PT: Motu                dara             ‘lagoon in atoll’
 MM: Teop                hoa              ‘a place in a reef where a canoe can cross through breakers’
 MM:     Nduke           savaŋa           ‘passage’
 MM:     Roviana         savaŋa           ‘strait between two islands’
 SES:    Gela            hā               ‘open place’
 SES:    Bugotu          hā               ‘landing place’
 SES:    Arosi           tawa             ‘common prefix to names of landing places’
 SES:    ’Are’are        tawa             ‘channel in the shore reef; landing place; parting in the hair’
 SES:     Sa’a           tawa             ‘opening in the shore reef; used in the names of landing places’
 NCV: Mota               salava           ‘landing place’ (savala reinterpreted as sawa ‘landing place’ + lava ‘large’??)
 Mic:    Kiribati        rawa             ‘channel, passage through reef’
 Mic:    Mokilese        taw              ‘channel, passage through reef’
 Mic:    Carolinian      tawur            ‘channel, passage through reef’
 Mic:    Woleaian        tawa             ‘channel, harbour’
 Fij:    Wayan           ðawa             (N LOC) ‘(i) (when speaker is on coast) the beach or reef flat; (ii) (when speaker is inland) the coast, seaside’
PPn *awa ‘channel, passage through reef’ (Biggs & Clark 1993; loss of initial *s- is unexpected)
 Pn:   Niuean      ava                 ‘channel, opening in the reef; harbour’
 Pn:   Rennellese aba                  ‘pass, channel, canoe anchorage’
 Pn:   Samoan      ava                 ‘channel, passage (in the reef), gap’
 Pn:   Maori       awa                 ‘channel, landing place for canoes’
 Pn:   Hawaiian    awa                 ‘port, harbour; channel or passage, as through a reef’
>

                                                                      The seascape      117

<
POc *|mata (qi,ni) sawa(n,ŋ)| ‘channel in fringing reef giving passage to boats; landing place’ (Pawley & Pawley 1994; *mata ‘eye’, *qi or *ni ‘genitive linker’)
 Adm: Lou            mara-sa            ‘channel, passage between islands’
 Adm: Titan          mata-caw           ‘channel, passage between islands’
 Adm: Loniu          ma-caw             ‘ocean passage between two islands’
 SES: Gela          | mata ni hā |        ‘landing place’
 SES: Lau            mā-i-takwa         ‘landing place, opening’
 SES: Arosi          ma-e-tawa          ‘landing place where the sea is calm’
 SES: Kwaio         | mā li takwa |       ‘landing place’
 SES: ’Are’are        maritawa           ‘landing place, channel’
 Mic: Kiribati      | mata n rawa-rawa | ‘channel, gap in reef’
 Fij:    Bauan       mata-sawa          ‘landing place’
 Fij:    Wayan       mata-ðawa          ‘beach’
>

In similar vein, Nakanai has (la)mata-la-sakalu ‘passage through the reef’ (la article).

   POc *wasas seems basically to have denoted a space between two points, expanding its
meaning in Central Pacific languages to mean ‘distance at sea’ and then finally simply
‘ocean’.

<
POc *wasas ‘passage, space between, particularly at sea, distance between two points’
 PT:   Gumawana (neg)wasa                 ‘sea’
 PT:   Dobu          (a)wasasa            ‘passage in reef’
 PT:   Muyuw         (a)wasas             ‘space, gap, bay, gulf, inlet’
 NCV: Mota           wasa(ŋiu)            ‘narrow space or interval between’
 Fij:  Rotuman       vasa                 ‘far out at sea; stand between.’
 Fij:  Bauan         wasa-wasa            ‘sea, ocean’
PPn *wasa ‘open sea; space, distance, especially at sea’ (not in Biggs and Clark 1993, which has PPn *wā ‘interval of space or time’)
 Pn:    Tongan      vaha                   ‘space between; space, distance, especially at sea’
 Pn:    Tongan      vasa-loa               ‘wide expanse, esp. of sea’
 Pn:    Tongan      vaha-mohe              ‘so far apart that at least one night must be spent at sea in travelling from one to the other’ (of two islands, _mohe vaha_ ‘to sleep at sea’)
 Pn:    Rennellese basa                    ‘far, deep ocean’
 Pn:    Samoan      vasa                   ‘open sea’
 Pn:    Tikopia          vasa           ‘open space; empty space, esp. of cosmic kind; in marine context, ocean wastes’
 Pn:    E Futunan        vasa           ‘separation, interval’
 Pn:    Tokelauan        vasa           ‘open sea’
 Pn:    Mangareva        vaʔa           ‘space, interval’
>

118    Meredith Osmond, Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross


Where a Polynesian language includes reflexes of both *moana (p.94) and *wasa, (as for
example Tongan, Samoan and Tikopia do), the former generally refers to deep sea, the
latter to open unlimited sea.


4.4 Conclusion

   There can be no doubt that the physical world outlined by reconstructions in this chapter
is consistent with the nature of Lapita settlements as reconstructed by archaeologists and
described in Chapter 2. The reconstruction of terms for the marine physical environment in
this chapter is substantially better supported that the reconstruction of terms for the
terrestrial environment in Chapter 3. It includes a plethora of terms for the sea, for reefs,
and for features associated with them, with such detail as submerged reefs and
passageways through the reef for canoes, features relevant to human marine activities
rather than simply features that dominate the landscape. As we noted in the conclusion of
Chapter 3, the main reason that terms for certain landscape features are not reconstructable
is probably that early Oceanic speakers were on the move from one landscape to another.
By the same token, the fact that a reasonably detailed seascape terminology is
reconstructable implies (i) that the seascape and coastal environment remained fairly
constant even when the landscape changed; and (ii) that the sea and the coastline were of
crucial importance to the economies of Proto Oceanic speakers and their descendants. The
constancy of speakers’ coastal environments does not mean that they are identical on all
Pacific islands—for they are not. Rather, it implies that Oceanic speakers have had a
strong tendency to seek out coastal environments of a certain kind, namely those with
accessible reefs.



5              Meteorological phenomena

5.1 Introduction

   The reconstruction of any terminology brings its own peculiar problems. In this case,
the challenge was associated with the fact that meteorological conditions are not the same
throughout the Austronesian speaking area. It is a necessary inference that as Austronesian
speakers settled the regions they now occupy, they encountered new conditions which
required adaptations in their terminology. Thus the meanings of the terms in a given
language need to be related to the weather conditions which occur where the language is
spoken. For this reason, §2 gives a short account of Pacific wind systems, while in §3 the
weather patterns that Austronesian speakers encountered during their (largely eastward)
migrations are described. Less trivially, a hypothesis about the semantic structure of POc
speakers’ weather terminology must rest on a hypothesis about where POc was spoken—
and the same is true of any protolanguage for which weather terms are reconstructed. My
assumption here that POc was spoken in the Bismarck Archipelago. I return to this matter
in the concluding section.[1]

[1] This is a revised version of a paper published in Oceanic Linguistics 34:261–304 (1995). My thanks go to
  Andrew Pawley, Gerard Ward, Robert Blust, Robert Bugenhagen, Ann Chowning, Ross Clark, Mark
  Donohue, Alex François, Paul Geraghty, Charles Grimes, Waruno Mahdi and Meredith Osmond for their
  comments on earlier versions of this chapter.


5.2 Pacific wind systems

   The main planetary surface wind system affecting tropical regions consists of the trade
winds. The trades blow from the sub-tropical high-pressure zones of both hemispheres to
the equatorial low-pressure zone, but are deflected by the earth’s rotation (the Coriolis
effect) so that they blow from the southeast in the southern hemisphere and from the
northeast in the northern. The equatorial low-pressure zone where the southeast and
northeast trade winds meet is known as the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ),
colloquially ‘the Doldrums’.

120   Malcolm Ross

Map 10: Prevailing winds in the Indian and Pacific Oceans during the southern hemisphere winter (July)

Meteorological phenomena   121

Map 11: Prevailing winds in the Indian and Pacific Oceans during the southern hemisphere summer (January)

122     Malcolm Ross

    The trade winds and the ITCZ are two of the major ingredients of the weather in the
region inhabited by Austronesian speakers. Map 10 provides a general overview for the
period from (roughly) April to October.[2]

    The trades are noted for their consistency and force, especially over the eastern side of
the ocean (Hawaii has quite consistent trade wind flow, bringing sunshine with sporadic
cumulus and some humidity). Over the western Pacific (e.g. in the Bismarck Archipelago),
they are less consistent because of monsoonal and other disturbances. Near their high-
pressure source the trade winds are quite dry, but as they blow over the ocean towards the
Equator they pick up moisture which they deposit as orographic rain when they hit high
islands. Orographic rainfall occurs when air is forced to ascend the side of a mountain
range, and is particularly common where mountains lie parallel to the coast over which
blow moist winds from the sea. This is the situation on the large islands of the Philippines;
in Papua New Guinea on Manus Island, the tip of Papua, the Huon Peninsula and the
island of New Britain; in the New Georgia group and on Guadalcanal in the Solomons; and
on the high islands of Fiji. All of these experience heavy rain on their windward coasts
during the trades, whilst areas in the lee of their mountain ranges remain relatively dry. In
these areas the trades are therefore associated with rain (and sometimes with the rainiest
season), whereas in most Pacific locations they bring the dry season.

    The ITCZ has weather effects of a different kind. It is a low-pressure belt with relatively
little wind but various local perturbations. Incoming airflow has nowhere to go but up—in
large numbers of isolated columns. Each island becomes capped with a cloud build-up
resulting from evaporation due to the sun’s heat and there is thundery convectional rain,
but little lee effect. Thus the ITCZ is characterised by frequent, more or less windless
rainfall .

    On non-monsoonal Pacific islands (i.e. islands well away from the land masses of
Australia and mainland Asia) the main determinant of seasonal variation is the annual
movement of the ITCZ. Because most of the languages I am concerned with in this paper
are spoken in places south of the Equator, I will refer to the seasons as the southern
hemisphere ‘winter’ (SHW) and the southern hemisphere ‘summer’ (SHS), using these
terms also to refer to the northern hemisphere ‘summer’ and ‘winter’ respectively.

    The movement of the ITCZ roughly tracks the zenith sun southward in the SHS,
northward in the SHW. This movement is visible if one compares Maps 10 and 11. But
because the northern hemisphere has larger land masses than the south, forming the areas
of greatest heating, the mean annual position of the ITCZ generally lies well north of the
Equator. On the leading edge of the ITCZ (the south in the SHS, the north in the SHW),
tropical cyclones—‘typhoons’ in the northwest Pacific—sometimes arise. They are small
intense low-pressure systems. The wind whirls around them, often with torrential rainfall,
as they move away from the ITCZ. The movement of the ITCZ of course means that the
trades system also moves with the seasons: the southeast trades blow further north in the
SHW, the northeast trades further south in the SHS.

[2] This section is based on general information about wind systems culled from Monkhouse (1966:Chs. 16
  and 18), Hare (1984), Lamb (1984) and Irwin (1992) and on information about Pacific weather from
  Howlett (1967:36–38), Brookfield with Hart (1971:5–13), Cotter (1984); Gentilli (1984), and the Atlas of
  the South Pacific (New Zealand Government Printing Office, 1986). One difficulty that I encountered in
  writing this short conspectus was that there is disagreement in the literature about the weather patterns at
  some Pacific locations.

                                                                     Meteorological phenomena            123


   Among non-monsoonal Pacific islands there are just a few inhabited locations which lie
more or less constantly within the ITCZ despite its movement and hence have little
seasonal variation in temperature or rainfall. These include the northern islands of Kiribati
and the southern Marshall Islands between about 2˚N and 6˚N.

   On other non-monsoonal islands there are two asymmetric seasons—a ‘wet’ and stormy
season of about four months when the more intense effects of the ITCZ are felt, and a ‘dry’
and stormfree season during the rest of the year when the trade winds blow more or less
without interruption. However, the terms ‘wet’ and ‘dry’ are merely relative in many
Pacific locations, and exceptions to this pattern in any case occur where the trades bring
heavy orographic rain.

   In the southern hemisphere, when the ITCZ moves south in the SHS bringing the ‘wet’,
islands closer to the Equator (easternmost parts of the island of New Guinea and the
Bismarck Archipelago, the northern Solomons, Tuvalu, Tokelau) are directly within the
ITCZ and receive relatively windless convectional rains. When the wind does blow, it is
generally from the northwest. Islands further south (the southern Solomons, Vanuatu, Fiji,
Tonga, Samoa) experience variable weather as the southeast trades are sporadically
disrupted by westerly and northwesterly winds and tropical cyclones caused by
perturbations in the ITCZ.

   Non-monsoonal islands in the northern hemisphere experience the converse seasonal
regime. When the ITCZ moves north in the SHW, the northeast trades are interrupted by
wet weather with westerly and southwesterly winds and typhoons.

   The main disruptions to the regime described above are the seasonal reversals of
pressure and wind over the land masses and neighbouring oceans which are known as
monsoons, which affect the weather on the islands close to the land masses of Australia
and mainland Asia. Monsoons are caused by the summer heating of the land, which
effectively causes an extension of the equatorial low-pressure zone well north into Asia in
July and south into northern and central Australia in January.[3] The Asiatic low-pressure
area centring on northwestern India is so intense that it supersedes the equatorial low in the
SHW, so that the southeast trades cross the Equator and become the southwest monsoon in
peninsular India, whilst Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, China and Japan experience
winds from the south, varying to southeast and southwest as they blow in towards the
heated continent. This phenomenon can be seen in Map 10. The extension of the equatorial
low into Australia in the SHS is less intense, but is sufficient to draw the northeast trades
across the Equator, where they become the northwest monsoon, bringing cloudy and rainy
weather to Indonesia and western and southern parts of the island of New Guinea (see Map
11). From the perspective of this paper, the most important effect of the monsoon is that it
brings a marked seasonal reversal. Whereas the wet on non-monsoonal islands either
consists of the windless rain of the ITCZ or of variable, stormy weather, the monsoon
draws the trade winds across the Equator into the opposite hemisphere, eliminating the
doldrums and giving a clear reversal of wind direction.


[3] A geographer expert in this field would probably consider this definition an oversimplification, but it will
  suffice for present purposes (Gentilli 1984:389).

124    Malcolm Ross

5.3 The Austronesian weather experience[4]

   It is clear from this account of wind systems in Austronesian speaking areas that people
in different parts of the area experience somewhat different configurations of wind and
season. It follows from this that during their spread through the region, Austronesian
speakers encountered new weather conditions and had either to adapt old terms to new
conditions or to add new terms to their vocabularies.

   Table 3 summarises the seasonal conditions pertaining in various Austronesian speaking
areas. It is at best a crude summary, as local conditions may change considerably from one
side of an island to the other, especially where orographic rain occurs. The locations are set
out in very roughly the sequence in which I assume them (on the basis of Figure 1) to have
been occupied by Austronesian speakers.

   I assume that Proto Malayo-Polynesian was spoken in the northerly part of the
Philippines. Here the northeast trades prevail in the SHS, but are replaced by monsoonal
southerlies in the SHW. On the larger islands this means that east-facing slopes receive
orographic rain during the trades and convectional rains in the monsoon, whilst west-
facing slopes get orographic rain during the monsoon and have drought during the trades
(Alip & Borlaza 1984). During the monsoon typhoons often strike the northern and central
islands, but Benedek (1991:13) reports for the islands between the Philippines and Taiwan
that there is sometimes a period when the sea is becalmed and the heat becomes
intolerable.

   As Austronesian speakers moved south into Mindanao and then Borneo, Sulawesi and
perhaps Halmahera, they left the trade winds behind and entered the equatorial region with
two monsoon seasons where rain falls all the year round. North of the equator, the
accustomed monsoonal southerlies or southwesterlies continued in the SHW, but in the
SHS the northeast trades became the northeast monsoon as they accumulated moisture
prior to crossing the Equator. When our travellers crossed the Equator, they experienced a
reorientation of wind directions: the southerly monsoon of the SHW became decidedly
southeasterly or easterly, whilst the northeast monsoon of the SHS veered to the northwest
or west.

   Even in the equatorial zone, there is some seasonal variation in rainfall, the peak
occurring in the SHS when the airflow is from Asia to Australia. This difference became
more pronounced the further south and east (i.e. the closer to Australia) Austronesian
speakers moved, and Sumba and Timor are quite dry during the SHW when the easterly
monsoon brings dry air from Australia. By the time it reaches western Indonesia or moves
north of the Equator and becomes the southwest monsoon, its winds have become humid
and a source of rain, so that Sumatra and Borneo have no dry season, whilst Java divides
into a wet west (from orographic rain) and a dry east (McDivitt 1984).

   When Austronesian speakers travelled eastwards, probably from Halmahera, and moved
along the north coast of the island of New Guinea, they gradually experienced a lessening
of the effects of the southeast monsoon, as the central cordillera provided an increasingly
large obstacle to it. The northwest monsoon of the SHS continued to provide the rainy
season, however.


[4] As well as the sources indicated in the text, this section relied quite heavily on Brookfield and Hart
  (1971), Gentilli (1984), and the Atlas of the South Pacific (New Zealand Government Printing Office,
  1986).

                                                                    Meteorological phenomena             125


   As the migrants emerged from the lee of the cordillera onto the Huon Peninsula and
crossed to New Britain, two things occurred which presumably came to be reflected in POc
terminology. First, they had left the monsoonal region behind them, and during the SHS
they experienced the fairly windless rainy season of the ITCZ, with some sporadic
northwesterly winds. Secondly they encountered for the first time the southeast trades of
the SHW, during which the north coasts of the Huon Peninsula and of New Britain have
their dry season, whilst their south coasts suffer torrential orographic rain (Howlett
1967:36–38). As they later spread around the coasts and offshore islands of Papua New
Guinea and into the Bismarck Archipelago and then the New Georgia group of the
northwest Solomons, they continued to encounter this and other kinds of local variation,
but the southeast trades always continued to be the prevailing winds.

__pre__
              Table 3: Approximate summary of seasons in some Pacific locations
                                Southern Hemisphere Winter              Southern Hemisphere Summer

Philippines                     southwest monsoon, wet season;           northeast trades, dry season,
                                in centre and north some cyclones        orographic rain
Sumatra, Borneo                 in north, southwest monsoon;             in north, northeast monsoon
                                in south, southeast monsoon;             in south, northwest monsoon,
                                humid wind and rain                      clouds and rain
rest of Indonesia               southeast monsoon, dry season;           northwest monsoon,
                                in west, some orographic rain            clouds and rain
Manus Island, New Britain,      southeast trades,                        ITCZ
Huon Peninsula, tip of Papua    heavy orographic rain                    convectional rain
Papua New Guinea rest           southeast trades,                        ITCZ
                                dry season                               convectional rain
New Georgia group               southeast trades                         ITCZ
                                heavy orographic rain                    convectional rain
rest of northwest Solomon       southeast trades                         ITCZ
Islands                         dry season                               convectional rain
southeast Solomon Islands,      southeast trades                         variable stormy weather
Vanuatu, New Caledonia          dry season                               some cyclones
Fiji                            southeast trades, dry season             variable stormy weather
                                heavy orographic rain                    some cyclones
Tonga, Samoa, Wallis, Futuna,   southeast trades                         variable stormy weather
Cooks, Tahiti, Tuamotus         dry season                               some cyclones
Tuvalu, Tokelau, southern       southeast trades                         ITCZ
Gilberts, Nauru                 humid wind, some rain                    convectional rain
northern Gilberts,              ITCZ                                     ITCZ
southern Marshalls              convectional rain                        convectional rain
northern Marshalls,             variable stormy weather                  northeast trades
Carolines                                                                some rain
Hawaii                          northeast trades                         northeast trades
                                some orographic rain                     some orographic rain

126     Malcolm Ross


   As Oceanic speakers moved further into the Pacific, the lie of the islands ensured that
they first also moved further south as well as east. In the southeast Solomons, Vanuatu,
New Caledonia, Fiji and Samoa this took them right out of the ITCZ into the southern
tropical zone where the rainy season of the SHS is relatively short (around four months)
and the winds are variable: sometimes the southeast trades continue to penetrate, but often
they are disrupted by stormy northwesterlies and sometimes by cyclones. There is a long
dry season when the southeast trades blow consistently, except when they deposit
orographic rain on high islands, particularly in Fiji.

    It was from somewhere in this zone that Oceanic speakers moved northwards into
Micronesia. In Tuvalu and the southern Gilberts[5] they encountered a climate similar to that
of the smaller islands in the Bismarcks: the southeast trades continue to predominate, but
become more moist nearer to the Equator, and the northwesterlies and cyclones give way
again to the much less windy wet season of the ITCZ. Further north, in the northern
Gilberts and southern Marshalls, they found themselves permanently in the ITCZ, with
relatively little wind and a good measure of convectional rain. Finally, in the scattered
archipelagoes of the northern tropical zone—the northern Marshalls, the Carolines and the
Marianas—they left the ITCZ to their south and entered a region in which the climate is
the converse of that in the southern tropical zone. Here in nuclear Micronesia there is a
long dry season when the northeast trades prevail in the SHS and a short rainy season with
variable winds and storms in the SHW.

    In the sections below I set out my reconstructions of POc terms referring to and
associated with winds and the weather.

[5] Tuvalu is today Polynesian speaking, but may well once have been colonised by the people who first
  entered the Gilberts. I use the term ‘Gilberts’ here to denote the island group, rather than ‘Kiribati’, which
  denotes the national entity that also includes the Phoenix and Line Islands.


5.4 Winds

5.4.1 Wind and wind strengths

  Winds seem to have been classified in two ways in POc. In this section I will present
generic terms for wind and wind strengths, in the next section terms for seasonal winds and
wind directions.

  The generic term for ‘wind’ in POc was *aŋin, which continues PMP *haŋin.

<
PMP *haŋin ‘air, wind’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *aŋin ‘wind’
 NNG: Mangap               yaŋ                            ‘rain’
 NNG: Bing                 yaŋ                            ‘wind’
 PT:     Minaveha          yagina                         ‘wind’
 PT:     Wedau             ðaɣina                         ‘wind’
 PT:     Balawaia          aɣi                            ‘wind’
 PT:     Motu              lai                            ‘wind’
 MM: Konomala              yaŋin                          ‘wind’
 NCV: Port Sandwich        n-ean                          ‘wind’
 Mic:    Kiribati          aŋ                             ‘wind’
 Mic:    Woleaian          yaŋ                            ‘wind’
 Fij:   Bauan             ðaŋi             ‘wind’
 Pn:    Tongan            aŋi              ‘(wind, breeze) blow’
 Pn:    Samoan            aŋi              ‘(wind, breeze) blow’
>

                                                           Meteorological phenomena       127


   Three terms for winds of differing strengths are reconstructable. POc *jaŋi referred to a
strong wind, *sau/*sau-ŋ(a) and *mur[i,e] to breezes. It seems that *sau was a verb (‘blow
freshly’), and *sau-ŋ(a) a nominalisation referring to the breeze itself. I cannot reconstruct
a difference in meaning between *sau and *mur[i,e].

<
POc *jaŋi (N) ‘strong wind’; (?) (V) ‘be windy’
 NNG: Bing               sāŋ              ‘wind strong directly against’
 NNG: Mapos Buang saŋ                     ‘strong winds which blow up the valley around November’
 SES: Arosi              daŋi             ‘wind’
 SES: Sa’a               deŋi             ‘wind’
 NCal: Nemi              dān              ‘wind’
 Pn:    Tongan           (ma)taŋi         (N) ‘wind’; (V) ‘be windy’
 Pn:    Samoan           (ma)taŋi         (N) ‘wind’; (V) ‘be windy, stormy’
>

<
POc *sau (V) ‘(breeze) blow’; (?) (N) ‘breeze’
POc *sau-ŋ(a) (N) ‘breeze’
 Adm: Lou                soso             ‘wind, breeze’
 Adm: Titan              só-soú-n         ‘wind from a particular direction’
 NNG: Kilenge            -sou             ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Bilibil            sau              ‘rain’
 NNG: Poeng              saū              ‘wind; large, damaging with black, foreboding sky’
 MM: Solos               seou-ŋ           ‘wind’
 SES: Gela               sau(toŋa)        ‘north wind’
 Fij:  Wayan             ðau-ðau          ‘light to moderate wind, of early mornings and early evenings’
 Fij:  Bauan             ðau-ðau          ‘land breeze’
 Pn:   Rapanui           hau              ‘breeze, wind; blow freshly; cool’
 Pn:   Hawaiian          hau              ‘cool breeze’
 Pn:   Maori             hau              ‘wind, breeze’
 Pn:   W Futunan         sau              ‘(wind) blow; sound of wind’
>

<
POc *mur[i,e] (N) ‘breeze’; (V) ‘blow gently’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono) muru                  ‘breeze’
 NNG: Mangap             mīri            ‘wind’
 NNG: Mangap             mir-mīri        ‘little breeze’
 NNG: Kilenge            na-mule         ‘wind’
 NNG: Yabem              mu              ‘wind’
 MM: Tabar               mur             ‘wind’
 Fij:  Rotuman           mure            ‘blow gently’
 Fij:  Bauan             mudre           (V) ‘(wind) blow gently’; (N) ‘cool breeze’; (ADJ) ‘cool, breezy’ (-dr- for expected *-r-)
 Fij:       Wayan              mure               ‘(breeze) blow lightly’
 Pn:        Maori              muri-muri          ‘breeze’
 Pn:        Tuamotuan          mure               ‘fail (of breath)’
>

The terms below may also reflect POc *mur[i,e], but with a change in meaning.

__pre__
 NNG: Amara             o-mur          ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Bing              mur-mōriy      ‘wind which blows strongly from the west, often causing damage’
 PT:    Motu            miri(gini)     ‘north wind’
 PT:    Mekeo           mili(kini)     ‘north wind’

The Mangap, Motu and Mekeo terms have -i- where -u- is expected. This may reflect
vowel assimilation.

128       Malcolm Ross


   Another term for wind was POc *mal(i,e)u, but it is not possible to determine its
meaning precisely from its reflexes. In Proto Micronesian, it referred to a typhoon, but this
was presumably its denotation after the ancestral Micronesians crossed out of the ITCZ
into the northern hemisphere.

<
POc *mal(i,e)u ‘wind’
 SJ:   Sobei                   maro                   ‘wind’ (-o < *-ew)
 PT:   Tawala                  malewa                 ‘favourable wind, wind from behind’[6]
 MM: Lavongai                  malu                   ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Kara (West)               maliu                  ‘wind’
 MM: Nalik                     maliu                  ‘wind’
 MM: Notsi                     mal                    ‘wind’
 MM: Madak                     man-man                ‘wind’
 MM: Maringe                   maloa                  ‘air, open space’ (-oa < *-ewa)
 Mic: Mokilese                 mɛl-mɛl                ‘storm, typhoon’
 Mic: Ponapean                 mɛli-mɛl               ‘windstorm, typhoon’
 Mic: Woleaian                 mari-mer               ‘storm, typhoon’
>

[6] Tawala malewa includes the final -a which is added after a final consonant, indicating that at an interstage
  ancestral to Tawala *malew, rather than *maleu, should be reconstructed.

   In Ross (1995c) I wrote:

|        my attempts to reconstruct POc terms for ‘typhoon’, ‘cyclone’ and ‘whirlwind’ have
|        failed completely. On reflection, this is not surprising, as I have hypothesised that POc
|        was spoken in the Bismarcks—too close to the Equator and to the ITCZ to be affected
|        by winds of this kind.

Lynch (1997), however, points out that there is a South Vanuatu reflex of PAn *baRiuS
‘typhoon’, and that POc *paRiu ‘cyclone’ is therefore reconstructable. The lack of reflexes
elsewhere is perhaps to be attributed, then, to their loss in languages whose speakers do not
normally experience cyclones.

<
PAn *baRiuS ‘typhoon’
POc *paRiu ‘cyclone’
 SV: Anejom           (n)eheyo                    ‘cyclone, hurricane’
>

                                                                 Meteorological phenomena          129


   Although a number of etyma referrring to a wind seem to have been used both as a noun
denoting that wind and as a verb expressing the action of the particular wind, there are also
several reconstructable POc terms which seem to have been primarily used as verbs of
blowing with reference to winds or people.

   Three of these, *upi, *ipu and *ip(w)i, are clearly related to each other phonologically.
The pair *upi and *ipu ‘blow’ are strikingly parallel to POc *ubi/*ibu ‘half coconut shell
used as a drinking cup’, and it is possible that both pairs were generated at the same time
by the application of a single rule (or similar wordplay) to the pre-existing member of each
pair. In the case of POc *upi/*ipu ‘blow’, it seems likely that the pre-existing member was
*ipu, since it can be traced back to PMP *ibut ‘breeze, draught of wind’, and that *upi was
the late-generated form. However, its generation predates POc, as Blust has reconstructed
PCEMP *upi ‘(wind, person) blow’ (1993).[7] Similarly, the generation of the pair *ubi/*ibu
‘half coconut shell …’ also predates POc, as both forms are reconstructable in Proto
Eastern Malayo-Polynesian (Blust 1978a).

[7] Blust (1993) derives PCEMP *upi from PMP *hiup ‘blow’, and it is possible that the generation of pairs
  was triggered by the existence of similar forms with close meanings.

<
PCEMP *upi ‘(wind, person) blow’ (Blust 1993)
POc *upi ‘(wind, person) blow’ (cf. vol. 1, pp.107–108)
 Adm: Seimat           uhi               ‘blow on the fire’
 NNG: Mangap           -wi               ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Apalik           uwi               ‘northwest monsoon’
 NNG: Takia            -wi               ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Yabem            yu                ‘(s.o.) blow’
 NNG: Kaiwa            u                 ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Misim            yuv               ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Vehes            vin               ‘wind’
 NNG: Mangga           va-vi             ‘wind’
 NNG: Medebur          -wi               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Tabar             uvi               ‘(wind) blow’
 SES: Gela             uvi-uvi           ‘blow with the breath, play pipes’
 SES: Lau              ufi               ‘blow with the mouth; blow a conch or panpipes’
 SES: Arosi            uhi               ‘blow, breathe on’
 NCV: Mota             uw                ‘blow with the mouth, or of wind’
 NCV: Raga             uvi               ‘blow’
 NCV: Paamese          uhi               ‘blow’
 Fij:  Wayan           uvi, uvu          ‘(fire, flute) be blown with the mouth, (ball, balloon) inflated, blown up’
 Fij:  Wayan           uvi               ‘blow s.t. with the mouth’
>

   In a number of NNG languages in the region of the Vitiaz Strait and the Huon Gulf, a
nominalised form of *upi ‘blow’ has become the generic term for ‘wind’ (see vol. 1,
pp.33–34 with regard to nominalising morphology):



130    Malcolm Ross

<
PNNG *upi-ŋ(a) ‘wind’
 NNG: Atui            uvin                ‘wind’
 NNG: Kaiwa           (wa)vin             ‘wind’
 NNG: Duwet           fiŋ-fiŋ             ‘wind’
 NNG: Danggal         fiŋ                 ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Silisili        fiᵑg                ‘wind’
 NNG: Adzera          fi-fiŋ              ‘strong, fierce wind’
>

<
PMP *ibut ‘breeze, draught of wind’ (ACD)
POc *ipu ‘(wind) blow’ (cf. vol. 1, pp.107–108)
 NNG: Bing             yu                ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Sissano          -iu               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Tinputz           viu               ‘(wind) blow’ (metathesis)
 MM: Mono              ihu               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Lungga            ivu               ‘blow’
 MM: Roviana           ivu-a             ‘blow on (fire), blow into (conch)’
 MM: Maringe           ifu               ‘blow’
 SES: Bugotu           ifu               ‘blow (fire, pan-pipes)’
>

It seems likely that the form *ip(w)i is the result of an idiosyncratic change to *upi, *ipu or
both. A couple of forms, NNG: Kaulong e-ip ‘the wind’ and MM: Nalik if ‘(wind) blow’,
may reflect either *ipu or *ip(w)i.

<
POc *ip(w)i ‘(wind, person) blow’
 MM: Ramoaaina          ipi               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Tolai              ipi               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Teop               ivi               ‘(wind) blow’
 Pn:    Tongan          ifi               ‘blow with the mouth; blow or blow into or play (a whistle, or wind instrument)’
 Pn:     Samoan          ifi              ‘blow smoke’
 Pn:     Maori           ihi              ‘blow, of wind’
>

   Two other forms meaning ‘blow’ are also reconstructable. These are also formally
rather similar to each other, but this similarity evidently dates back to well before the
genesis of POc. I know of no proper non-Oceanic cognates of POc *p(w)usi, but it appears
to reflect the same monosyllabic root (*bus) as PMP *qembus ‘snort, pant’ (ACD) (with
regard to monosyllabic roots, see vol. 1, pp.27–28).

<
POc *p(w)usi ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Aria              -pu               ‘(wind) blow’
 NNG: Sengseng          pe-puh            ‘wind’
 NNG: Numbami           pusie             ‘(wind) blow ’
 NNG: Patep             plu               ‘blow ’
 MM: Konomala           fus               ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Minigir            vusu              ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Tolai              vu                ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Hahon              vus               ‘wind’
 MM:    Tinputz         vuh           ‘wind’
 SV:    Sye             o-vosi        ‘wind’ (Lynch 1978b)
 Pn:    Rennellese      pusi          ‘(wind) blow; blow (flute)’
 Pn:    Maori           pu-puhi       ‘blow (as the wind, a whale); shoot (as a gun)’
>

The initial p- of the Pn items reflects POc *b- or *pw-: hence the suggestion that there was
a POc alternant *pwusi.

                                                         Meteorological phenomena       131

<
PAn *pu+put ‘blow’ (Zorc 1994)
PMP *putput ‘puff, blow suddenly and hard’
POc *(pu)put ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Kara (West) fifit              ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Siar              fut          ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Selau             wut          ‘(wind) blow’
 MM: Papapana          pute         ‘wind’
>

5.4.2 Seasonal winds

   If POc speakers lived in the Bismarcks, then they encountered two seasons: the dry,
when the southeast trades blew with reasonable consistency, and the wet, when there were
sporadic northwesterly winds. The POc terms for the winds associated with these seasons
were respectively *raki and *apaRat. They may also have referred to the seasons, with
typical weather and wind direction as inevitable components of their meanings, as well as
having associations with navigability and agriculture. Modern uses of wind terms suggest
strongly that they also served as terms for cardinal directions in POc, and that the two
major wind directions were perhaps the only cardinal directions for POc speakers (Ch. 8,
§1).

   POc *raki ‘southeast trades’ has no obvious non-Oceanic cognates. This is hardly
surprising. When Austronesian speakers came out of the lee of the New Guinea cordillera
into the Bismarcks and encountered the southeast trades of the SHW and the attendant dry
season, they met what was for them a new phenomenon. The only part of Indonesia with a
similar season is in the southeast in the area around Timor, where the southeast monsoon
brings a dry season. But it is unlikely that people ancestral to Oceanic speakers migrated
via that area.

   POc *raki probably also denoted the dry season when the southeast trades blow. In the
Admiralties its reflex refers to a northeasterly wind, in Micronesia to the southerly
direction and to the summer season (SHW) when the breadfruit grow. In both cases, the
seasonal conditions familiar to POc speakers do not occur. On Manus Island in the
Admiralties, there is a double rainfall maximum and no true dry season. Micronesia lies
north of the Equator and has seasons the converse of those of POc. In both cases, reflexes
of *raki have been applied to a new referent. In the Admiralties it has retained its
association with a cooler wind and now applies to a cool wind from the mountains of
Manus Island. In Micronesia it refers to the same period of the year and roughly the same
wind direction as in POc, but because of the northern tropical location it now refers to the
wet season rather than the dry. It is noteworthy, however, that in both the Admiralties and
Micronesia, *raki continues to have a referent which is considered to be pleasant—in the
Admiralties because the wind is cool, in Micronesia because the season produces
breadfruit.

132   Malcolm Ross

   A selection of data supporting the reconstruction of *raki follows.

<
POc *raki ‘southeast trades’ (probably also ‘dry season when the southeast trades blow’)
 Adm: Lou               ra          ‘northeast, northeast wind’
 Adm: Titan            | n ray |      ‘wind from the mainland, mountain breeze, blows at night’
 NNG: Kove              hai         ‘southeast trade, year’
 NNG: Bariai            rai         ‘year’
 NNG: Gitua             rak         ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Lukep             rai         ‘year’
 NNG: Mangap            rak-rak     ‘fresh morning (during windy season)’
 NNG: Tami              lai         ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Maleu             na-lai      ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Ali               rai         ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Tumleo            riei        ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Vitu               raɣi        ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Bulu               laɣi        ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Tigak              rei         ‘wind’
 NCV: Lewo              lagi(pesoi) ‘east wind ’
 Mic: Marshallese       ṛɯak             ‘south, summer’
 Mic: Ponapean          rāk         ‘breadfruit season, season of plenty’
 Mic: Woleaian          ẓaxi       ‘year, age, summer season’
 Fij:  Wayan            draki       ‘weather’
 Fij:  Bauan            draki       ‘weather’
PPn *laki ‘southwesterly quandrant, southwest wind and weather associated with it’
 Pn:    Niuean         laki        ‘west’
 Pn:    E Uvean        laki        ‘southeast or southwest wind’
 Pn:    Pukapukan      laki        ‘southwest wind’
 Pn:    Samoan         laʔi        ‘southwest veering to northwest’
 Pn:    Tokelauan      laki        ‘hurricane season and westerly quarter winds that blow during it’
 Pn:    Anutan         laki        ‘the whole southwestern quadrant; westerly or southwesterly wind; the period of the year when the wind is from that quarter’
 Pn:    Rennellese     gaki        (N) ‘west or southwest wind’; (V) ‘(of this wind) blow’
 Pn:    Takuu          laki        ‘season of westerly winds’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       laʔi        ‘calm, stillness, quiet (of sea, sky, wind)’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan raki             ‘wind from southwesterly quadrant’
>

   Much of the data for the reconstruction of PPn wind directions is drawn from Biggs and
Clark (1993), but the glosses of the protoforms are mine. For example, for PPn *laki Biggs
and Clark give the gloss ‘the westerly quarter, wind from that quarter and weather
associated with it’. If this were its denotation, we might expect reflexes to range in
meaning between northwest and southwest, but no reflex denotes a direction north of west.
From this I infer that it denoted the southwesterly quadrant. Similar argumentation applies
to PPn *toŋa ‘southeasterly quadrant, southeast wind’ and PPn *tokelau ‘northwesterly
quadrant, north-west winds’ below.

                                                         Meteorological phenomena       133

   POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind’ has non-Oceanic cognates. It is descended from PMP
*habaRat, and from the reflexes listed below, I infer that this meant ‘southwest monsoon,
wet season’ in its homeland. However, in Mindanao, where Manobo is spoken, there are
two monsoons, the southwest and the northeast. Because the northeast monsoon is a much
moistened version of the northeast trades, it evidently blows harder that the southwest
monsoon and has taken over the ‘monsoon/wet season’ label. When the northeast monsoon
changes direction to northwest south of the Equator, it retains the same label right across
Indonesia, and POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind’ is its natural continuation in the Bismarcks.

<
PAn *SabaRat ‘(?) south wind’ (ACD; Zorc 1994: ‘monsoon wind’)
PMP *habaRat ‘west monsoon’ (Dempwolff 1938, ACD)
 WMP: Belau            ŋəbarð         ‘west wind’ (Josephs 1990)
 WMP: Yami             kavalat-an     ‘west or southwest wind’ (Benedek 1991)
 WMP: Itbayat          havayat        ‘west wind (blows from late July to September)’
 WMP: Tagalog          habagat        ‘west or southwest wind; monsoon’
 WMP: Bikol            habagat        ‘south wind’
 WMP: Cebuano          habagat        ‘strong wind that hits Cebu from the southwest, common from June to September’
 WMP: Manobo           evaɣat         ‘the strongest wind: the northeast monsoon’ (Elkins 1968)
 WMP: Tiruray          barat          ‘the rainy season’
 WMP: Aceh             barat          ‘west, westerly’
 WMP: Old Javanese barat              ‘strong wind, storm; west’
 WMP: Wolio            bara           ‘west, west monsoon’
 CMP: Manggarai        warat          ‘rainy season (primarily in January and February); violent storm’
 CMP: Buru             fahat          ‘west monsoon’
 SHWNG: Numfor         barek          ‘west’
 SHWNG: Numfor         (wam)barek     ‘west wind or monsoon’
>

   POc *apaRat probably also denoted the accompanying wet season (SHS). The glosses
of a number of its reflexes denote the wind direction rather than the season, whereas we
might expect a priori that the word would refer primarily to the season rather than to the
wind, as the latter does not blow consistently. This may be a product of elicitation
techniques which asked for wind names rather than for seasons. In any case, there is no
serious competitor for ‘wet season’, and a sufficient spread of reflexes referring to the
season, to rain, to rough seas and to storms to establish *apaRat as the word for the season
as well as for the wind. In Central Pacific languages (Fijian and Polynesian) reflexes refer
to the storms and cyclones associated with the wet in the southern tropical zone.

<
PMP *habaRat ‘west monsoon’ (Dempwolff 1938, ACD)
POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind; wet season when northwesterlies blow and sea is rough’
 Adm: Mussau          apae            ‘strong wind, storm wind’
 Adm: Wuvulu          afā             ‘northwest wind’
 Adm: Drehet            yaha            ‘stormy season, generally from November to March; strong wind and rough sea from the northwest’
 NNG: Kove              awaha           ‘rain’
 NNG: Gitua             yavara          ‘north wind’
 NNG: Tami              yawal           ‘northwest wind’
 NNG: Kairiru           yavar           ‘northwest wind, makes sea rough’
 PT:  Muyuw             yavat           ‘west, west wind’
 PT:  Iduna             yavalata        ‘rains with wind from the northwest in February and March’
 PT:   Tawala           yawalata        ‘light rain from southwest during dry season’
 PT:   Motu             lahara          ‘northwest wind, season of northwest wind’
 MM: Bali               vurata          ‘northwest wind’
 MM: Nakanai            le-avala        ‘year, wet season’
 MM: Kara (East)        yefet           ‘wet season’
 MM: Barok              awat            ‘year’
 MM: Siar               yahrat          ‘year’
 MM: Tinputz            ivat            ‘strong wind’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa          (w)āvac         ‘north wind’ (Lynch pers. comm.)
 NCal: Pije             (y)avec         ‘north wind’
 NCal: Fwâi             (y)avec         ‘north wind’
 NCal: Nemi             (y)avec, (y)aec ‘north wind’
 NCal: Jawe             (y)aec          ‘north wind’
>

134   Malcolm Ross

<
PCP *avā ‘storm, gale, hurricane’
 Fij:  Wayan            ðavā             ‘storm, strong wind bringing rain’
 Pn:   Tongan           afā              ‘hurricane, gale or very severe storm’
 Pn:   Niuean           afā              ‘storm, hurricane, gale’
 Pn:   Samoan           afā              ‘storm, hurricane’
 Pn:   Tokelauan        afā              ‘storm, hurricane’
 Pn:   E Futunan        afā              ‘storm, hurricane’
 Pn:   E Uvean          afā              ‘storm, hurricane’
 Pn:   Rennellese       ahā              ‘storm, hurricane’
 Pn:   W Futunan        afa              ‘gale, storm winds, hurricane winds’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan        āfā              ‘(storm) break forth violently’
 Pn:   Maori            āfā              ‘storm, hurricane’
>

   Related forms also occur in Southeast Solomonic and Micronesian languages, but all
appear to be borrowed rather than directly inherited. The Southeast Solomonic forms
below reflect a (non-existent) POc **awaRosi rather than *apaRat. They are evidently the
outcome of borrowing from a Western Oceanic language where POc final consonants were
retained with paragogic *-i (the only group of languages which satisfy this criterion today
are the Suauic languages of the Papuan Tip, and they are geographically somewhat
unlikely candidates for the source).

                                                                Meteorological phenomena         135

__pre__
 SES: Arosi                worosi             ‘northwest gale’
 SES: ’Are’are             awarosi            ‘the northwest wind’
 SES: Sa’a                 awalosi            ‘northwest wind’

   The Micronesian forms are odd in two ways. Firstly, if sound correspondences are
applied to infer their putative POc ancestor, the result is **barat[a], a form which is
certainly not POc, but which is consistent with an early borrowing from a WMP language,
perhaps a Philippine language. Its initial *b- and final *-t reflect the corresponding
phonemes of PMP *habaRat. Certain Philippine languages also reflect PMP *habaRat-an
with the locative suffix *-an, e.g. Cebuano habagatan ‘southwest’, and the suffix may be
the source of the final -a of Trukic and Woleaian forms. Secondly, the forms mean
‘(northeast) trade wind’, not, as we might here expect, something like ‘southwest storm
wind’:

__pre__
 Mic: Ponapean              (nan-)par     ‘tradewind season’
 Mic: Proto Trukic          *parata       ‘tradewind’
 Mic: L. Mortlockese paras                ‘rain that comes in due to wind’
  Mic: Woleaian             paẓasa       ‘tradewind’

   Blust (ACD) takes it that PMP *habaRat ‘southwest monsoon season, wet season’
formed a pair with PMP *timuR, implying that the latter referred to the northeast trades
and the dry season. However, such a pairing seems to have arisen among the WMP
languages of Indonesia, where reflexes of *habaRat mean ‘west’ and of *timuR ‘east’. In
Philippine languages, where we might expect the PMP sense to be retained, reflexes of
*timuR refer to a south or east wind, but not a monsoonal wind. (The PMP term for
northeast trades seems to have been *qamíh-an,[8] lost when Austronesian speakers crossed
into the southern hemisphere.) PMP *timuR also has reflexes in Oceanic languages, and
POc *timu(R) seems to have meant ‘wind bringing light rain’. In Papuan Tip languages
forms which appear to reflect *timu(R) have undergone a curious semantic shift and now
mean ‘island’ (Ch. 3, §2.2). Relevant data are listed below.

[8] Tsuchida (1976) reconstructs PAn *qamiS ‘north wind’. Philippine reflexes indicate that the locative
  suffix *-an had been appended in PMP, giving *qamíh-an, reflected in Isneg amiyān ‘monsoon wind’,
  Casiguran Dumagat amian ‘northeast wind’, Tagalog amíhan ‘northeast wind’, Bikol amíhan ‘northeast
  trade wind’, Maranao amian ‘northwest wind’.

<
PMP *timuR ‘south or east wind’ (Dempwolff 1938: ‘wind bringing rain’; Zorc 1994: ‘rain wind from southeast’)
 WMP: Belau             ðíməs         ‘south wind’ (Josephs 1990)
 WMP: Tagalog           tīmog         ‘south’
 WMP: Cebuano           tímug         ‘wind that hits Cebu from the east’ (Wolff 1972)
 WMP: Bilaan            timul         ‘south’
 WMP: Malagasy          a-tsimu       ‘south’
 WMP: Aceh              timu          ‘east’
 WMP: Indonesian        timur         ‘east’
 WMP: Sasak             timuq         ‘east’
 CMP: Buru              timo          ‘east’
>

136   Malcolm Ross

<
POc *timu(R) ‘wind bringing light rain’
 NNG: Takia             tim               ‘wind’
 NNG: Ali               tim               ‘dew’
 PT:    Iduna           himula            ‘island ’
 PT:    Dobu            simula            ‘island ’
 PT:    Motu            si-simu           ‘light shower’
 MM: Ramoaaina          timtim            ‘drizzle; of rain’
 Pn:    Samoan          timu              ‘be rainy, rain’
 Pn:    Anutan          timu              ‘light rain, drizzle’
 Pn:    Tongan          jimu-jimu         ‘heavy blowing, almost a hurricane’
>

   In Fijian and Polynesian languages the reflexes of POc *raki ‘southeast trades’ and
*apaRat ‘northwest wind’ listed above reflect shifts in meaning. In Fijian languages,
reflexes of *raki mean ‘weather’, whilst Polynesian reflexes point to PPn *laki
‘southwesterly quandrant, southwest wind and weather associated with it’ (Biggs & Clark
1993), i.e. a shift from southeast to southwest. In both Fijian and Polynesian languages,
reflexes of POc *apaRat point to PCP *avā ‘storm, gale, hurricane’.

   The closest functional equivalents to POc *raki and *apaRat in PPn were evidently PPn
*toŋa ‘southeasterly quadrant, southeast wind’ and PPn *tokelau ‘northwesterly quadrant,
northwest winds’. Whereas the POc terms evidently referred prototypically to seasonal
winds, the central meanings of the PPn terms seem to have been winds from a certain
portion—apparently a quadrant—of the compass, as the reflexes below indicate and as
Åkerblom (1968:52) has observed. In Rarotongan, for example, toŋa refers to winds from
south-by-west to south-southeast (but prototypically to south), tokerau to winds from
northwest-by-north to west-northwest (prototypically to northwest); in Pukapukan toŋa
refers to winds from south-by-east to southeast-by-south (but prototypically to south-
southeast), tokelau to winds from north to northwest (Lewis 1972:74–75). Åkerblom goes
a step further and suggests that neither term refers specifically to the trade wind. However,
he recognises that throughout Polynesia a feature of the meaning of each is the prevailing
wind and that they are often used with reference to the southeast trades and to northwest
storm winds.

   The ancestry of PPn *toŋa is unclear, and I return to this below. Data supporting its
reconstruction are as follows:

<
PPn *toŋa ‘southeasterly quadrant, southeast wind’
 Pn:    Niuean          toŋa             ‘south wind’
 Pn:    Tongan          toŋa             (N) ‘south’; (V) ‘(wind) be south’
 Pn:    E Uvean         toŋa             ‘south wind’
 Pn:    E Futuna        toŋa             ‘south (wind)’
 Pn:    Pukapukan       toŋa             ‘south-southeast wind’ (Lewis 1972:75)
 Pn:    Rennellese      toŋa             ‘east’
 Pn:    Samoan          toŋa             ‘south wind’
 Pn:    Tuvalu          toŋa             ‘south’
 Pn:    Tikopia         toŋa             ‘east, east wind, trade wind; winter’
 Pn:    W.Futunan       toŋa             ‘south’
 Pn:    Rapanui         toŋa             ‘autumn, winter’
 Pn:    Rarotongan      toŋa             ‘one of the wind quarters, south or southerly ’
 Pn:    Rarotongan      toŋa                ‘south wind’ (Lewis 1972:74)
 Pn:    Mangareva       toŋa                ‘south wind’
 Pn:    Tahitian        toʔa                ‘south wind’
 Pn:    Maori           toŋa                ‘south’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan       toŋa                ‘wind from southerly or easterly quarter’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        kona                ‘leeward (i.e. south or southwest)’
>

                                                        Meteorological phenomena        137

   PPn *tokelau ‘northwesterly quadrant, northwest winds’ reflects POc *tokalau(r), the
precise denotation of which is unclear. It presumably did not mean ‘northwest wind’, as
this was the meaning of POc *apaRat. The glosses of its reflexes below suggest that it
denoted a northerly, or perhaps northeasterly, wind.

<
POc *tokalau(r) ‘(?) northerly wind’
 Adm: Baluan             tolaw              ‘north wind’
 Adm: Nyindrou           tolau              ‘north’
 NNG: Kairiru            tolau              ‘non-seasonal south wind, makes sea rough’
 NCV: Paamese            tōlau              ‘northeast wind’
 NCV: Atchin             tola               ‘northwest wind’
 NCV: Nguna              tokolau            ‘northwest wind’
 NCV: Namakir            tokolo             ‘northwest wind’
 Fij:   Wayan            tokalau            ‘easterly wind’
 Fij:   Bauan            tokalau            ‘northeast wind; third of compass from N to roughly WSW’ (Neyret 1950)
PPn *tokelau ‘northwesterly quadrant, northwest winds’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:    Tongan         tokelau             ‘north ’
 Pn:    E Futunan      tokelau             ‘northerly wind’
 Pn:    Pukapukan     | tokelau (iti) |     ‘north wind’ (Lewis 1972:75)
 Pn:    Pukapukan     | tokelau (matua) | ‘northwest wind’ (Lewis 1972:75)
 Pn:    Rennellese     tokegau             ‘northwest wind’
 Pn:    Samoan         toʔelau             ‘trade wind from northeast to east-southeast’
 Pn:    Tuvaluan       tokelau             ‘north, northerly wind’
 Pn:    Takuu          tokorau             ‘north, northerly wind’
 Pn:    Sikaiana       tokelau             ‘north’
 Pn:    Luangiua       koʔolau             ‘north’
 Pn:    Tikopia        tokerau             ‘north wind’
 Pn:    Rarotongan     tokerau             ‘northwest wind’ (Lewis 1972:74)
 Pn:    Hawaiian       koʔolau             ‘windward (northeast) sides of Hawaiian islands.’
 Pn:    Marquesan      tokoʔau             ‘north or northwest wind’
 Pn:    Anutan         tokerau             ‘approximately north; northerly wind’
>

   POc *tokalau(r) ‘(?) northerly wind’ reflects two PMP morphemes, as Dempwolff
(1938:134) observed. The first appears to be PMP *tekas ‘come to rest in a place’ (ACD),
the second PMP *lahud ‘downriver, towards the sea’. It is not clear how the POc meaning
is derived from the glosses of these morphemes, and probable that POc *toka-lau(r) was a
lexicalised unit.

138    Malcolm Ross


   POc may also have inherited a semantically related term *toŋa-laur, reflected in the
items below and apparently denoting a northwesterly wind.[9]

[9] Ramoaaina tailaur ‘wind from New Ireland direction’ (basically east) seems to reflect another compound,
  where the first morpheme may reflect POc *tasik ‘sea, saltwater’.

__pre__
  MM: Roviana         toŋa-rauru     ‘wind from direction of Lauru (approx north to northwest)’
  NCV: Mota           toŋa-lau       ‘northwest wind’
  NCV: Raga           toŋa-lau       ‘wind from direction of Ambae, i.e. northwest wind’

This term seems to contain the morpheme *toŋa (cf. PPn *toŋa ‘southeasterly quadrant,
southeast wind’ above), implying its existence in POc, even though its POc meaning
remains unknown. It is perhaps also reflected in Gela sau-toŋa ‘north wind’, where sau
reflects POc *sau ‘breeze’. However, caution is necessary here: it is possible that the three
terms above simply reflect a sporadic sound change in POc *tokalau(r) ‘(?) northerly
wind’.

   Other terms relating to a major wind direction or a season and reconstructable in POc or
one of its more immediate daughters all refer to the southeast trades, not to the storm
winds. This probably reflects the fact that the POc homeland lay within the ITCZ during
the SHS, when the winds of the rainy season are fairly unpredictable and sporadic. The
southeast trade wind of the SHW, on the other hand, blows consistently, and the various
terms presumably reflect its nuances or refer to various aspects of its activity.

   POc *karak(a) seems to have referred to a strong southeast trade wind. Some reflexes
suggest **karag, but final voiced stops did not occur in POc. Some NNG reflexes imply a
POc final vowel, but SES reflexes do not. Some of the SES reflexes lack an expected
initial consonant (Gela ɣ-, Longgu, Lau, Kwaio ʔ-), and so does Woleaian (x-). However,
the fact that these items have appropriate meanings and otherwise correspond formally
suggests that they belong to this cognate set, even if the loss of the initial is unexplained.

<
POc *karak(a) ‘(strong?) southeast trade’
 NNG: Lukep           karaka          ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Bing            karag           ‘southeast trade, blows off the sea strongly in August and September’
 NNG: Bilibil         karag           ‘dry wind’
 NNG: Gedaged         kìl̥ag           ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Takia           karag-arag      ‘a light southeast wind which appears as part of the initial development of the southeast trade in April’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa      kara-karata     ‘east wind’
 SES: Gela            ara             ‘southeast wind’
 SES: Talise          ɣara-ɣara       ‘wind’
 SES: Malango         hara-hara       ‘wind’
 SES: Birao           hara-hara       ‘wind’
 SES: Longgu          ara             ‘a cool, pleasant wind from the southeast’
 SES: Lau             āra             ‘southeast trades, violent wind’
 SES: Kwaio           ala             ‘southeast wind’
 Mic: Woleaian        aẓa            ‘south wind’
>

                                                        Meteorological phenomena        139


  Two other terms which apparently referred to the southeast trades are given below.

<
POc *marau ‘southeast trade wind’
 NNG: Kove             marau             ‘light wind from the sea’
 NNG: Bariai           marau             ‘wind’
 NNG: Bam              marau(lo)         ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Vitu              marau             ‘north wind’
 SES: ’Are’are         marāu             ‘southeast trades’
 SES: Sa’a             marāu             ‘southeast trades’
 SES: Arosi            marāu             ‘southeast trades’
>

<
PNGOc *yawana ‘southerly wind’
 NNG: Bing          yowan                ‘wind, a cold easterly wind across the land which brings the rain’
 NNG: Takia             yawan            ‘a southerly wind associated with moderately heavy seas’
 PT:    Iduna           yawana           ‘wind from the sea’
 PT:    Tawala          yawana           ‘south wind, wind from the south ’
 PT:    Suau            yawana           ‘northwest monsoon’
 PT:    Misima          yavana           ‘southerly wind’
>

   One more term, *aqura, seems to have served both as a generic wind term and as a term
for the ‘default’ wind, the southeast trade:

<
POc *aqura ‘wind, possibly southeast trade’
 Adm: Nauna            eul               ‘wind’ (ACD)
 Adm: Penchal          aul               ‘wind’ (ACD)
 Adm: Lou              our               ‘wind’
 Adm: Pak              ouh               ‘wind’ (ACD)
 NNG: Tuam             yawur             ‘wind’
 NNG: Mutu             yagur             ‘wind’
 NNG: Malai            yagur             ‘wind’
 NNG: Sio              wɔr̃a             ‘northwest monsoon’
 NNG: Numbami          aula              ‘wind’
 NNG: Takia            ur                ‘air ’
 NNG: Ali              ur                ‘wind’
 PT:   Motu            laura(bada)       ‘southeast trade wind’ (bada ‘big’)
 SES: Kwaio            au                ‘southeast wind, wind from sea’
 Mic: Kosraean         ɛir               ‘north’
 Mic: Ponapean         (pali)eir         ‘south’
 Mic: Carolinian       ə̄r               ‘south’
>

   The terms I have reconstructed above refer to wind directions and to seasons,
sometimes prototypically to the wind, sometimes to the season. A further development is
that one of the seasonal terms comes to mean ‘year’ (perhaps something like ‘the annual
round’ would be more accurate). Relevant examples are repeated here, but this
development also affects local seasonal/wind terms. Thus these items reflect POc *raki
‘southeast trades’—

140    Malcolm Ross

__pre__
 NNG: Kove               hai               ‘southeast trade, year’
 NNG: Bariai             rai               ‘year’
 NNG: Lukep              rai               ‘year’
 Mic: Woleaian           ẓaxi             ‘year, age, summer season’

—whilst the two below reflect POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind’:

__pre__
 MM: Barok              awat            ‘year’
 MM: Siar              yahrat          ‘year’

5.5 The weather

5.5.1 ‘calm’

   Four reconstructions with the meaning ‘calm’ (as applied to the weather) are given
below. The first two, *malino and *[ma-[d]]rapu, are reconstructed for POc (and earlier
stages). The multiple bracketing of *[ma-[d]]rapu does not reflect doubt about the
reconstruction, but rather the fact that POc inherited several derivationally related forms:
*rapu, *ma-rapu, *N-rapu, *maN-rapu (it is not clear in what measure these derivations
were still productive in POc).

   It is difficult to distinguish between the meanings of these two terms but the glosses for
reflexes of *malino imply an emphasis on tranquility, whereas those of *[ma-[d]]rapu
seem to refer to the stillness of the wind.

   The cognate set below indicates that speakers of several daughter languages adopted
one or other strategy to get rid of *-l- and *-n- in the onsets of consecutive syllables in POc
*malino. The two sounds entail different manners of articulation at the same point of
articulation, but it is not clear to me why this should have led to the avoidance of the
sequence.

<
PMP *linaw ‘be clear’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *ma-lino ‘calm’ (Grace 1969)
 NNG: Kove             malilo          ‘calm’ (consonant assimilation)
 NNG: Atui             mullil          ‘soft’ (consonant assimilation)
 NNG: Takia            malin           ‘calm’
 NNG: Manam            malino          ‘calm’
 NNG: Bam              malin           ‘calm’
 PT:   Balawaia        maino           ‘calm’
 PT:   Gabadi          maino           ‘calm’
 MM: Vitu              manilo          ‘calm’ (metathesis)
 MM: Nakanai           malilo          ‘calm’ (consonant assimilation)
 MM: Lavongai          malila          ‘calm’ (consonant assimilation)
 MM: Minigir           malila          ‘calm’ (consonant assimilation)
 MM: Mono              malilo          ‘calm’ (consonant assimilation)
 Pn:   Samoan          manino          ‘transparent, clear’ (consonant assimilation)
 Pn:   Tongan          melino          ‘at peace’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan       marino          ‘calm’
>

                                                           Meteorological phenomena         141

<
PMP *(d,r)apu ‘still, calm, quiet’(Blust 1972b)
POc *[ma-d,ma-]rapu ‘still, calm, windless’
 Adm: Nyindrou            nra-dah           ‘breeze ’
 MM: Petats               marah             ‘calm’
 MM: Haku                 maraha            ‘calm’
 MM: Taiof                madav             ‘calm’
 MM: Teop                 mara              ‘calm’
 Fij:  Bauan              maravu            (N) ‘a calm (at sea)’; (V, ADJ) ‘(sea) calm,’
 Fij:  Wayan              maravu            ‘(sea) calm, still, windless’
>

   The other two forms, PEOc *ma-lua(s) ‘soft, gentle, (weather) calm’ and PWOc
*siwaRop/*niwaRop ‘(weather) calm, peaceful’, are reconstructable as weather terms in
lower-order protolanguages.

   PEOc *ma-lua(s) ‘soft, gentle, (weather) calm’ is descended from POc *ma-luas ‘soft’,
but only the Eastern Oceanic reflexes refer to the calmness—or perhaps more accurately
the gentleness—of the weather.

<
POc *ma-luas ‘soft’
 MM: Notsi                 məlus             ‘soft’
 MM: Konomala              (ma)mlas          ‘soft’
 MM: Siar                  (ma)maluas        ‘soft’
 MM: Ramoaaina             (mal)malua        ‘soft’
 MM: Nehan                 (mal)malua(n)     ‘soft’
PEOc *ma-lua(s) ‘soft, gentle, (weather) calm’
 SES: Gela               malua             ‘soft’
 SES: ’Are’are           mārūrū            ‘soft, gentle, flexible’
 Mic: Ponapean           malu-n            ‘calm, of the sea’
 Mic: Mokilese           molu-n            ‘calm or fine, of weather’
 Mic: L. Mortlockese maləwa-ləw            ‘peaceful’
 Mic: Puluwatese         maliwa-li         ‘to be easy or slow, to be calm (as the sea), to be gentle’
 Fij:  Bauan             mālua             ‘gently, slowly, quietly’
>

   PWOc *siwaRop/*niwaRop ‘calm, peaceful’ may well have expressed a nuance of
‘peace’. Again we have two derivationally related forms, the first the base, the second the
base prefixed by PMP *N- (originally ‘antipassive’) or perhaps PMP *‹in›/ni- ‘perfective,
perfective nominaliser’.

<
PWOc *siwaRop, *niwaRop ‘(weather) calm, peaceful’
 PT:  Dobu         siwalowa            ‘calm’
 PT:  Molima       hiwalova, niwalova ‘calm’
 PT:  Iduna        niwalova            ‘stillness, season without wind, calm, peace (no fighting)’
 PT:  Are          niworoa             ‘calm’
 PT:  Kiriwina     niwal               ‘calm’
 PT:  Taboro       (a)siure-ure        ‘calm’
 MM:    Sursurunga       siaroh          ‘peaceful (as waves), calm’
 MM:    Siar             siarof          ‘calm’
 MM:    Solos            sianoh          ‘calm’
 MM:    Selau            sarowo          ‘calm’
 MM:    Teop             hiarovo         ‘good weather after a rain ’
>

142    Malcolm Ross


5.5.2 The sky and clouds

   The locus of much of the weather was of course POc *laŋit, the sky, and there are a few
signs that this word also had something of the sense of English ‘weather’, in some
languages coming to refer to a particular form of weather. The sky was also very important
in the context of navigation (p.157). POc *laŋit was also used as a local noun meaning ‘up
above’ (p.235).

<
PMP *laŋiC ‘sky’ (Dempwolff 1938)
PMP *laŋit ‘sky’
POc *laŋit ‘sky, weather’
 Adm: Tench             raŋiti           ‘rain’
 Adm: Titan             laŋ              ‘sky; heaven’
 NNG: Malalamai         laŋ              ‘cloud’
 NNG: Buang             yagk             ‘sky’
 NNG: Manam             laŋ              ‘sky, heavens’
 NNG: Kaiep             laŋit            ‘thunder’
 MM: Bali               laŋiti           ‘sky’
 MM: Tigak              laŋit            ‘rain’
 MM: Tabar              raŋiti           ‘sky’
 MM: Siar               laŋit            ‘sky’
 MM: Nehan              laŋit            ‘sky’
 MM: Haku               laŋic            ‘rain; sky’
 MM: Alu                laiti            ‘rain’
 SES: Kwaio             laŋi             ‘sky, heavens’
 SES: Arosi             raŋi             ‘rain’
 NCV: Raga              laŋi             ‘wind’
 NCV: Paamese           alaŋ             ‘wind’
 NCV: Lewo              laŋi             ‘wind’
 Mic: Marshallese       laŋ              ‘sky, heavens’
 Mic: Woleaian          raŋi             ‘sky; typhoon, rainstorm, wind’
 Fij:  Bauan            (vū-ni)-laŋi     ‘horizon’ (lit. ‘base of sky’)
 Fij:  Bauan            (lewe-ni)-laŋi   ‘full moon’ (lit. ‘flesh of sky’)
 Pn:   Tongan           laŋi             ‘sky, heavens’
 Pn:   Samoan           laŋi             ‘sky, heavens’
>

                                                       Meteorological phenomena    143

   PNGOc *sabam ‘sky’ is also reconstructable. It is not clear how this contrasted with
*laŋit.

<
PNGOc *sabam ‘sky’
 NNG: Malai            sabam            ‘sky’
 NNG: Sio              saba             ‘sky’
 NNG: Bing             som              ‘sky’
 NNG: Dami             sa               ‘sky’
 NNG: Bilibil          sabat            ‘sky’
 PT:  Ubir             safam            ‘sky’
 PT:  Are              sapama           ‘sky’
 PT:  Bwaidoga         ɣabama           ‘sky’
 PT:  Kiriwina         labuma           ‘sky’
>

  The generic term for ‘cloud’ in POc was *qaRoq.

<
POc *qaRoq ‘cloud (generic)’
 PT:   Dobu           yaloa             ‘cloud’
 PT:   Kwato Suau yaloi                 ‘cloud’
 PT:   Misima         yalu-yalu         ‘cloud’
 MM: Maringe          maloa             ‘sky’
 SES: Bugotu          (ma)alo(a)        ‘sky’
 SES: Lau             salo              ‘sky’
 SES: Kwaio           lalo              ‘sky’
 SES: Sa’a            (mei)salo         ‘cloud’
 SES: Arosi           aro               ‘sky’
 Fij:  Bauan          ō                 ‘cloud’
 Fij:  Wayan          (ka)ō             ‘cloud’
 Pn:   Tongan         ʔao               ‘cloud(s)’
 Pn:   Samoan         ao                ‘cloud’
 Pn:   Hawaiian       ao                ‘any kind of cloud’
>

   The four terms below each possibly denoted a type of cloud. POc *rodo(ŋ) meant ‘rain
cloud’. PNGOc *guba(r,R) may have denoted a storm cloud, but it is impossible to
attribute more exact meanings to POc *ulu or POc *bala.

<
PMP *rendeŋ ‘wet season’ (ACD)
POc *rodo(ŋ) ‘rain cloud’
 SES: Talise           ro-rodo          ‘cloud’
 SES: ’Are’are         roto             ‘cloudy, black cloud, squall’
 SES: Arosi            ro-rodo          ‘a cloud’
 NCV: Fortsenal        koko             ‘rain cloud’
 NCV: Raga             dodo             ‘rain cloud’
>

<
PNGOc *guba(r,R) ‘k.o. cloud (possibly storm cloud)’
 NNG: Mangap          gubur             ‘dark cloud’
 NNG: Sepa            kuba              ‘rain’
 PT:  Are             guba              ‘cloud’
 PT:    Gapapaiwa        guva             ‘cloud’
 PT:    Maopa            kupa             ‘rain’
 PT:    Motu             guba             ‘sky; heavens; a northwest squall’
 PT:    Gabadi           upa              ‘rain’
 PT:    Mekeo            ufa              ‘sky, heavens’
>

144    Malcolm Ross

<
POc *ulu ‘k.o. cloud’
 NNG: Uvol               ulu              ‘cloud’
 MM: Lavongai            ulu-l            ‘fog’
 SES: ’Are’are           uru              ‘cloud, heaven, sky, top’
 SES: Arosi              uru              ‘white clouds’
 SES: Arosi              uru-uru          ‘black rainclouds’
 SES: Arosi              (bara)uru        ‘evening bank of clouds; heavy masses of dark clouds’
>

<
POc *bala ‘k.o. cloud’
 Adm: Titan              pala             ‘cloud, light white clouds’
 MM: Tabar               bara-bara        ‘cloud’
 MM: Lihir               (lo)bal-bal      ‘cloud’
 MM: Tangga              bal-bal          ‘cloud’
 SES: Arosi              bara(uru)        ‘evening bank of clouds; heavy masses of dark clouds’
>

   There are a number of reconstructable POc terms some of whose reflexes mean ‘cloud’,
others ‘mist’ or ‘fog’. amd yet others have both meanings. It seems reasonable to infer that
a mist was conceived as a cloud at sea—or ground—level.

<
PMP *Ra(m)bun ‘haze’ (Blust 1972b)
POc *Rapu(n) ‘haze, mist’
 Adm: Drehet          kxo-kxoh            ‘cloud’
 NNG: Bariai          lau-lau             ‘cloud’
 PT:   Kiriwina       loa-lova            ‘cloud’
 SES: Bugotu          lavo                ‘haze, vapour; misty, hazy’
 SES: Lengo           lavo                ‘fog’
 SES: Longgu          lavo                ‘fog’
 SES: Lau             lafo                ‘cloud’
 SES: Kwaio           lafo                ‘cloud’
 SES: ’Are’are        raho                ‘haze, mist, fog, cloud’
PNCV *ma-Ravu ‘fog, mist’ (Clark 1996)
 NCV: Mota             marav           ‘dim, misty’
 NCV: Raga             marav           ‘mist’
 NCV: Paamese          mahu-mahu       ‘cloud’
 NCV: Nguna            (na)mavu        ‘fog, mist’
>

                                                          Meteorological phenomena       145

The meanings of the set below are intriguing: their common denominator seems to be
misty rain which gives rise to a rainbow if the sun’s rays are refracted through it, but this
gloss is somewhat speculative.

<
POc *bwa(p)o ‘(?) misty rain’
 Adm: Mussau           bao                ‘rain’
 SJ:   Kayupulau       bwau               ‘cloud’
 SJ:   Ormu            wawu               ‘cloud’
 PT:   Iduna           bowa               ‘rainbow’
 PT:   Kiriwina        bwabwau            ‘rain clouds’
 PT:   Sudest          bwao               ‘rainbow’
 SES: Lau              kwafo              ‘mist, cloud’
 SES: Kwaio            gwafo              ‘mist’
>

    The items below—POc *kapu(t)/*kopu ‘low cloud, mist, fog’ and POc *gapu(l)
‘mist’—are intriguing because of their formal similarity to each other. It is eminently
likely that *gapu(l) is derivationally related to *kapu(t). If we ignore their putative final
consonants, the former appears to be derived from *N + kapu (see vol. 1, pp.29–30). But
the final *-t of *kapu(t) is attested by non-Oceanic witnesses, the final *-l of *gapu(l) by
its Minigir and Tolai reflexes, and I cannot see a way of resolving this conflict.

<
PMP *kabut ‘mist’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *kapu(t) ‘low cloud, mist, fog’
 Adm: Titan            aúu                ‘low lying clouds, mist, not raining’
 NNG: Takia            kau-kau            ‘fog’
 NNG: Kairiru          qafu-f             ‘fog’
 NNG: Kove             ɣau-ɣau            ‘misty’
 PT:   Motu            ɣahu               ‘mist; fog at sea; haze’
 PT:   Roro            abu                ‘fog’
 PT:   Mekeo           apu, apu-apu       ‘fog, cloud’
 MM: Kara (West) kauf                     ‘fog’
 SES: Talise           ɣavu               ‘fog’
>

The Bali and Fijian forms below are problematic, as they reflect POc *kabu(t), not
*kapu(t)

__pre__
 MM: Vitu             ɣabu-ɣabu     ‘fog’
 Fij:    Bauan        kabu          ‘mist’
 Fij:    Wayan        kabu          (N) ‘mist, haze, fog’; (V) ‘be covered in cloud, mist, fog’

   It seems likely that *kopu already occurred in POc as a doublet of *kapu(t) resulting
from assimilation of the rounding feature of the second vowel to that of the first. Such a
change was once productive in both Rotuman and Tongan (Andrew Pawley, pers. comm.).

<
POc *kopu ‘low cloud, mist, fog’
 Adm: Lou              kop-kop            ‘dust; fog, mist’
 Adm: Drehet           kopw(ieh)          ‘mist, fog’
 PT:   Molima          kwau               ‘cloud’
 MM: Mono              (ma)kohu           ‘fog’
 MM: Laghu             kō                 ‘fog’
 SES: Bauro            kwahu              ‘fog’
 NCV: Raga             govu               ‘clouded’
 Fij:    Bauan          govu              ‘light clouds covering land’
 Pn:     Mangareva      kou               ‘clouds low on the peaks of the hills’
 Pn:     Tahitian       ohu               ‘cloud settled on the mountain tops’
 Pn:     Marquesan      kohu              ‘fog, haze’
>

146     Malcolm Ross

<
POc *gapu(l) ‘mist’
 NNG: Malai             gafu-f            ‘fog’
 NNG: Amara             (a)gau-gau        ‘fog’
 NNG: Arove             gau-gau           ‘fog’
 PT:   Tawala           gahu              ‘fog’
 MM: Minigir            gavulu            ‘cloud’
 MM: Tolai              gavul             ‘fog, mist’
 SES: Gela              gavu              ‘mist, haze’
 SES: Kwara’ae          goh               ‘fog’
 SES: Langalanga        gafu              ‘fog’
 SES: Arosi             gahu              ‘mist, be misty’
 Pn:   Tongan           ka-kapu           ‘mist’
>

   As if this were not already complicated enough, a further curiosity is the reconstruction
of Proto Nuclear Polynesian *kapuqa ‘cloud’ (Biggs & Clark 1993), which either entails
the addition of *-qa to a reflex of POc *kapu(t) or *gapu(l) or is a derivative of the PPn
verb *kaputi ‘cover over’.

<
PNPn *kapuqa ‘cloud’
 Pn:    Rapanui        kapuʔa          ‘fog, haze, mist’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       ʔōpua           ‘puffy clouds, as banked up near the horizon’
 Pn:    K’maringi      gabua           ‘raincloud (sign of rain)’
 Pn:    Maori          kapua           ‘cloud, mist’
 Pn:    Rarotongan     kāpua           ‘cloud, mist’
>

5.5.3 Rain

   The most widely reflected POc word for ‘rain’ (both verb and noun) is *qusan. Also
reconstructable are POc *[ka]dapuR ‘rain, rain cloud’ and PWOc *(rR)ugu ‘rain’. It is not
known if *(rR)ugu differed in meaning from *qusan, but *[ka]dapuR seems to have
referred both to a rain cloud and to the rain it deposits.

<
PAn *quZaL ‘rain’ (Blust 1969, Dempwolff 1938)
PMP *quZan ‘rain’
POc *qusan ‘(N, V) rain’
 NNG: Malasanga         kuya         ‘rain’
 NNG: Poeng             kue          ‘rain’
 NNG: Takia             ui           ‘rain’
 NNG: Numbami           usana        ‘rain’
 NNG: Kaiwa             ur           ‘rain’
 NNG: Manam             ura          ‘rain’
 PT:   Are              kusana       ‘rain’
 PT:  Balawaia              ɣura       ‘rain’
 MM: Bali                   ɣuzaŋa     ‘rain’
 MM: Lihir                  uos        ‘rain’
 MM: Teop                   huan       ‘rain’ (metathesis)
 MM: Maringe                (na)uha    ‘rain’
 SES: Bugotu                uha        ‘rain’
 SES: Longgu                uta        ‘rain’
 SES: Lau                   uta        ‘rain’
 NCV: Fortsenal             usa        ‘rain’
 Mic: Woleaian              uta        ‘rain’
 Fij: Bauan                 uða        ‘rain’
 Pn:  Tongan                ʔuha       ‘rain.’
 Pn:  Samoan                ua         ‘rain’
>

                                                      Meteorological phenomena   147

<
POc *[ka]dapuR ‘rain, rain cloud’
 Adm: Loniu                  kaʔæh     ‘cloud’
 Adm: Lele                   kanrah    ‘cloud’
 MM: Bulu                    kadavu    ‘rain’
 MM: Meramera                adavu     ‘rain’
 MM: Kara (East)             rafui     ‘rain’
 MM: Nalik                   dafur     ‘rain’
 MM: Konomala                daf       ‘rain’
 MM: Banoni                  ɣarau     ‘rain’
 MM: Piva                    ɣaravu    ‘rain’
 Mic: Kiribati               karau     ‘rain, heaven, sky’
 Mic: Kosraean               kʌṣao    ‘sky, heaven’
 Mic: Marshallese            keṛaw    ‘cloud, overcast’
 Mic: Ponapean               kec̣ew    ‘rain, to rain’
 Mic: Mokilese               kɔsɔw     ‘cloud’
 Mic: Chuukese               kuc̣ū-    ‘cloud’
 Mic: Puluwatese             woṛow    ‘white cloud’
 Mic: Carolinian             uṣow     ‘rain’
 Mic: Woleaian               xoṣou    ‘rain’
>

<
PWOc *(rR)ugu ‘rain’
 NNG: Aria                  rugu       ‘rain’
 NNG: Mangga Buang          ruq        ‘rain’
 NNG: Kumaru Mumeng         ruk        ‘rain’
 MM: Roviana                ruku       ‘rain’
 MM: Hoava                  ruku       ‘rain’
>

148    Malcolm Ross

   A semantically related term was POc *bata, which, to judge from a constellation of
Meso-Melanesian and Polynesian reflexes, probably meant ‘raindrop’. However, a number
of Western Oceanic languages also agree on the meaning ‘cloud’.

<
POc *bata ‘(?) raindrop, (?) rain cloud’
 NNG: Apalik            (e)vat             ‘cloud’
 NNG: Atui              vat                ‘cloud, sky’
 NNG: Akolet            (e)wat             ‘cloud’
 MM: Kara (West) bata                      ‘cloud’
 MM: Tabar              bata               ‘rain’
 MM: Sursurunga         bət                ‘sky; cloud’
 MM: Tolai              bata               ‘rain, to rain’
 MM: Siar               bat                ‘rain’
PPn *pata ‘raindrop’
 Pn:    Niuean           pata              ‘raindrop’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         paka              ‘raindrop’
 Pn:   Maori             pata              ‘raindrop’
 Pn:    Marquesan        pata              ‘raindrop’
>

  POc *d(r)im(a)-d(r)im(a) evidently meant ‘drizzle, light rain’. I have yet to find a reflex
which allows me to diagnose whether the initial consonant was POc *d or *dr.

<
POc *d(r)im(a)-d(r)im(a) ‘drizzle, light rain’
 Adm: Lou              rim-rim             ‘light rain’
 PT:    Iduna          dima-dima           ‘drizzle, rain of small drops that takes a long time to stop’
 MM: Tolai             ri-rimi             ‘drizzling rain’
 MM: Ramoaaina         rim-rim             ‘drizzle, sprinkle’
>

   In search of other terms associated in one way or another with rain, I tried to reconstruct
terms for ‘rainbow’ and ‘dew’. However, I could only reconstruct a Proto Eastern Oceanic
term for the former (but see the note on POc *bwa(p)o ‘misty rain (?)’ above, p.145).

<
PEOc *nua-nua ‘rainbow’
 NCV: Mota           nunua                 ‘change colour’
 NCV: Araki          nuenue                ‘rainbow’
 NCV: Tamambo        nuenue                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   E Futunan     nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   E Uvean       nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Pukapukan     nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Tuvalu        nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Samoan        nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Tokelauan     nuanua                ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Tahitian      (ā)nuanua             ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Maori         (ā)niwaniwa           ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Tuamotuan     (a)nuanua             ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Hawaiian      (ā)nuenue             ‘rainbow’
 Pn:   Marquesan     (ā)nuanua             ‘rainbow’
>

   For ‘dew’, a few reflexes of a PMP term occur.

                                                           Meteorological phenomena    149

<
PMP *lamuR ‘dew’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *lamuR ‘dew’
 PT:   Iduna        numura               ‘dew’
 PT:   Kiriwina     numla                ‘fog’
 PT:   Lala         lamu                 ‘dew’
 PT:   Balawaia     amo                  ‘dew’
>

5.5.4 Thunder and lightning

   I have reconstructed five separate terms for ‘lightning’. POc *qu(s,j)ila(k) seems to be
the generic term for lightning, inherited from Proto Malayo-Polynesian. The glosses of
reflexes of PNGOc *lamaR imply that this item may have referred to lightning and thunder
together. The other three reconstructions are *pilak ‘lightning’, *pitik ‘lightning’,
*lap(w)a(r,R) ‘lightning, phosphorescence’. Whilst these may have referred to different
kinds of lightning (e.g. sheet and forked) is also possible that they were descriptive or
metaphorical terms. It is reasonably clear, for example, that PNNG *kila(m,p) ‘lightning’
was a reflex of PMP *kila(p,b) ‘flash, sparkle’, (and that POc *qu(s,j)ila(k) ‘lightning’
reflects PMP *silak ‘beam of light’; cf. Dempwolff 1938:153).

<
PMP *qusilak ‘lightning’ (Ross 1988)
POc *qu(s,j)ila(k) ‘lightning’
 Adm: Nauna              kocil           ‘lightning’
 Adm: Seimat             usil            ‘lightning’
 NNG: Malalamai          uzila           ‘lightning’
 NNG: Tami               kujil           ‘lightning’
 NNG: Yabem              osiʔ            ‘lightning ’
 NNG: Bukawa             siʔ             ‘lightning ’
 Pn:   Tongan            ʔuhila          (N) ‘lightning’
 Pn:   E Uvean           ʔuhila          (N) ‘lightning’
 Pn:   Samoan            uila            (N) ‘lightning’
>

<
PMP *bilak ‘lightning’ (Dempwolff 1925)
POc *p(w)ilak ‘lightning’
 NNG: Kove              pelaka        ‘lightning’ (final consonant retained: borrowing from Bali?)
 NNG: Bariai            pir           ‘thunder’
 NNG: Mangap            bil           ‘flash, lightning’
 NNG: Dami              fili          (V) ‘lightning’
 NNG: Medebur           vilik         ‘lightning’
 MM: Bola               vila          ‘lightning’
 MM: Nalik              uilak         ‘lightning’
 MM: Sursurunga         pil           ‘lightning’
 MM: Nehan              pil           ‘thunder’
 MM: Solos              pina          ‘thunder’
 MM: Teop               pira          ‘thunder ’
 MM: Banoni              pina             ‘lightning’
 MM: Maringe             fila             ‘thunder’
 SES: Talise             (pila)pila       ‘lightning’
 SES: Longgu             pila(ðia)        (N, V) ‘lightning’
 SES: Arosi              hira(ia)         ‘lightning’
 NCV: Mota               vila             ‘lightning’
 NCV: Raga               vilehi           ‘lightning’
 NCV: Paamese            (a)hile          ‘lightning’
 NCV: Nguna              (na)vila         ‘lightning’
>

150   Malcolm Ross

<
PCEMP *pitik ‘lightning’
 CMP: Selaru           hitik              ‘lightning’ (Coward)
POc *pitik ‘lightning’
 NNG: Manam              pitik(awa)       ‘lightning’
 NNG: Wogeo              fitik            ‘lightning’
 SES: Gela               viti             ‘lightning’
 SES: Malango            vitih(i-a)       (V) ‘lightning’
>

<
POc *lap(w)a(r,R) ‘lightning, phosphorescence’
 NNG: Sengseng          (pe)lap          ‘lightning’
 MM: Tigak              lapak            ‘lightning’
 MM: Kara (West) lapai                   ‘lightning’
 MM: Tomoip             lap              ‘thunder’
 MM: Haku               (ka)naha         ‘lightning’
 MM: Torau              (si)nava         ‘lightning’
 MM: Mono               (ilai)laha       ‘lightning’
 Pn:    Pileni          lapa             ‘deep phosphorescent light, distinct from surface phosphorescence, occurring at a depth of from about 1 to 6 feet’ (Lewis 1972:208)
 Pn:    Niuean          lapa(sia)        ‘dazzled by the sun.’
 Pn:   Tokelauan        lapa             ‘flash of lightning’
>

Despite the formal variations in the cognate set above, its members are regular reflexes.

<
PNGOc *lamaR ‘lightning’
 NNG: Malalamai      lem                  ‘lightning’
 NNG: Manam          lama-lama            ‘thunder’
 PT:  Molima         namala               ‘lightning’
 PT:  Tawala         nama-namala          ‘lightning, bright, glitter’
 PT:  Misima         (pi)namal            ‘lightning’
 PT:  Kwato Suau nama-namali              ‘lightning’
 PT:  Hula           rama-rama            ‘lightning’
>

                                                          Meteorological phenomena       151

<
PMP *kila(p,b) ‘flash, sparkle’ (Dempwolff 1925, ACD)
POc *kilap ‘flash, sparkle’
PNNG *kila(m,p) ‘lightning’
 NNG: Gitua              kila-kila      ‘lightning’
 NNG: Lukep              kili           ‘lightning’
 NNG: Poeng              kilama         ‘lightning’
 NNG: Roinji             kirap          ‘thunder’
 NNG: Bing               kin            ‘lightning ’
 NNG: Takia              -ki-kilawi     ‘thunder and lightning’
 Pn:    Samoan           ʔi-ʔila        ‘(of reflected light) shine, glisten, sparkle, twinkle’
>

   POc appears to have had two basic roots for thunder, *kuru and *pwaraq, both of which
occur in apparent fossilised morphological variants. Firstly, alongside *kuru we find
*guru. The latter may represent *N + kuru. Secondly, alongside *kuru, *guru and *pwaraq
we find forms with reduplication of the second syllable: *kururu, *gururu and *pwararaq.
This was not to my knowledge a widespread process in POc, and I take its appearance here
to be associated with the onomatopaeic nature of the etyma. Thirdly, it seems that the
foregoing forms were (at least sometimes) verbal, and we find apparent nominalisations:
*guru-ŋ(a), *gururu-ŋ(a), and *para-ŋ(a).

<
PMP *guruq ‘noise, tumult’ (ACD)
POc *kuru, *kururu ‘thunder’
 NNG: Kove             ku-kururu           ‘thunder’
 MM: Bola              kururu              ‘thunder’
 SES: Lau              kururu              ‘thunder’
 SES: Arosi            (a)kuru             (N, V) ‘thunder’
 SES: Kahua            (ɣu)ɣuru(hia)       ‘thunder’
 Fij:  Bauan           kuru                (N, V) ‘thunder’
 Fij:  Wayan           kuru-kuru           (N, V) ‘thunder’
>

<
PMP *guruq ‘noise, tumult’ (ACD)
POc *guru, *gururu ‘thunder, make loud noise’
 Adm: Drehet           kuruh           ‘thunder’
 NNG: Takia            -gurur          ‘noise rumbling, thunder, crackling’
 NNG: Buang            klu             ‘roar, thunder, explode; like falling or running water, – like a waterfall, or thunder’
 NNG: Sukurum          (mu)ᵑkuru       ‘thunder ’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain       gururu          ‘thunder’
 PT:   Misima          gulu(mʷawa)     ‘thunder’
 PT:   Motu            guru            ‘noise, clamour’
 PT:   Balawaia        ɣulu            ‘loud noise’
 PT:   Lala            ulu             ‘thunder’
 MM: Ramoaaina         (pa)guru        ‘(thunder, wind in stomach) make a rumbling noise’
 MM: Teop              guru            ‘thunder’
 MM:     Haku           gururu          ‘it thunders’
 MM:     Tinputz        guguruh         (V) ‘thunder’
 MM:     Maringe        gu-gulu         ‘thunder’
 SES:    Gela           guru            ‘(thunder) rumble’
 SES:    Lengo          gururu          ‘thunder’
 SES:    Arosi          guru-guru       ‘thunder’
>

152     Malcolm Ross

<
POc *guru-ŋ(a), *gururu-ŋ(a), *gururu-aŋ ‘thunder’
 NNG: Gitua            gururuŋ         ‘thunder’
 NNG: Sengseng         kulu-ŋ          ‘thunder’
 NNG: Avau             ruŋ-ruŋ         ‘thunder’
 NNG: Akolet           ŋu-gruŋ         ‘thunder’
 NNG: Bebeli           gu-gurun        ‘thunder’
 NNG: Uvol             kuruŋ           ‘thunder’
 MM: Tigak             guŋ             ‘thunder’
 SES: Longgu           gururua         ‘thunder, small thunder, clap of thunder heard in the late afternoon when you get late afternoon rain; a storm’
>

<
POc *pwaraq, *pwararaq ‘thunder’
 NNG: Gitua           palaki            ‘thunder’
 PT:   Gumawana       (lo)pala-pala     (V) ‘thunder’
 PT:   Ubir           (wa)ferer         ‘loud thunder’
 PT:   Tawala         palele            ‘thunder’
 PT:   Muyuw          pala-pal          ‘thunder’
 MM: Kara (East)      (va)barak         ‘thunder’
 MM: Notsi            pal-pallek        ‘thunder’
 MM: Tabar            para-para         ‘thunder’
 MM: Lihir            palal             ‘thunder’
 MM: Sursurunga       pər               ‘thunder’
 MM: Patpatar         par-parara        ‘thunder’
 SES: Arosi           pʷararā           ‘thunder’
 Mic: Kiribati        pā                ‘thunder’
 Mic: Kosraean        pʌlæl             ‘thunder’
 Mic: Mokilese        palar             ‘thunder’
 Mic: Puluwatese      pac̣c̣            ‘thunder’
 Mic: Carolinian      pac̣c̣            ‘thunder’
>

<
POc *para-ŋ(a) ‘thunder’
 Adm: Mussau           pala-palaŋa      ‘thunder’
 Adm: Drehet           palaŋ            ‘thunder accompanied by lightning’
>

5.6 Concluding remarks

                                                         Meteorological phenomena       153

  It may seem to the reader that I have turned the Wörter und Sachen technique on its
head. That is, instead of using reconstructed items to determine something of the culture
and environment of POc speakers, I have used climatic information based on a hypothesis
about Austronesian speakers’ directions of dispersal and about the location of the POc
speech community to set up a hypothesised structure for a POc meteorological
terminology, and then set out to fill in its semantic categories. This is a variation on the
method of terminological reconstruction used in other contributions to this work. I have
deliberately chosen to establish semantic categories on the basis of climatic information
rather than of the terminologies of present-day languages because of the variation in these
terminologies from one location to another due to climatic differences.

   The final step in the method of terminological reconstruction is to examine the
hypothesised terminology to see if it needs modification in the light of the reconstructions
which have been made. If POc reconstructions can be made for unpredicted items (say for
hurricanes and cyclones), or POc reconstuctions cannot be made for expected terms, then
we must re-examine the initial hypothesis.

   Meteorological terms (PAn *baRiuS ‘typhoon’ and *qamiS(-an) ‘north, cold season’)
are among those that have been used as supporting evidence to locate the Proto
Austronesian homeland (Blust 1984–85, Pawley & Ross 1993). In the present case, I have
been able to reconstruct the POc terms I expected on the hypothesis that the POc speech
community was located in the Bismarck Archipelago (except ‘rainbow’) and have not
found that the data forced me to reconstruct unpredicted meteorological terms. So we can
say that the hypothesis that POc was spoken in the Bismarck Archipelago has not been
disconfirmed by this study.



6                 Navigation and the heavens

6.1 Introduction

   For as far back as the four or five thousand years that we can trace them culturally,
Austronesian speakers have preferred to live close to the sea.[1] They have typically been
sailors and fishermen. For as long as their settlements were confined to southeast Asia and
northwest Melanesia, virtually all their sailing would have been between intervisible or
near-intervisible islands. However, in the late second millennium BC, Austronesian
speakers living somewhere in the region of the Bismarck Archipelago—speakers of the
language now known as Proto Oceanic—began to move out eastwards, to the Solomons
and beyond. Over the next few hundred years their descendants explored and settled many
of the major island groups of the southwestern and central Pacific. The dates of these early
movements are discussed in Chapter 2.

   Building on the experience of their Austronesian ancestors in island southeast Asia, and
aided by an increasingly sophisticated canoe-building technology (see vol. 1, Ch.7) these
ocean navigators accumulated a body of knowledge that enabled them to sail freely beyond
sight of land while retaining their orientation of home. Irwin (1992) has persuasively
argued that even purely exploratory voyages into unknown waters were guided by
knowledge of the prevailing wind system, ensuring that any push eastwards against the
prevailing wind carried with it a good chance of a safe return.

   More complex navigation skills had to be brought to bear once new and distant island
groups were settled, a development which typically involved some regular trafficking
between the old homeland and the new. These skills lay in recognising the regular
patterning of naturally occurring phenomena such as star movements, wind systems,
currents and swells as they applied to each new sea route, and in developing strategies that
could be used in the committing to memory of these features.


[1]   An earlier version of this chapter was published in Palmer and Geraghty, eds (2000).
      I am particularly grateful to Malcolm Ross, whose work on time expressions has thrown further light
    on Oceanic knowledge of heavenly bodies. Thanks are also due to Andrew Pawley and Jeff Marck for
    their advice during the writing of this chapter, and to Ann Chowning and Fred Damon for additional data.

156    Meredith Osmond

   The best scholarly minds of Europe had spent centuries developing ways of
representing a curved world on a flat map and ways in which explorers could locate
changing positions on their flat maps by using compass, sextant, chronometer, almanacs
and various mathematical tables. When Europeans first ventured into the Pacific they had
to grapple with the almost inconceivable notion that Pacific Islanders could navigate their
canoes successfully over distances sometimes as great as a thousand miles without benefit
of compass or chart or in fact any aids beyond what they held in their heads and what they
could sense. In the mid-1960s, David Lewis, an experienced ocean yachtsman, aware that
in some parts of the Pacific this skill was still practised, determined to seek out any
remaining old-time navigators and sail with them where possible, to try to comprehend and
record their navigational strategies. His resulting book, We, the Navigators (1972),[2] is the
most complete record we are likely to get of this body of knowledge, rapidly disappearing
with the increased presence of motorised boats and Western navigational technology. He
was also at pains to record, in the languages of the navigators themselves, the names of the
physical features on which they relied, the stars, different kinds of wave movements and so
on. He took particular care to describe and name concepts for which Western navigation
theory lacks any equivalent. He has thus provided us with an (admittedly small) list of
words from Puluwat and Kiribati in Micronesia, Ninigo (= Seimat) in the Western
Admiralties, and a number of Polynesian languages, principally those of Tonga and Tahiti,
and two Polynesian outliers, Pileni, in the Santa Cruz group, and Tikopia.

   The purpose of this chapter is to reconstruct the earliest possible Oceanic words from
which are descended existing terms and meanings associated with the field of navigation.
For the most part they are terms of the physical world, of the night sky and the ocean
seascape. Also explored are terms such as the Polynesian kaveŋa (star or other object for
which one steers) and the Micronesian etak (a ‘moving’ reference point) which refer to
concepts incompatible with Western navigation theory. For some of these we may be able
to offer a Proto Oceanic (POc) origin. Undoubtedly, as navigation skills developed and
were refined in the Pacific, new terms would have been required, or old meanings
extended. There is a further complication in that we are not dealing with one homogeneous
environment. Take just one example—the night sky. There is no change to the night sky as
one travels east or west apart from changes to the times of star rise and star set. But the sky
visible from the northern hemisphere is a different sky from that of the southern
hemisphere. That part of the globe which we are chiefly concerned with here extends from
roughly 15°N (Saipan) to 20°S (Tonga), with the presumed POc homeland in the Bismarck
Archipelago lying just a few degrees south of the Equator. Similarly, the patterning of
winds, currents and swells varies with latitude and with distance from land mass, ocean
depth etc., as well as with the seasons.

[2] We, the Navigators was reissued in 1994 in revised format, including a glossary of terms. Subsequent
  references to the volume in this chapter are to the 1994 revision.


6.2 The sky and the horizon

   For early Oceanic navigators, as for the Arabs, the Phoenicians, the Vikings and other
early navigators, the fundamental sources of position finding were the heavenly bodies.


                                                                   Navigation and the heavens           157

6.2.1 Sky, heavens

  The most soundly based reconstruction for sky is POc *laŋit (see also p.142). In some
Oceanic languages its meaning has been extended to include weather, apparently both as a
general category and as a specific reference to kinds of weather, rain, wind etc.

<
PMP *laŋiC ‘sky’ (Dempwolff 1938)
PMP *laŋit ‘sky’
POc *laŋit ‘sky’
 Adm: Tench           raŋiti                      ‘rain’
 Adm: Titan           laŋ                         ‘sky, heaven’
 NNG: Manam           laŋ                         ‘sky, heavens’
 NNG: Hote            leŋ                         ‘heaven, sky; air’
 MM: Bali             laŋiti                      ‘sky’
 MM: Tigak            laŋit                       ‘rain’
 MM: Nehan            laŋit                       ‘sky’
 MM: Haku             laŋic                       ‘rain; sky’
 SES: Kwaio           laŋi                        ‘sky, heavens’
 SES: Arosi           raŋi                        ‘rain’
 NCV: Raga            laŋi                        ‘wind’
 NCV: Lewo            laŋi                        ‘wind’
 Mic: Marshallese     laŋ                         ‘sky, heavens; weather’
 Mic: Woleaian        raŋi                        ‘sky; typhoon, rainstorm, wind’
 Fij:  Bauan          (lomā)laŋi                  ‘sky, heavens’ (loma ‘inside’)
 Pn:   Tongan         laŋi                        ‘sky, heavens’
 Pn:   Samoan         laŋi                        ‘sky, heavens’
>

   The sky was typically conceptualised as something spanning a flat world from horizon
to horizon. In both Micronesia and Polynesia it was regarded as a dome or a series of
domes resting on the earth and forming concentric horizons on its surface (Lewis
1978:121). Tongans identified both laŋi, the sky, and vavā, which was the space between
earth and sky. Some communities referred to the sky in legendary terms, conceiving it, for
instance, as the home of the ancestors or of the Polynesian demigod, Maui.[3] In Kiribati the
heavens, karawa, could be subdivided into a lower heaven of birds and clouds where
things appear small, karawa merimeri; and a heaven of the stars, karawa uatao. For a
Kiribati navigator, however, the night sky was a vast roof. He never called it karawa, the
usual Micronesian term for the heavens, but referred to it as uma ni borau ‘the roof of
voyaging’ (Grimble 1931:197).

[3] For instance, a Kiribati creation myth describes how the face of heaven was originally like hard rock stuck
  to the earth, but was prised apart and then held up by four women, who became like mighty trees (Grimble
  1972:39–41). The legend is echoed in Hawaii, where the sky dome is supported by four pillars and in
  Tahiti where the sky rests on ten pillars (Makemson 1941:199).

6.2.2 Horizon

158     Meredith Osmond


  The line where sea meets sky is commonly referred to by a compound—either
edge/walls/ base of sky, edge of sea, or similar. I have located two sets of cognates, one
limited to Polynesia, the other to Micronesia. The first reflects PEOc *tapa ‘side’ (p.255) +
*qi ‘non-specific possessor particle’ + *laŋit ‘sky’. The Tongan form and the East Uvean
borrowing of that form reflect the replacement of the PPn preposition *ʔi by an
unexplained ʔaki.

<
PPn *(tafa)tafa-qaki-laŋi, *(tafa)tafa-qi-laŋi ‘horizon’ (*tafa ‘side, edge’, laŋi ‘sky’)
 Pn: Tongan           (tafa)tafa-ʔaki-laŋi
 Pn: E Uvean         | tafa-ʔaki laŋi |        ‘horizon, limit, edge’
 Pn: Samoan           tafa-tafa-ʔi-laŋi
 Pn: Maori            taha(a)-raŋi
 Pn: Tikopia          tafa-tafā-raŋi
 Pn: Tokelauan        tafa-tafā-laŋi
>

    Similarly, PChk *pai-laŋi may be from POc *baRa ‘fence’(see vol.1, p.60) + qi + laŋit
lit. ‘fence of sky’.

<
PChk *pai-laŋi ‘horizon’ (Marck 1994)
 Mic: Mortlockese payiləŋ                        ‘horizon’
 Mic: Satawalese     ppayileŋ                    ‘horizon’
 Mic: Puluwatese |(yɔrop) pǣlaŋ |                 ‘horizon’
 Mic: Chuukese       (ɔrop)peyiɾeɾ               ‘horizon’ (ɔroppa + ɾeɾi ‘rim of heaven’)
>

   Two SE Solomonic languages describe the horizon in terms of the sea rather than the
sky. Lau and Kwaio both have ʔaena asi, literally ‘foot/leg of the sea’. Other terms retain
the more usual second element meaning ‘sky’ but vary the first element:

__pre__
 PT: Motu           | guba dokona |         ‘horizon’ (guba[4] ‘sky’ doko ‘end’)
 SES: Lau           | ʔaena salo |          ‘horizon’ (ʔaena ‘foot’, salo[5] ‘sky’)
 SES: Arosi          waʔa-ni-aro          ‘horizon’ (lit. ‘beginning of the sky’)
 Mic: Chuukese       epī-ɾeŋ              ‘horizon’ (epi- ‘bottom’, ɾeŋi ‘sky’)
 Mic: Marshallese   | kapin laŋ |         ‘horizon’ (kapi ‘bottom’, laŋ ‘sky’)
 Mic: Kosraean       pe kʌṣa             ‘horizon’ (pe ‘side’, kʌṣa ‘sky/heaven’)
 Mic: Kiribati      | te tataŋa ni mainiku | ‘eastern horizon’ (lit. ‘roof-plate of east’)
 Mic: Kiribati      | te tataŋa ni maeao | ‘western horizon’ (lit. ‘roof-plate of west’) (Grimble 1931:198)
 Fij: Bauan          vū-ni-laŋi           ‘horizon’ (lit. ‘base of sky’)
 Fij: Wayan          vū-ni-laŋi           ‘horizon’
 Pn: Hawaiian        kumu-lani            ‘horizon’ (lit. ‘base of sky’)
 Pn: Hawaiian        pōʔai-lani           ‘horizon’ (lit. ‘sky circle’)
 Pn: Hawaiian        kūkulu-o-lani        ‘horizon’ (Åkerblom 1968:15) (kūkulu ‘pillar, post, side, edge, horizon’ denotes the four pillars which were the principal supports of the heavenly dome (Makemson 1939:19))


[4]   From PNGOc *guba(r,R) ‘storm cloud’ (see Chapter 5, §5.2), but in at least two Papuan Tip languages,
    Motu and Mekeo, the meaning has become generalised to ‘sky’.

[5]   Reflexes of POc *qaRoq ‘clouds’ (generic) typically serve as the term for sky in SE Solomonic
    languages.

                                                                 Navigation and the heavens           159

   It is a peculiarity of Kiribati that features of the sky are typically referred to in terms of
roof parts. This is because instruction in navigation was traditionally carried out in the
maneaba or meeting house, with the great roof substituting for the sky. The night sky was
uma ni borau ‘the roof of voyaging’; the eastern and western horizons were tataŋa, the
term for the two large horizontal beams on which the rafters are placed; the meridian was
marked by taubuki ‘ridge of house roof’ with the spot at which it was supported by a
central pillar indicating the position of the zenith star, Rigel. The roof framework was a
network of named criss-crossing rafters which served as a kind of grid reference that could,
in the imagination, be transferred to the night sky. A Kiribati navigator could thus estimate
and identify altitudes of stars within a degree of two (Grimble 1931:197–198).


6.3 Sun

   The sun is the main direction indicator during daylight, but its position must be related
to the time of year. Actual points of sunrise and sunset move over a horizontal arc that
gets progressively larger the further one is from the equator. Åkerblom (1968:15–17)
and Makemson (1941:85) offer linguistic and archaeological[6] evidence of Polynesian
familiarity with the sun’s apparent annual movement, a familiarity that it would be
necessary in any event to presuppose to explain navigators’ facility in using the sun as a
bearing indicator. Polynesians have terms for the ecliptic, the path along which the sun
appears to move over a year. For the Pukapukans, it was te ala o te la, literally ‘the path of
the sun’. Hawaiians called it ke ala ula a ke kuʔukuʔu, ‘the bright road of the spider’.
Hawaiian terms have been recorded for the sun’s southern limit, ke alanui polohiwa a
Kanoloa, literally ‘the black-shining road of Kanaloa’, and for its northern limit, ke alanui
polohiwa a Kane, literally ‘the black-shining road of Kane’.[7] In Pukapuka, the terms for
the solstices were lua poto ‘short pit’ and lua loa ‘long pit’, phrases which Beaglehole
suggests refer to the short days of winter and the long days of summer respectively. Tahiti
has corresponding terms—rua poto and rua maoro. Maori has the one term, mārua roa
‘long pit’ for both solstices, and applies the term also to the month or season during which
the sun is at its furthermost points (Makemson 1941:85). The only Micronesian terms I
have located have been recorded in a Gilbertese myth by Arthur Grimble, in which a tree,
Kai-n-tiku-aba, whose right side is te-au-meaŋ ‘northern solstice’ and left side is te-au-
maiaki ‘southern solstice’, springs from the spine of Na Atibu (Grimble 1972:43). In his
Gilbertese dictionary, Sabatier defines au as ‘used to indicate sun’s position north or south
of the equator’; meaŋ is the directional ‘north’ and maiaki ‘south’.

   At its highest point each day the sun is also an accurate indicator of due north (unless
you happen to be at the particular latitude for which the sun is then directly overhead). As
Lewis points out, the north–south axis can be accurately ascertained at noon by the shadow
of a vessel’s mast, which points either due north or south depending on the latitude and the
season (1994:384).[8]

[6] Archaeological evidence comes from identification of probable solar observation sites on, for instance,
  Mangareva and Easter Island (Åkerblom 1968:17).

[7] Kane and Kanaloa were important gods in the Hawaiian pantheon, Kane being associated with light,
  Kanaloa with darkness (Makemson 1941:21).

[8] Through measurement of the angle by which the position of the sun at midday differs from the vertical,
  the sun can also be a precise indicator of latitude. This latter property, although depended upon by
  Western navigational technology for a daily position fix, would have been of less use to canoe navigators
  whose main need was regular bearing indicators.

160      Meredith Osmond

   Reconstruction of a POc term for the sun itself is not clearcut. Blust has reconstructed
PMP *qajaw or *qalejaw as ‘day’, continued as POc *qajo ‘day’. In this he has revised
both the form and meaning of Dempwolff’s (1938) reconstruction PMP *ha(ŋ)gav ‘day,
sun’. Here we have opted for ‘sun’ as the primary meaning of POc *qaco, and, by
extension, ‘daytime’. There is evidence both within and without the Oceanic region that
the senses of ‘day/daylight/daytime’ and ‘sun’ were commonly interchanged.

<
PAn *qajaw, *qalejaw ‘sun, daylight’ (ACD)[9]
 WMP: Itbayat         araw              ‘sun’
 WMP: Cham            atdaw             ‘sun’
 WMP: Saban           sieu              ‘day’
 WMP: Makasarese allo                   ‘day; sun (in some expressions)’
 WMP: Muna            gholeo            ‘day’
 CMP: Bima            liro              ‘sun’
 CMP: Ngadha          leza              ‘sun; day; daylight; daytime; heat of the sun’
 CMP: Roti            ledo              ‘sun’
 CMP: Leti            lera              ‘sun; day’
 CMP: Yamdena         lere              ‘sun; day’
POc *qaco ‘sun, daytime’
 Adm: Ponam            al                          ‘sun’
 Adm: Seimat           al                          ‘sun’
 NNG: Bariai           ado                         ‘day, sun’
 NNG: Takia            ad                          ‘sun’
 NNG: Takia            ad-ad                       ‘daytime’
 NNG: Kaiwa            as                          ‘daytime’
 PT:    Molima         ʔasu                        ‘sun’
 MM: Nakanai           haro                        ‘sun; day’
 MM: Tigak             ias                         ‘sun’
 MM: Tigak             (gan)ias                    ‘daytime’
 MM: Nalik             ias                         ‘sun’
 SES: Bugotu           aho                         ‘sun’
 SES: Gela             aho                         ‘sun; good weather; put in the sun; experience good weather’
    SES:    Lau               sato                 ‘sun’
    SES:    ’Are’are          rato                 ‘sun, sunshine, no rain, good weather’
    SES:    Sa’a              sato                 ‘sun, sunshine, fine weather’
    NCV:    Mota              loa                  ‘sun’
    NCV:    Lonwolwol         jal                  ‘sun’
    NCV:    Paamese           ealo                 ‘sunshine’
    NCV:    Namakura          ʔal                  ‘sun’
    Mic:    Marshallese       alɯ                  ‘sun’
    Mic:    Woleaian          yaro                 ‘sun’
>

[9]    Blust (ACD) glosses this ‘day’, but the gloss given here appears more consonant with the data.

                                                    Navigation and the heavens    161

<
PPn *qaso ‘day, as period of time’
 Pn:    Tongan          ʔaho          (N) ‘day’; (V) ‘be day or daylight’
 Pn:    Rennellese      ʔaso          ‘time, day, season’
 Pn:    Samoan          aso           ‘day’
 Pn:    Tokelauan       aso           ‘day’
 Pn:    Tuvalu          aho           ‘day (as time span)’
 Pn:    Tikopia         aso           ‘day (as time span)’
>

Proto Nuclear Polynesian shows a split between *qaso ‘day, as a period of time’ and
*qaho ‘daytime, daylight’.

<
PNPn *qaho ‘daytime, daylight’
 Pn:   Samoan         ao              ‘day (contrasted with night); daylight’
 Pn:   Rennellese     ʔao             (N) ‘day, daylight’; (V) ‘be daylight’
 Pn:   Rarotongan     ao              ‘day, daylight, dawn; world’
 Pn:   Tikopia        ao              ‘daylight’
 Pn:   Maori          ao              (N) ‘daytime as opposed to night’; (VI) ‘dawn, become day’
>

<
PAn *daqaNi ‘day’ (ACD)
POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’
 Adm: Ponam            ran            ‘day’
 Adm: Drehet           laŋ            ‘daytime’
 NNG: Yabem            -lɛŋ           ‘be daytime’
 PT:    Kiriwina       yam            ‘daytime’
 PT:    Sinaugoro      laɣani         ‘daytime’
 PT:    Motu           rani           ‘daytime’
 MM: Nalik             ran            ‘daytime’
 MM: Petats            len            ‘daytime’
 MM: Haku              lan            ‘daytime’
 MM: Uruava            rani           ‘daytime’
 MM: Roviana           rane           ‘day’
 MM: Maringe           na-rane        ‘day’
 SES: Bugotu           dani           ‘morning, daylight’
 SES: Gela             dani           ‘day, daylight’
 SES: Lau              dani           ‘day, daylight’
 SES: Sa’a             dani, daŋi     ‘daylight’ (ŋ for n unexplained)
 SES: Kwaio            dani, daŋi     ‘day’ (ŋ for n unexplained)
 SES: ’Are’are         tani           ‘daylight’
 SES: Arosi            daŋi           ‘daylight, day’ (ŋ for n unexplained)
 NCV: Mota             (ma)ran        ‘light, daylight, morning, day; be light; tomorrow’s light; the morrow’
 NCV: Raga              rani          ‘day, light, become day; morning’
 NCV: Raga              (ma)rani      ‘morning light’
 NCV: Tamambo           rani          ‘daylight’
 NCV: Big Nambas        na-ran        ‘daytime’
 NCV: Lonwolwol              ren              ‘be light (of sky, weather etc.); weather, light, daylight’
 NCV:     Paamese            lani             ‘daybreak’
 SV:      Lenakel            n-ian            ‘day’
 SV:      Kwamera            (ia)ran          ‘day’
 Mic:     Marshallese        ṛɯān            ‘day, date’
 Mic:     Ponapean           rān              ‘day’
 Mic:     Puluwatese         rǣn             ‘day’
 Mic:     Woleaian           ẓan             ‘day, date’
 Pn:      Maori              raŋi             ‘day, as period of time’ (ŋ for n unexplained)
>

The Southeast Solomonic forms above are irregular, initial d- reflecting *drani.

162    Meredith Osmond



   The preceding cognate set may ultimately be connected with the following one.
However, it is clear that reflexes of POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’ are synchronically
distinct from reflexes of POc *[dr,r]aqā ‘sun’s heat, sunlight’; ‘(sun) shine; *[dr,r]aqa-ŋi
‘shine on, be hot, be bright’, in contemporary Oceanic languages which reflect both etyma.

<
POc *[dr,r]aqā (N) ‘sun’s heat, sunlight’; (VI) ‘(sun) shine, be hot, be bright’
POc *[dr,r]aqa-ŋi (VT) ‘shine on’
 NNG: Mapos Buang rŋ(ah)                  ‘daytime’[10]
 PT:      Motu           rarai(a)         (VT) ‘shine, of sun and moon’
 MM: Tigak               gan(ias)         ‘daytime’
 SES: Bugotu             raŋi             (VI) ‘shine, of sun’
 SES: Lau                rā               ‘sunlight’
 SES: Lau                rara             (VI) ‘shine, be hot, warm’
 SES: Lau                raraŋi           (VT) ‘shine upon’
 SES: ’Are’are           rārā             ‘scorch, singe, of sun and fire’
 SES: Sa’a               rā, rārā         (V) ‘shine brightly’; (N) ‘the sun’s light, radiance’
 SES: Arosi              rā               (V) ‘be hot, bright; shine’
 SES: Arosi              rārā(na)         (N) ‘sunshine, heat of sun or fire’; (VI) ‘shine, be hot’
 SES: Arosi              rāŋi             (VT) ‘shine on’
 Fij:     Wayan          drā              (VI) ‘(sun, moon, star) shine’
PPn *laqā ‘sun’
 Pn:    Tongan               laʔā             (N) ‘sun’; (VI) ‘be sunny’
 Pn:    Niuean               laā              ‘sun’
 Pn:    Samoan               lā               ‘sun’
 Pn:    Rennellese           gaʔā             (N) ‘sun’; (V) ‘sun, sunbathe, dry in the sun’
 Pn:    Maori                rā               ‘sun’
 Pn:    Tahitian             rā               ‘sun’
 Pn:    Rapanui              ra               ‘sun’
>


[10] The Mapos Buang and Tigak etyma are possibly from *raqaŋi qaco ‘shine on + sun’.

   Evidence for the transitive form *raqa-ŋi above comes from the Bugotu, Lau and Arosi
forms as well as the Motu, where *ŋ is regularly reflected by Ø.

                                                                 Navigation and the heavens   163

   The following set focuses on effects of the sun’s heat as opposed to its light, and
extends to heat from fire.

<
POc *raraŋ (VI) ‘be warm, hot, of sun; be warmed or heated by fire or sun’
POc *[ra]raŋ-i (VT) ‘warm, dry s.o., s.t. by sun or fire’
 PT:    Molima            lala              ‘wilt leaves over a fire’
 MM: Tolai                raŋ, raraŋ        (VT) ‘scorch, dry, warm, by sun or fire’
 SES: Bugotu              raraŋi            (VT) ‘heat’
 SES: Tolo                raŋi-             ‘warm or dry s.t. on the fire’
 SES: ’Are’are            rara              (VI) ‘be warm, hot, of sun’
 SES: ’Are’are            rarani-           ‘warm oneself by fire or sun’
 NCV: Mota                rara              ‘dry before a fire’
 Mic: Marshallese         ṛɯaŋ-ṛɯaŋ         ‘warm oneself by the fire’
 Mic: Woleaian            c̣aŋ              ‘get warmed up near fire’
 Fij:   Rotuman           rara              ‘warm (self or child) by the fire’
 Fij:   Wayan             rara              (VI) ‘(patient subject) heated, warmed’; ‘(pot) fired, baked’; ‘(fish) smoked’
 Fij:   Wayan             rarani            (VT) ‘warm s.t.’ (n for exp. ŋ)
 Fij:   Bauan             rara              (VI) ‘warm oneself at a fire’
 Fij:   Bauan             raraŋ-            (VT) ‘reheat food by a fire, sear banana leaves’
 Pn:    Tongan            ā                 ‘heat (sticks or leaves) over a fire’
 Pn:    E Futunan         lala              ‘smoke fish’
 Pn:    Rennellese        gaga              ‘smoke, as fish on a fire; warm, as hands over a fire’
 Pn:    Rarotongan        rara              ‘dry (leaves) in sun, dry over a fire; smoke fish over a fire’
>

   Yet another contender for the POc term for sun is *sinaR, which Blust (1998) glosses as
‘shine’. While some reflexes from across Oceania support ‘shine’, others lean towards the
meaning ‘sun’. This may, however, be the result of independent parallel development.

<
PMP *sinaR ‘ray of light’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *sinaR (V) ‘shine’; (?) (N) ‘sun’
 Adm: Mussau            sinaka [11]       ‘sun’
 Adm: Tench             sinaka [11]         ‘sun’
 Adm: Lou               sinsin         ‘sun’
 PT:    Motu            dina           ‘sun; day’
 MM: Lavongai           sinaŋ          (N) ‘sun’; (V) ‘(sun) shine’
 MM: Tigak              siŋan          (V) ‘(sun) shine’ (metathesis)
 SES: Lau               sina           ‘shine, give light’
 SES: Kwaio             sina           ‘sun’
 SES: ’Are’are          sina           (V) ‘shine, brighten’; (N) ‘light, brightness’
 SES: Sa’a              sineli         ‘shine’
 SES:    Arosi             sina             ‘sun’
 NCV:    Mota              siŋa             ‘shine’
 Mic:    Chuukese          ttira            (V) ‘shine’; (N) ‘ray, brightness, beam’
 Mic:    Puluwatese        tin              ‘shine, as the sun’
 Mic:    Mortlockese       tin, tina-       ‘shine: used for fire, moon, lantern’
 Mic:    Satawalese        ttin             (V) ‘shine’; (N) ‘ray, brightness, beam’
 Fij:    Rotuman           sina             ‘light, lamp, star’
 Fij:    Wayan             siŋa             ‘day, daylight, sun’
 Fij:    Bauan             ðina             ‘lamp, torch’
>

[11] Mussau/Tench -k- as a reflex of POc final *-R is irregular.

164    Meredith Osmond

   Building on its ‘shine’ meaning, POc *sinaR has given rise to a number of Polynesian
terms which, with the addition of mā-, a stativising prefix, refer to the moon:

<
PPn *mā-sina ‘moon, month’
 Pn:   Rennellese      māsina               ‘moon, month’
 Pn:    Tongan         māhina               ‘moon, month’
 Pn:    Samoan         māsina               ‘moon, month’
 Pn:    E Futunan      māsina               ‘moon, month’
 Pn:    E Uvean        māhina               ‘moon, month’
 Pn:    Maori          māhina               ‘moon, month’
>

6.4 Moon

   The moon is of little value as a navigational aid. Its typical role is as a marker of periods
of time. Reflexes of POc *pulan ‘moon’ are widespread throughout the Admiralties, the
Western Oceanic region, Southeast Solomons, Vanuatu and Fiji.

<
PAn *bulaN ‘moon, month, menstruation’ (ACD)
PMP *bulan ‘moon, month; menstruation’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *pulan ‘moon, month’ (ACD)
 Adm: Lou             pulan           ‘moon’
 Adm: Mussau          ulana           ‘moon’
 NNG: Kove            pula            ‘rise, shine, of sun, moon, stars’ (Chowning)
 PT:    Motu          hua             ‘moon, month’
 MM: Tigak            ulan            ‘moon’
 SES: Bugotu          vula            ‘moon, month’
 SES: Gela            vula            ‘moon, month’
 SES: Lau             fula            ‘the moon (but only in naming a month)’
 SES: Kwaio           fula            ‘moon (mainly in compounds)’
 SES: Kwaio           fula(bala)      ‘full moon, night when it is light from moonrise to dawn’
 SES: Kwaio           fula(ʔalo)      ‘rainbow’
 SES: Sa’a            hule            ‘phases of the moon; full moon’
 SES: Sa’a           | hule i lade |    ‘name of a month, July’
 SES: Ulawa           hula(ahola)     ‘six nights of the moon’s course, including the full moon and two nights each way’
 SES:    ’Are’are        hura             ‘moon, lunar month’
 SES:    ’Are’are        hura(ʔaro)       ‘rainbow’
 SES:    Arosi           hura             ‘moon, month. It is said there were twelve native months beginning July (the planting) and ending in the following June’
 NCV: Mota               vula             ‘moon, month, season marked by moon’
 Fij: Bauan              vula             ‘moon, month’
>

                                                         Navigation and the heavens     165


In Polynesia *pulan is reflected as a verb, PPn *pula ‘to glow’ (with PPn *p instead of
expected *f), and the moon is referred to by reflexes of PEOc *ma[d]rama.

<
PEOc *ma[d]rama ‘moon’
 SES: Lau           madama                ‘moon’
 Mic: Mokilese      maram                 ‘moon’
 Mic: Chuukese      maram                 ‘moon’
 Mic: Ponapean      maram                 ‘moon, moonlight’
 Mic: Puluwatese    maram                 ‘moon’
 Pn:   Rarotongan   marama                ‘moon’
 Pn:   Tikopia      marama                ‘moon’
 Pn:   Tahitian     marama                ‘moon’
>

6.5 Stars

   Although the sun serves as a direction marker, particularly at sunrise, noon and sunset,
the stars are the critical signposts in guiding navigators across open sea. The age-old
method of star navigation consists in laying a course direct to a given destination by
keeping the bow of the vessel pointed towards a star near the horizon whose bearing
corresponds to the direction of the destination. As one star rises higher or sets, another of
similar declination will be selected to take its place. For this purpose, the stars have
obvious advantages over the sun. In the first place, the apparent movement of the stars is
more stable than that of the sun. Although they rise each night four minutes earlier than on
the previous night, they do so always at the same point on the horizon relative to a
stationary observer. Second, the number and position of significant stars or star groups is
on a scale that permits virtually an unlimited number of sequential stars or ‘star paths’ to
be identified and memorised. Third, familiarity with the night sky as a whole can mean that
even if the night is cloudy, the appearance of only a few stars can orient a skilled
navigator.

   It has already been pointed out that the northern hemisphere sky differs from that of the
southern hemisphere. Polaris, for instance, that significant pointer of the northern sky,
drops out of sight as one reaches the Equator. However, there are many stars common to a
band of sky visible between, say, 15°N and 15°S, an area which includes New Guinea and
its islands; almost all of Micronesia; the Solomons; northern Vanuatu; and part of
Polynesia including the northern Cook Islands, Tuvalu and Tokelau but not Fiji or Tonga.
Some star groups including the Southern Cross and its Pointers, the Pleiades, Orion’s Belt
and the triangle which Westerners refer to as Taurus are also recognized and named as
units by Oceanic people. Many other patterns in the sky have been identified and named by
them according to familiar shapes or to illustrate legends. One non-western constellation
has been identified at POc level, and several others at the level of Proto Micronesian. I
have reconstructed the following terms for stars and star groups. All known cognate sets
are included, as well as other terms that carry information about the significance of
particular stars to the naming community.

166     Meredith Osmond


6.5.1 Star (generic)

<
PAn *bituqen ‘star’ (ACD)
POc *pituqun ‘star’
 Adm: Titan               pítuy                   ‘star’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono)        pitiki                  ‘star’
 NNG: Takia               patui                   ‘star’
 PT:    Misima            pútum                   ‘star’
 PT:    Muyuw             utun                    ‘star’
 PT:    Motu              hisiu                   ‘star’
 MM: Nehan                pitopit                 ‘star’
 SES: Arosi               hiʔu                    ‘star’
 NCV: Mota                vitu                    ‘star’
 NCV: SE Ambrym           hitu                    ‘star’
 Mic: Kiribati            itoi                    ‘star, constellation’
 Mic: Woleaian            fisi                    ‘star’
 Mic: Puluwatese          fū                      ‘star; point of the compass; canoe course plotted by the stars’
 Mic:      Marshallese          icu               ‘star, comet, planet’
 Mic:      Mokilese             ucu               ‘star’
 Mic:      Ponapean             usu               ‘star’
 Fij:      Rotuman              hefu              ‘star’
 Pn:       Rennellese           hetuʔu            ‘star, constellation’
 Pn:       Tongan               fetuʔu            ‘star; daisy’
 Pn:       Hawaiian             hōkū              ‘star’
 Pn:       Tikopia              fetū              ‘star, constellation’
 Pn:       Anutan               petū              ‘star’
>

6.5.2 Individual stars and star groups[12]

6.5.2.1 Venus (Morning Star, Evening Star)

   The planets ‘wander’ in their movements and are of little use as guiding stars. The only
one to feature regularly in wordlists is Venus. The POc name for Venus continues a PMP
etymon.

[12] In addition to regular dictionary sources, the following sources for star names were used: Feinberg (1988)
   for Anutan, Christian (1899) for Ponape, Lamotrek and Mortlockese, Thomas (1987) for Satawalese and
   Capell (1969) for Sonsorolese. Makemson (1941) was an invaluable source for many Polynesian terms.

                                                                     Navigation and the heavens              167


<
PMP *mantalaq ‘the morning (evening) star: Venus’ (ACD)
PMP *(t)ala(q) ‘star’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *ma-dala ‘the morning star’ (Blust 1972b)
 Adm: Lou               (ko)mtal        ‘Morning Star/Evening star:Venus’
 Adm: Titan             (ápa)tal        ‘Morning Star which appears about 5 a.m.’
 Adm: Loniu             (kopo)matan     ‘the Morning Star’
 NNG: Kove              motala          ‘star, generic’
 NNG: Kove             | motala waro aia | ‘Morning Star’ (lit. ‘star sun-for’) (Chowning)
 NNG: Labu              metana          ‘the morning star’
 SES: ’Are’are         | matara ni tani | ‘Morning Star’ (tani ‘daylight’)
 SES: Sa’a              madala          ‘the morning star’
 SES: Arosi             madara          ‘the morning star’
 Mic: Mokilese          mālāl           ‘the morning star’
>

   As in English, Venus often appears to have separate identities as Morning and Evening
Star. The following illustrate:

Morning Star:
(i) compounds from ‘star’ + ‘daytime’

<
PPn *|fetuqu qaho| ‘Morning Star’ ( > POc *qaco ‘sun, daytime’)
 Pn:     Tongan      | fetuʔu ʔaho |     ‘Morning Star’
 Pn:     Marquesan   | hetu ao |         ‘star of dawn’ (Makemson 1941:207)
 Pn:     Samoan      | fetū ao |         ‘Morning Star’
 Pn:     Tikopia     | fetū ao |         ‘Morning Star’
 Pn:     Anutan      | petū ao |         ‘Morning Star: Venus’
 Pn:     Hawaiian     hōkū-ao          ‘Venus when seen in the morning’
>

<
PMic *|fitū rāni| ‘Morning Star’ ( > POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’)
 Mic: Marshallese | icu ṛɯan |             ‘Morning Star’
 Mic: Ponapean        | usūn rān |         ‘Morning Star’ (rān ‘day’)
 Mic: Kiribati        | itoi ni ŋaina |    ‘Morning Star’ (ŋaina ‘day, daylight’)
 Mic: Chuukese        | fū rāɾ |           ‘Venus as Morning Star’
>

(ii) other compounds

__pre__
  NNG: Gedaged                boi tinan             ‘Morning Star’ (boi ‘star’, tinan ‘mother’ or ‘big’; cf. p.195)[13]
  NNG: Manam                  goai zama             ‘Morning Star’ (goai ‘star’, zama ‘tomorrow’)
  PT:  Motu                   hisiu bada            ‘Morning Star’ (hisiu ‘star’, bada ‘large’)


[13] POc *tina, literally ‘mother’, sometimes carries the interpretation ‘big’ in contrast to ‘child/small’.

168     Meredith Osmond


Evening Star (various compounds):

__pre__
 MM: Roviana           govete pisi                  ‘Evening Star, Venus’ (govete ‘to flee, run away’, pisi ‘to sting or bite, as insects’)
 SES:      To’aba’ita         bubufaŋa              ‘Evening Star’ (bubu ‘look at’, faŋa ‘eat; food’
 SES:      Lau              būbūfaŋa       ‘Evening Star’ (būbū ‘look at, gaze’, faŋa ‘to have a meal, food’)
 SES:      Arosi            maŋai ŋau      ‘Evening Star’ (maŋa ‘eat’, ŋau ‘eat food’
 Pn:       Tikopia          fetū ramaŋa    Alternative name for evening star when standing in west, in monsoon nights (lit. ‘torchlight fishing star’)
 Pn:       Hawaiian         hōkū-kau-ʔōpae ‘Evening Star’ (lit. ‘star for placing shrimp’)


6.5.2.2 Big Bird (Constellation including Sirius, Canopus, Procyon, Betelgeuse, Rigel)

   One of the few constellations that I have been able to identify and trace back to POc is
*manuk, literally ‘bird’ (manu in Pn), referred to by Lewis, Gladwin and others as ‘Big
Bird’ or ‘Giant Bird’. Most of the stars which fall within the Western constellations of
Orion and Canis Major would also be included within the larger Manuk constellation.
Lewis (1978:11) writes of following ‘the guiding star Betelgeuse in Orion, the northern
wingtip of the Polynesian constellation Giant Bird, whose head is Sirius and whose nether
wingtip Canopus.’ In his dictionary Firth describes Rigel, on Orion’s knee, as a central star
of Manuk. Although Lewis and Firth refer to Betelgeuse as indicating Manuk’s northern
wingtip, Feinberg (1988:104) and Thomas (1987:240) both mark it, from the point of view
of Anuta and Satawal respectively, with Procyon. Both are feasible. Feinberg also notes
(p.110) that on Nukumanu the Long Wing corresponds with Canopus but the Short Wing is
marked by a star probably Monocerus.[14]

[14] Gladwin (1970:148) writes that ‘on Puluwat the cardinal direction is east, under the rising of Altair, the
   “Big Bird”’. This is something of a puzzle because, although both Altair and Manuk rise just north of
   east, they rise many hours apart. Altair is definitely not a part of the Manuk constellation. It would seem
   that here we have an instance of a prominent star or star group being equated with a cardinal reference
   point.

<
PMP *manuk ‘bird’
POc *manuk ‘bird, Bird constellation’
 Adm: Ninigo            mān         ‘(constellation incl.) Canopus, Sirius, Procea’ (Lewis, 1994:406)
 Mic: Kiribati          man         ‘Canopus’
 Mic: Mortlockese       man         ‘Sirius’
 Mic: Satawalese        mān         ‘(constellation incl.) Sirius’
 Mic: Puluwatese        mān         ‘a scattered group of stars, Canopus, Sirius, Procyon’
 Mic: Woleaian          mar         ‘Sirius-Procyon-Canopus star’
 Mic: Carolinian        mān         ‘Sirius’
 Pn:   Tikopia          manu        ‘Rigel’ (part for whole) (Lewis, 1978:33)
 Pn:   Anutan           manu        ‘Bird constellation, consisting of Sirius (Manu’s body), Canopus (east wing), Procyon (north wing) and a few stars in between’
>

We also have various references to particular stars as Manuk’s head, Manuk’s body etc.

                                                              Navigation and the heavens         169

__pre__
 Adm: Ninigo              mānifono                    ‘Sirius’ (fono ‘head’)
 Adm: Ninigo              mānitola                    ‘Procyon’
 Adm: Ninigo              mānihaiup                   ‘Canopus’ (Lewis 1994:406)
 Mic:    Kiribati         pwāpwā-ni-man               ‘Sirius’ (pwāpwā ‘chest’)
 Mic:    Kiribati         man-ati                     ‘Rigel’ (ati ‘heart’)
 Mic:    Puluwatese       yinekin-mān                 ‘Sirius’ (yinek ‘body, trunk’)
 Pn:     Rennellese      | te tino-manu |               ‘three bright stars at the end of Taurus’ (tino ‘body’)
 Pn:     Anutan          | te kaokao o manu |           ‘Manuk’s armpit: a group of four small stars near Sirius; said to pass almost directly over Tikopia when approaching from Anuta’
 Pn:     Anutan          | te tino a manu |             ‘Sirius’ (tino ‘body’)
 Pn:     Tikopia         | te opiŋa o manu |            ‘Manuk’s armpit’ (Feinberg 1988:101) A Tikopian name but commonly used on Anuta.


Procyon (or Betelgeuse) and Canopus are widely referred to as the north wing and
south/east wing respectively in Micronesian Satawalese, where reference to Manuk is
included, and in the Polynesian Outliers of Anuta, Tikopia and Pileni, where the Manuk
reference has been dropped.[15]

[15] Carolinian and Woleaian use comparable terms, respectively pāy efeŋ and pai yefaŋ ‘north wing’, and
   pāy yer and pai yeiẓ ‘southern wing’ but apply them to the northern and southern wings of the
   constellation Aquila.

__pre__
 Mic: Satawalese paīne-māne-mefuŋ             ‘Procyon (lit. ‘northern wing of Manuk’)
 Mic: Satawalese     paīne-māne-meir          ‘Canopus (lit. ‘southern wing of Manuk’)
 Pn: Anutan          te kapakau paka-tokerau ‘Procyon, the ‘north wing (of Manuk constellation)’ (kapakau ‘wing’, tokerau ‘north’)
 Pn: Anutan          te kapakau paka-toŋa     ‘Canopus, Manuk’s east wing’ (kapakau ‘wing’, toŋa ‘south/east’)
 Pn: Tikopia         kapakau faka-tokerau     ‘Betelgeuse’
 Pn: Tikopia         kapakau faka-toŋa        ‘probably Canopus’
 Pn: Pileni          trekapekau ki taumako    ‘Betelgeuse’(Taumako is an island east northeast of Pileni)
 Pn: Pileni          trekapekau ki ndeni      ‘Canopus’(Ndeni is an island southwest of Pileni) (Lewis 1994:408)


   Individual stars within a constellation are frequently named because of their
significance as seasonal or navigational markers, and at times because of a mythical
association. It appears, however, that communities have at times retained familiar star
names but applied them to different stars, stars more appropriate markers of a season or sea
route as the location varied. Reflexes of the following PPn reconstruction applied, in
compound form, to a number of bright stars and planets, as well as to the months and
seasons over which the stars presided (Makemson 1941:254). In Eastern Polynesia,
references are typically to Sirius.

170    Meredith Osmond

<
PPn *takulua ‘a bright star’
 Pn: Tongan           takulua-tua-ʔalofi    ‘name of a large star’
 Pn: Tongan           takulua-tua-fanua     ‘name of a large star’
 Pn: Tahitian         taʔurua-faupapa       ‘Sirius’
 Pn: Tuamotuan        takurūa               ‘star name: may be Venus, Jupiter or Saturn’
 Pn: Maori            takurua               ‘Sirius; winter’ (Åkerblom 1968:19)
 Pn: Marquesan        takuʔua               ‘Sirius; July’
 Pn: Hawaiian         kaulua                ‘Sirius; June-July or February-March’
>

In Hawaii, Sirius is also known as hōkū-hoʔokele-waʔa, literally ‘canoe-guiding star’.

   We have another PPn reconstruction whose reference is apparently to a star or stars
within the constellation of Orion.

<
PPn *tākelo ‘name of a star or stars, possibly in Orion constellation’
 Pn: Tongan          takelo                ‘two stars in the northern sky’ (Makemson 1941:253)
 Pn: Tahitian        taʔero                ‘Mercury’
 Pn: Maori           tākero                ‘an unidentified star; Mercury’
 Pn: Tuamotuan       takero                ‘Orion’s Belt’ (Makemson 1941:253)
 Pn: Marquesan       takeo                 ‘a star; June-July’
 Pn: Hawaiian        kāʔelo                ‘a star, perhaps Betelgeuse; name of a wet month’
>

A Kiribati name for Betelgeuse is kāma-n-nuka. Kāma is the name of a mythical being,
nuka ‘middle’ (Grimble 1931:241). Rigel is known there as te taubuki literally ‘ridge of
house roof’.


6.5.2.3 Orion’s Belt

   It is hardly surprising that names for the group of three bright stars in a row should
typically focus on the number. Terms in the southeast Solomons, Polynesia and Micronesia
all contain reflexes of POc *tolu ‘three’. In ’Are’are, Sa’a and Arosi in the southeast
Solomons they are named by the term for a three-man canoe taʔe-oru. Makemson
(1941:198) gives the Tongan name as alo-tolu, identified in Churchward’s dictionary as
ʔalo-tolu ‘three persons paddling together’. Tikopia and Anutan have ara-toru, ‘path of
three’, a reference to an origin legend in which the three brothers of the demigod
Motikitiki died and ascended to the sky when their outrigger was severed from their canoe
following an argument (Feinberg 1988:11). In Maori they are referred to as tau-toru ‘three
men’ (Åkerblom 1968:82), while in Tokelauan according to Macgregor (1937:90), and
also in East Futunan, the group is called simply tolu ‘three’. Pukapukans call them toluŋa
maui ‘Maui’s three’, and the Rennellese toguŋa māui, the reference being to Maui, a
legendary Polynesian hero, and his two brothers. The Carolinian name eliw̡el is the term
for three (eli) plus the classifier for general objects. Woleaian has yeri̡-yer (yeri ‘three’).
The North New Guinea language of Gedaged is an exception. Their term is nitul, which is
also the term for a fish holder—the hooked string or branch used to string up fish. Fred
Damon (pers. comm.) reports that in Muyuw the term for Orion’s Belt is kiyad, the term
for the pole that stretches from one side of a canoe to the outrigger, attached in three
places.

                                                              Navigation and the heavens         171


6.5.2.4 Pleiades

   The Pleiades, or Seven Sisters, are a group of stars of moderate brightness which,
because of their number and closeness to each other, form a small bright patch in the sky.
Makemson believes that the Polynesians carried the Pleiades year with them into the
Pacific from the ancient homeland of Asia, although she offers no specific evidence for
this (1941:76). However it is the case that until recent times the Pleiades served as
significant calendar stars throughout the Oceanic world, their reappearance each year
marking the beginning of the annual seasonal cycle. In a number of languages of the north
coast of New Guinea (Gedaged balas, Biliau barahas, Takia baras) the stars are thought of
as young unmarried women, associated with health and fertility rituals. When the
constellation reappears in mid-June, it is time to prepare the fields for planting yams.
Speakers of Muyuw, a Papuan Tip language, are supposed to plant their yams by Gumeaw,
the Pleiades (Damon 1990:36). Åkerblom reports that the Polynesian year begins in Tahiti
when the Pleiades rise on the eastern horizon in the evening (late November). But in
Pukapuka, Mangareva, Marquesas and parts of New Zealand the seasonal cycle begins
when the Pleiades appear on the eastern horizon shortly before sunrise (about the end of
May) (Åkerblom 1968:97). Teuira Henry in 1928 described the Tahitian year as consisting
of two seasons, matarī-i-nia ‘Pleiades above’, the forerunners of the season of plenty, and
matarī-i-raro, ‘Pleiades below’, the season of scarcity (quoted in Makemson 1941:92). A
Maori term for the constellation is ao kai ‘season of food’ (Makemson 1941:200). Kiribati
also recognizes two seasons, one marked by the appearance of the Pleiades, the other by
Antares (Grimble 1972:223).

   Blust has reconstructed PMP *buluq, POc *puluq ‘a constellation, the Pleiades’ with a
single WMP reflex (from Sundanese) in addition to the Oceanic reflexes below. Many
Polynesian languages use reflexes of PPn *mataliki.

<
PMP *buluq ‘a constellation, the Pleiades’ (ACD)
POc *bulu(q) ‘a constellation, the Pleiades’ (ACD has *puluq)
 MM: Nakanai         vulu               ‘Pleiades’ (v for exp. b) [16]
 MM: Roviana         bibolo             ‘Pleiades’ (o for expected u)
 SES: Kwaio          bulu-bulu          ‘star; firefly’
 SES: Lau            (bu)bulu           ‘star’
 SES: ’Are’are       puru-puru          ‘star, firefly’
 SES: Arosi          buru               ‘Pleiades’ (buru-buru ‘firefly’)
 cf. also:
 SES: Gela           buru-buru          ‘Pleiades’ (r for exp. l)
>

   Ann Chowning (pers. comm.) has pointed out that, in common with the Southeast
Solomonic terms above, an alternative Nakanai name for the Pleiades, matatabu, and their
Sengseng name (li-m(e)lek), although unrelated, also denote fireflies.

[16] Alternatively, Ann Chowning considers that vulu, may be derived from POc *pulu ‘feather’, vulu also
   being the term for their yellow feathered headdress.

   In Polynesia and Micronesia a different term, translatable literally as ‘small face’ or
‘small eyes’ is widespread (POc *mata ‘eye’, *liki ‘small’). The Micronesian reflexes,
however, refer not to the Pleiades but probably to Sagittarius.


172    Meredith Osmond

<
PEOc *mataliki ‘name given to a significant star cluster’
 Mic: Marshallese     mæcɛt-ṛikṛik ‘a constellation, stars in Sagittarius’ (lit. ‘small face/eyes’)
 Mic: Mortlockese     meisik            ‘stars in Hercules’
 Mic: Lamotrek        mairik            ‘name for the fourth month’
PPn *mataliki ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: Tongan              mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: E Futunan           mataliki          ‘Pleiades; third month; June’
 Pn: Pukapukan           mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: Samoan              mataliʔi          ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: Tuvalu              mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: Anutan              matariki          ‘Pleiades’
 Pn: Tikopia             matariki          ‘Pleiades (sign of advent of trade wind season when appears on eastern horizon before dawn, also sign for turmeric extraction)’
 Pn:   Tahitian           matariʔi         ‘Pleiades’
 Pn:   Maori              matariki         ‘Pleiades, the first appearance of which before sunrise indicated the beginning of the Maori year (about the middle of June)’
 Pn:   Marquesan          mataʔiʔi         ‘Pleiades; June’
 Pn:   Hawaiian           makaliʔi         ‘Pleiades; month name; the six summer months collectively’
>

   A number of similar terms for the Pleiades in Micronesian languages (Mortlockese
mariker, Puluwatese mwariker, Woleaian mwexaẓixeẓ, Carolinian mwǣrixær) are not
reflexes of the above, reflecting instead PChk *mwakariker.


6.5.2.5 Southern Cross

   Blust, in his Austronesian Comparative Dictionary, lists a number of Western Malayo-
Polynesian languages (Iban, Malay, Achenese, Simalur) in which the Southern Cross is
called by the term for a stingray, in each case a reflex of PMP *paRih. Makemson
(1941:269) lists a Maori name, te whai o titipa, literally ‘the stingray of Titipa’ as referring
to the Southern Cross or to a nearby feature, the Coalsack. Whether the reference to the
star group is inherited with the term for a stingray, or is simply independent recognition of
a familiar appearance we can only guess. Three Central Malayo-Polynesian languages
which are either closely related or geographically contiguous (Fordata, Kei, Yamdena)
contain reflexes of *paRih which indicate Scorpio rather than the Southern Cross as the
constellation in question. In several of the languages in the Solomons and Micronesia, the
same term denotes both the Southern Cross and a triggerfish, also seen as similar to the
constellation in shape. The Samoan term for the Southern Cross, sumu, although not
cognate, is also the term for a triggerfish.

                                                        Navigation and the heavens     173

   Although the Southern Cross is typically associated with the southern hemisphere,
it is visible in the lower latitudes of the northern hemisphere, and is a significant
navigational constellation for Micronesia. Specific terms indicate whether it is seen as
upright, on either diagonal or lying horizontally on either side (Lewis 1994:103–106). A
PEOc reconstruction is proposed. The Hawaiian term, newe, may be a borrowing from the
upright position Carolinian form (see below).

<
PEOc *bubu ‘Southern Cross; triggerfish’
 SES: Sa’a           | hoi pupu |          ‘Southern Cross; triggerfish’
 SES: Arosi          | hua i bubu |        ‘Southern Cross; triggerfish’
 Mic: Mokilese        (lō)pʷu            ‘Southern Cross; triggerfish’
 Mic: Woleaian        pʷū                ‘Crux’
 Mic: Marshallese    | pɯubʷin ɛpɔ̄n  |  ‘Crux, Southern Cross’ (pɯupɯ ‘black triggerfish’)
 Mic: Puluwatese      pʷupʷ              ‘Southern Cross; k.o. fish, perhaps triggerfish’
 Mic: Lamotrek        pup                ‘Southern Cross. Also called the leatherjacket fish’
 Mic: Carolinian      bʷūbʷ              ‘Southern Cross; triggerfish’
 Mic: Carolinian      wenewenūbʷ         ‘Southern Cross in upright position’
>

   Other terms are descriptive, with the net metaphor and the cross shape or crucifix
recurring.

__pre__
 SES: Sa’a          ʔape                ‘Southern Cross’ (lit. ‘large square fishing net fixed on four upright poles’)
 Fij: Bauan         kalokalo-ni-ðeva ‘Southern Cross’ (kalokalo ‘star’, ðeva ‘the south or southeast wind’)
 Pn: Anutan         te kupeŋa           ‘The Net: Southern Cross’
 Pn: Tikopia        te kau kupeŋa       ‘pole-net handle’ (kau ‘handle’ probably refers to the Pointers rather than the Cross, which is the net.)
 Pn: Rennellese     kau-kupeŋa          ‘Southern Cross; net handle, net frame’
 Pn: K’marangi      tina ti raŋi        ‘Southern Cross’ (lit. ‘sky mother’)
 Pn: Tikopia        te uru a taŋata     ‘Southern Cross’ (lit. ‘man’s head’)
 Pn: Tikopia        rakau tapu          ‘Southern Cross’ (lit. ‘sacred timber’) (Lewis 1994:407)
  Pn: Hawaiian      hōkū-keʔa           ‘Southern Cross’ (keʔa ‘cross, crucifix’)


6.5.2.6 The Pointers

   The Pointers, Alpha and Beta Centauri, are widely referred to by compounds
translatable as the ‘two men’. The Sa’a form is derived from POc *mwaqane ‘man, male’,
while the Polynesian examples are reflexes of POc *tamwataq ‘living person’.

__pre__
  SES: Sa’a            ro mwane           ‘Pointers (to Southern Cross)’ (lit. ‘two men’)
  Pn: Samoan           lua taŋata         ‘Pointers: Alpha and Beta Centauri’ (Åkerblom 1968:27)
  Pn: Tikopia          rua taŋata         ‘Southern Cross’ (Lewis 1994:407)
  Pn: Tokelauan        na taŋata          ‘these two stars are guides for voyages from Tokelau to Samoa’ (MacGregor 1937:89)
 Pn:   Anutan         rua taŋata             Lit. ‘double man’: ‘constellation consisting of two bright stars near the Southern Cross. Centaurus, also known as te kau o te kupeŋa ‘handle of fishing net’’


174    Meredith Osmond


6.5.2.7 Taurus (the Triangle, the Tongs), including Aldebaran

   No cognates are evident for the constellation, but there are semantically parallel forms
in Sa’a, Lau and two Polynesian languages which all name the constellation with the local
word for tongs. This may simply reflect independent recognition of a common household
utensil shape.

__pre__
 SES: Sa’a           ireki               ‘the Southern Triangle’ (lit. ‘tongs’)
 SES: Lau            sākai               ‘bamboo tongs: name of constellation of six stars’
 Pn: Tikopia         te ūkopi            ‘the Tongs (Taurus’s forehead), particularly Aldebaran’ (Feinberg 1988:101). (Firth has ūkofi)
 Pn: Anutan          te aŋa-aŋa          ‘the Tongs: a constellation consisting of seven stars from Taurus arranged in a V pattern’


In Fiji the constellation is known as laða, literally ‘a sail’.

   There is a possible PEOc reconstruction for Aldebaran, the single brightest star of the
group. The long vowel indicates a possible *u(C)u sequence.

<
PEOc *u(C)unu ‘Aldebaran’
 Mic: Kiribati      un                    ‘the name of a star’
 Mic: Mortlockese   un(allual)            ‘Aldebaran and Orion’
 Mic: Puluwatese    wūn                   ‘Aldebaran; month about late July’
 Mic: Woleaian      ūru                   ‘Aldebaran. Also the name for a kind of dorfin’ (dorsal fin also triangular [MO])
 Mic: Lamotrek         ul                 ‘Aldebaran’
 Mic: Satawalese       ul                 ‘Aldebaran’
 Mic: Carolinian       wūn                ‘the star Aldebaran; synodic month, approx. July–August’
 Pn:   K’marangi      | ūnu te |            ‘star name’ (Pukui & Elbert 1973)
>

Other names located for Aldebaran include:

__pre__
 Mic: Kiribati         te boto-n-aiai   ‘Aldebaran (in Taurus)’ (lit. ‘base of ribs (aiai) of canoe’, because it stands in the V-shaped portion of Taurus) (Grimble 1931:241)
 Mic: Marshallese      lɯoc-lɯaplɯap ‘Aldebaran in Taurus’ (lit. ‘big bonito’)
 Pn: Tahitian          ana muri         ‘Aldebaran’ (Lewis 1994:403) (‘rear pillar supporting the sky’; cf. ana mua ‘front pillar, Antares)
 Pn: Maori             wero-i-te-kokota ‘Aldebaran’ (‘herald of the digging season’)


                                                          Navigation and the heavens     175


6.5.2.8 Polaris

   Polaris marks the centre of the North Celestial Pole. From the viewpoint of a stationary
observer it never moves. It is also a good indicator of how far north of the Equator you
happen to be. In Western terminology, if Polaris is 15° above the horizon, then your
location will be at 15°N latitude. It disappears below the horizon as you move south across
the Equator. It is valued by Micronesian sailors because it is always there unless obscured
by cloud, and, being close to the horizon, it provides a good bearing (Gladwin 1970:148).
The following compounds have been collected. Again we find semantic parallels even
when the forms are not cognate.

<
PChk *|fitū mʷakut| ‘Polaris’ (lit. ‘star not moving’)
 Mic: Puluwatese     | fūhæ mʷakət |            ‘Polaris’
 Mic: Satawalese     | fuese magut |            ‘Polaris’
 Mic: Carolinian     | fɨse mʷɔxut |        ‘Polaris’
 Mic: Woleaian         | werewereri iyefaŋi | ‘Polaris’ (werewere ‘straight, steady, still’, iyefaŋi ‘north’)
 Pn:   Tahitian         ana-niʔa           ‘Polaris’ (Lewis 1994:403)
 Pn:   Hawaiian         hōkū-paʔa          ‘Polaris or North Star’ (paʔa ‘firm, steadfast’)
>

6.5.2.9 Altair

   The only cognate set located is from Micronesia. References may be at times to the
constellation of Aquila rather than its most prominent star, Altair. The five Chuukic
languages reflect ‘PEOc/PMic *maRi/*mai ‘breadfruit’ while the Marshallese term,
although formally similar, reflects POc *mata ‘eye’.

<
PChk *mai-lapa ‘Altair’ (lit. ‘big/old breadfruit’)
 Mic: Puluwatese      | mǣy læp |           ‘Altair; a month, about March’ (from _mǣy_ ‘breadfruit’, _læp_ ‘big, old’; appearance of Altair marks the season of old breadfruit, northeast winds and much sailing. _mǣylæpænefæŋ_ is the name given to the season) (Elbert 1972)
 Mic: Mortlockese      meilap              ‘the constellation Aquila’
 Mic: Woleaian         māirapa             ‘Altair, the most prominent star in Carolinian navigation, a winter month’
 Mic: Carolinian       mǣilap             ‘the star Altair’
 Mic: Satawalese       mailap              ‘Altair’ (McCoy 1976)
 cf. also:
 Mic: Marshallese      mæclɛp              ‘constellation Aquila, Altair’ (lit. ‘big eye’)
>

  The Maori name for Altair is poutu-te-raŋi ‘pillar of heaven’, a reference to a creation
myth in which the sky is supported on pillars (Makemson 1941:64).

176   Meredith Osmond


6.5.2.10 Antares

   Antares, in the western constellation of Scorpio, ranks with the Pleiades as the most
important of the calendar stars throughout the whole Pacific area (Makemson 1941:98). I
have located cognate sets from both Micronesia and Polynesia, terms from the latter
referring at times to Venus.

<
PMic *(d,z)umuri ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Kiribati       rimwi(mata)         ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Marshallese    tumɯuṛɯ            ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Ponapean       tumur               ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Chuukese       tumwur              ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Mortlockese    tumur               ‘Scorpio’ (includes Antares)
 Mic:    Puluwatese     timir               ‘Antares; a month about January’
 Mic:    Carolinian     tumwur              ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Satawalese     tumwur              ‘Antares; a month about January’
 Mic:    Woleaian       tumwiẓi            ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Lamotrek       tumur               ‘Antares’
 Mic:    Sonsorolese    tumuri              ‘Antares’
PCEPn *refua ‘a star name, Antares?’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn: Tahitian           rehu               ‘a month name, between Dec. and January’
 Pn: Tuamotuan          rehua              ‘a star, Antares?’
 Pn: Maori             | rerehu or rehua | ‘Antares’ (Makemson 1941:98)
 Pn: Hawaiian           we-lehu            ‘Antares’ (Makemson 1941:98)
 Pn: Marquesan          ehua               ‘Antares’ (Makemson 1941:207)
PNPn *mele-mele ‘Venus or Antares’
 Pn: Pukapukan         mele-mele            ‘Antares’ (Lewis 1994:406)
 Pn: K’marangi         mere-mere            ‘Antares’
 Pn: Maori             mere-mere            ‘Venus as evening star’
 Pn: Hawaiian          mele-mele            ‘name of a star (Venus?)’
>

The Tahitians called Antares ana mua. For them it represented the front pillar, the parent
pillar of the sky (Makemson 1941:36). The Rennellese term for the constellation Scorpio is
tugā-gupe, literally ‘flock of pigeons’.

6.5.2.11 Pegasus

  The star names listed from this point onward are reconstructable only for Proto
Micronesian or for the lower-order Micronesian interstage of Proto-Chuukic.

<
PMic *lakV ‘stars in Pegasus’
 Mic: Marshallese        lɯak               ‘stars in Pegasus’
 Mic: Mortlockese        la                 ‘Pegasus’
 Mic: Puluwatese         la                 ‘star in Pegasus; month at beginning of breadfruit season, about May’
 Mic: Satawalese           na               ‘Alpheratz; about May’
 Mic: Woleaian             rax              ‘Pegasus’ (Alkire 1970:39)
>

                                                           Navigation and the heavens         177


6.5.2.12 Dolphin constellation (including Cassiopeia)

<
PMic *kua ‘Dolphin constellation incl. Cassiopeia’ (approximately equivalent to Aries)
 Mic: Kiribati          kua              ‘constellation incl. Andromeda, Perseus and Cassiopeia’ (kua ‘whale, porpoise’)
 Mic: Mortlockese       ku               ‘Aries’
 Mic: Puluwatese        kūw              ‘Cassiopeia, plus some other stars; porpoise’
 Mic: Woleaian          xu               ‘huge constellation including Cassiopeia and Cetus; porpoise’
 Mic: Carolinian        xūw              ‘constellation Aries’
 Mic: Satawalese        xu               ‘Dolphin constellation, whose tail is marked by Cassiopeia’
>

<
PChk *ukulīk ‘Cassiopeia’ (lit. ‘tail of fish’; POc *ikuR ‘tail’, *ikan ‘fish’)
 Mic: Puluwatese        wɨkɨnlik             ‘Cassiopeia’ (lit. ‘fish tail’)
 Mic: Woleaian          ɨxɨrīx               ‘Cassiopeia’
 Mic: Carolinian        ɨkkɨnīx              ‘star or stars in constellation of Cassiopeia’
 Mic: Satawalese        exulix               ‘Cassiopeia’
 cf. also:
 Mic: Marshallese    | lɯɔkʷan lɯakeke | ‘Cassiopeia’ (lit. ‘tail of porpoise’. Lakeke is a constellation shaped like a porpoise)
>

6.5.2.13 Delphinus

<
PMic *tapia ‘Bowl constellation, approximately Delphinus’ (POc *tabiRa ‘wooden bowl’)
 Mic: Marshallese       cæpe            ‘constellation: stars in Delphinus; bowl’
 Mic: Puluwatese        hæpiy           ‘bowl, calabash’
 Mic: Carolinian        sæpi            ‘constellation approximately Delphinus’
 Mic: Satawalese        sepie           ‘Delphinus: represents a carved wooden bowl’
 Mic: Woleaian          tapiy           ‘Delphinus star; bowl’
>

6.5.2.14 Arcturus

<
PMic *aremoi ‘Arcturus’ (brightest star of Bootes constellation)
 Mic: Marshallese       aṛ               ‘Arcturus’
 Mic: Mortlockese       aramoi           ‘Arcturus’
 Mic: Puluwatese        yoromōy          ‘a star and a month, about November’
 Mic: Carolinian        aremʷoy          ‘Arcturus’
 Mic: Satawalese        aremoi           ‘Arcturus’
 Mic: Woleaian          yaẓemōi         ‘Arcturus’
 Mic: Lamotrek          aramoi           ‘Arcturus’
>

In Tuamotuan and Hawaiian, Arcturus and possibly the whole constellation of Bootes, is
known by the term for a frigate bird, kiva and ʔiwa respectively (Makemson 1941:221).

178    Meredith Osmond


6.5.2.15 Corvus, Leo, Vega, Corona Borealis, Ursa Major, Equeleus

  The following star reconstructions are limited to Proto Chuukic, a subgroup of
Micronesian.

<
PChk *taropwolu ‘constellation Corvus’
 Mic: Mortlockese        soropuel      ‘Corvus’
 Mic: Puluwatese         hærepwəl      ‘Corvi’
 Mic: Carolinian         sarobʷəl      ‘star Corvus’
 Mic: Satawalese         sarapul       ‘Corvus’
 Mic: Woleaian           saẓeɸer      ‘Corvus; a summer month’
 Mic: Lamotrek           sorabol       ‘Corvus’ (lit. ‘viewer of the taro patches’)
 Mic: Sonsorolese        talebʷərɯ     ‘name of a star’
>

<
PChk *ici ‘constellation Leo’
 Mic: Mortlockese         yis            ‘constellation Leo’
 Mic: Puluwatese          yic̣c̣         ‘name for three unidentified stars’
 Mic: Woleaian            ic̣            ‘star in Leo (Hydra or Regulus)’
>

<
PChk *mul ‘Vega, brightest star in constellation Lyra’
 Mic: Puluwatese        mə̄l             ‘Vega; a month about February’
 Mic: Carolinian        mə̄l             ‘star Vega’
 Mic: Satawalese        mun              ‘Vega’
 Mic: Woleaian          mer              ‘Vega’
>

<
PChk *caw ‘Dip net constellation, approximately Corona Borealis’
 Mic: Puluwatese        ṛōw           ‘star and a month at the end of the breadfruit season, about December; hand net’
 Mic: Carolinian        ṣōw           ‘constellation approximately equivalent to Corona Borealis; dipping net’
 Mic: Satawalese        roe            ‘Corona Borealis, shaped like a dip net’ (roe lit. ‘dip net’)
 Mic: Woleaian          ṣoū           ‘a Corona Borealis star’
>

<
PChk *wuleko ‘stars in Ursa Major’
 Mic: Puluwatese         wələ            ‘stars in big Dipper, Ursa Major’
 Mic: Satawalese         wulego          ‘four stars of Ursa Major (Dubhe, Megrez, Phaeda, Merak) which constitute the cup of the Big Dipper’s ladle’
 Mic: Woleaian             werexe        ‘star in Ursa Major’
>

<
PChk *tə̄(d,z)a ‘constellation Equeleus’ (tiny constellation between Pegasus and Aquila)
 Mic: Mortlockese          sota           ‘Equeleus’
 Mic: Puluwatese           hə̄ta          ‘Equeleus; month about April’
 Mic: Carolinian       sēta               ‘month in the traditional siderial calendar, about April’
 Mic: Satawalese       ceuta              ‘stars in Equeleus; month about April’ (Thomas 1987:239, 270)
 Mic: Woleaian         sɨta               ‘Aquarius, a winter month’
>

                                                          Navigation and the heavens      179


6.5.2.16 Magellanic Clouds

   I have located terms only within Polynesia and Fiji for the Magellanic Clouds. The
reference to rua ‘two’ in Pileni and Manihiki is presumably to the Greater and Lesser
Magellanic Clouds, which appear as two distinct nebulae, sometimes distinguished as
‘flying’ or ‘stationary’ respectively.

<
PPn *maqafu ‘Magellanic Clouds’
 Pn: Tongan        maʔafu                 ‘Magellanic Clouds’ (a primary reference point for Tongan orientation. _maʔafu lele_ ‘flying fire’ and _maʔafu toka_ ‘stationary fire’)
 Pn:   Pileni         | lua mafu |          ‘Magellanic Clouds’ (Lewis 1994:406)
 Pn:   Manihiki       | rua mafu |          ‘Magellanic Clouds’ (Lewis 1994:407)
>

In Samoa, and also Anuta, they could simply be referred to as ‘flying cloud’ and
‘stationary cloud’ (Makemson 1941:187).

__pre__
  Pn: Samoan           ao lele, ao toʔa
  Pn: Anutan           ao rere, ao toka

In Bauan they were matādravu ni sautū, literally ‘hearth of peace and plenty’.


6.5.2.17 Milky Way

    Makemson (1941:183) wrote that Polynesians could tell the time of night by the
changing position of the Milky Way. She quotes a Hawaiian expression huli ke au,
literally ‘[the handle of] the Milky Way has turned’ as equivalent to ‘it is now past
midnight’. The following cognate set is from Polynesia.

<
PPn *kaniwa ‘the Milky Way’
 Pn: Tongan         kaniva
 Pn: Samoan         ʔaniva
 Pn: Sikaiana       kaniva                ‘rainbow’
 Pn: Tikopia       | te kau tu keniva |     ‘the Milky Way’ (lit. ‘handle of keniva’)
 Pn: Tokelauan      kaniva
  Pn: W Futunan     kaniva
>

    In Gedaged (NNG) the Milky Way is wat-dadeŋ (wat ‘driftwood, flotsam’, dadeŋ
‘trade, barter’). The association is not explained. In Lau (SES), it is simply tala ‘the path’,
while in Carolinian the galaxy is mesal fúú, literally ‘the face of stars’.

   Makemson (1941:183–186) lists a range of picturesque terms used by the Polynesians
for the Milky Way which include Mangaian moko-roa-i-ata, literally ‘long lizard of
morning’ Hawaiian kuamoʔo ‘backbone of lizard’, Tuamotuan vaero-o-te-moko ‘tail of the
lizard’ and a group of Maori terms, ika-nui ‘great fish’, ika-roa ‘long fish’ and maŋo-roa
‘long shark’. Still another Maori term for the Milky Way is pae-roa-o-whanui, literally
‘the long threshold of wide space’.

180    Meredith Osmond


6.5.3 Star path

  Firth (1957:91) writes:

|      The major navigational guide [in Tikopia] is the Star-path, the ‘Carrier’ (Kavenga).
|      This is a succession of stars towards which the bow of the canoe is pointed. Each is
|      used as a guide when it is low in the heaven; as it rises up overhead it is discarded and
|      the course is reset by the next one in the series. One after another these stars rise till
|      dawn, and at some times of the year a few still remain to rise when dawn breaks.

Lewis records identical advice given to him by a Tongan navigator in 1965, who refers to
‘kaveinga, the star path’ (1978:18). This term has a well-supported PPn antecedent and
etymology.

<
PPn *kaweiŋa ‘that which is steered for (usually a star)’ (From PPn *kawe ‘to carry’+ -i ‘verbal suffix from POc transitive marker *i’ + -ŋa ‘nominaliser’)
  Pn: Tongan            kaveiŋa          ‘star or other object for which one steers’
  Pn: Pukapukan         kaveiŋa          ‘a group of stars on the same declination, thought of as a constellation’
  Pn: Tikopia           kaveŋa           ‘carrier; esp. navigational aid by sequence of stars, star path’
  Pn: Tahitian          aveiʔa           ‘star path’
  Pn: Tuamotuan         kave(e)iŋa       ‘guiding star’
  Pn: Rarotongan        kaveiŋa          ‘that which is steered for’
  Pn: Anutan            kāveŋa           ‘the major guiding stars or constellations’
>

Feinberg (1988:100) adds a qualifier to the last-mentioned Anutan gloss. He writes: ‘The
name kāveŋa ‘carrier’ refers to the particular star or constellation being followed at a given
moment. A star path or sequence of stars that is followed from one island to the next,
including those stars not yet risen or already set, is a kau panoŋa porau.’ (lit. ‘company or
group for voyaging’). Feinberg describes this as the Anutans’ single most important
navigational tool.

   For Tikopia, Firth offers a purely literal term of ara fetū ‘star path’, and compares it
with _ara a vaka_ ‘canoe path’, the latter presumably referring to the actual sea route.
According to Grimble (1972:296), the Maori term for star path is also ara fetū.

   The Micronesians followed successive rising or falling stars in the same way. The name
given to star courses learnt by navigators on Woleai was _wōfariw_ (Alkire 1970:45), and on
Satawal, _wofanu_, literally ‘gaze at the island’ (Thomas 1988:261).

   Beatrice Blackwood documents a voyage in the northwest Solomons from Buka to
Nissan made by Hanahan speakers which agrees in every respect with Firth’s description
of navigating by using a star path. She gives a sequence of ten stars, but no term for the
system (1935:381–382).

                                                         Navigation and the heavens      181


6.5.4 Star rise and star set

   Stars provide the most accurate bearings when they are low in the sky. Thus navigators
describing star paths refer not to star X but to ‘rising X’ or ‘setting X’. In Micronesia such
compound forms have become lexicalised.


6.5.4.1 Rising

   POc *sake had as its primary sense ‘rise, go up’. But it also had the sense of ‘ride on
something, e.g. a canoe, catch a ride’. Both senses go back to PMP *sa(ŋ)kay. POc reflexes
can also carry the directional ‘east’.

<
PMP *sa(ŋ)kay ‘catch a ride, ride on something’ (ACD)
POc *sake ‘rise, go up; upwards’ (see also p.273)
 Adm: Mussau             (sae)sae(na)    ‘upwards’
 NNG: Kove               rae             ‘rise’ (Chowning)
 NNG: Kove               sae             ‘up, eastwards along the coast’ (Chowning)
 PT:   Motu              dae             ‘ascend’
 MM: Bali-Vitu           ðaɣe            ‘(sun) rise’
 MM: Nakanai             sae             ‘rise’
 MM: Meramera            saʔe            ‘climb’
 SES: Sa’a               taʔe            ‘up, inland’
 SES: Arosi              taʔe            ‘go up, ascend’
 SES: Lau                tae             ‘rise, ascend, get up, climb’
 SES: Longgu             taʔe            ‘ascend, go up’
 Mic: Kiribati           rake            ‘up, upwards, eastwards’
 Mic: Marshallese        tak             ‘eastward, upward’
 Mic: Ponapean           tak             ‘rise, of the sun and moon’
 Mic: Mokilese           tak             ‘rise (of sun); to shine’
 Mic: Kosraean           tak             ‘rise’
 Mic: Woleaian           tax             ‘upward, eastward, up’ (xetaxe-fis (N), ‘rising stars’ eg taxari-pwu ‘Crux rising’, taxrli-metaẓiwa ‘Scorpio rising’. Also taxari-yaro ‘sunrise’)
 Mic: Puluwatese         tǣn            ‘(star) rise in the east’ (e.g. _tānupw_ ‘rising Southern Cross’, _tāni mə̄l_ ‘rising Vega’. Lewis refers to (uncorrected spelling) _daane elüüel_ ‘rising Orion’s Belt, 90°’, _daane mailöb_ ‘rising Altair, 83°’, and _daan uun_ ‘rising Aldebaran, 75°’) (Lewis 1994:404)
 Mic: Carolinian         tǣn            ‘rising (esp. heavenly bodies)’
 Fij:  Bauan             ðake            ‘east; upwards’
 Pn:   Tongan            hake            ‘go up, esp. from the sea to the land’
 Pn:   Tongan            ha-hake         ‘east’
>

182    Meredith Osmond


6.5.4.2 Setting

   The POc term usually contrasted with *sake ‘to go up, upwards’ is *sipo ‘go down,
downwards’. Reflexes sometimes refer as well to the directional ‘west’ just as *sake
reflexes refer to ‘east’.

<
POc *sipo ‘go down, downwards’ (see also p.271)
 Adm: Lou             si              ‘down; descend’
 NNG: Kove            rio             ‘descend, lie down, be swallowed’
 NNG: Kove            sio             ‘down, westward along the coast’
 PT:    Motu          diho            ‘go down, descend’
 MM: Bali-Vitu        (va)ðiɣo(ni)    ‘downwards’
 MM: Nakanai          sivo            ‘go down’
 MM: Tomoip           tio             ‘(sun) set’
 SES: Lau             sifo            ‘late afternoon rain’
 SES: ’Are’are        siho            ‘(sun) set’
 Mic: Chuukese        tupʷu           ‘setting (western) position of a heavenly body’
 Mic: Puluwatese      tupʷwu           ‘(sun) set’
 Mic: Carolinian      tʉbʷʉ           ‘sink, go down, set (of sun, moon, stars)’
 Mic: Carolinian      tubʷul          (N) ‘setting, setting position of stars etc.’
 Mic: Woleaian        tuɸu            ‘set, of heavenly bodies’ (e.g. tuɸuri-werexe ‘Ursa Major setting’, tuɸuri-yaro ‘setting sun’)
 Fij:   Bauan         ðivo-ðivo       ‘wind sweeping down from hills’
 Pn:    Samoan        ifo             ‘downwards’
 Pn:    Tongan        hifo            ‘downwards’
 Pn:    Tikopia       ifo             ‘down, come down, descend’
 Pn:    Maori         iho             ‘downwards’
 Pn:    Hawaiian      iho             ‘downwards’
>

    In Chapter 3 (p.85) we reconstructed POc *solo ‘sink down, subside’, with reflexes
from the Solomons and Polynesia referring to landslides. In Puluwatese (Mic), a reflex of
*solo rather than *sipo is used in combination with star names to refer to stars setting.
Elbert’s dictionary lists tolol (N) ‘setting of stars’ and tololo (V) ‘disappear, set, as a star’,
and offers, as an example of usage, tolonupw ‘Southern Cross in setting position’. Lewis
lists (his spelling) doloni mariger ‘Pleiades setting’ and dolon uun ‘Aldebaran setting’
(Finney 1976:24, Lewis 1978:166).


6.5.5 Zenith star

    A zenith star is a star whose path is seen as lying directly overhead a particular island. It
is thus a rough indicator of the latitude of that island. (It tells nothing of longitude, so is
useful mainly in north–south voyages, such as from Hawaii to Tahiti.) For instance,
Arcturus is the zenith star for Hawaii; Sirius marks Tahiti, Fiji and Vava’u in Tonga; while
Rigel is the zenith star for Tikopia, Anuta and Vanikoro.

                                                                    Navigation and the heavens            183

    Lewis writes that ‘the determination by zenith stars of what amounts, in our terms, to
latitude, has long been postulated as a Polynesian navigational method, but on largely
circumstantial evidence’ (1978:33). He records his subsequent emotion when a Tikopian
navigator, Ramfe, referred to ‘stars on top’ as opposed to guiding stars. Ramfe knew that
there were different ‘on top’ stars for other islands, and that his grandfather had known
them but that he himself had forgotten them. Lewis writes that this information was later
repeated independently by other Tikopian navigators (p.33). The only other direct
reference Lewis makes comes from Tonga, where a member of the hereditary navigator
clan, the Tuitas, told Lewis that a fanakeŋa star, in secret Tuita usage, is ‘a star that points
down to an island, its overhead star’ (1978:77).

   Blust has reconstructed WMP *uRtuh ‘zenith; noon, mid-day’ (ACD), i.e. with specific
reference to the sun, but, although references to zenith stars are frequent in the literature on
Oceanic navigation, I am unable to reconstruct any term for the concept as it applies to
stars. There is less need for zenith stars in the northern hemisphere, because Polaris is
always a convenient indicator of latitude. The Micronesian navigators whose methods
were described by Lewis, Gladwin and others, evidently made no use of zenith stars.[17]

   Kiribati has a term taubuki ni karawa for ‘zenith’, literally ‘the ridgepole of heaven’.
Note that taubuki is also the name for the zenith star Rigel. Other terms for zenith, Samoan
tumu-tumu ‘top; peak, height, zenith’ and Maori puaŋa ‘zenith (also refers to Rigel,[18] in
Orion’s Belt)’ are unrelated.

   The Hawaiians have a term for zenith, hoʔokuʔi, which is literally ‘point of juncture’.
Pukui and Elbert’s dictionary records an expression mai ka hoʔokuʔi a ka hālāwai ‘from
zenith to horizon’, halawai meaning ‘meeting’ as well as ‘horizon’. Both terms appear to
relate to the concept of sky zones, a kind of grid reference of lines drawn across the sky.

[17] However, Tom Davis, Cook Islander and experienced western-style ocean yachtsman, has provided a
   plausible solution to a question which has long puzzled Lewis and others concerned to understand the
   skills of the early Pacific navigators. This relates to a report made in 1866 by a Spanish Captain Sanchez
   after interviewing an Elato (Carolines) navigator, which refers to the observation of star zenith by filling
   a cane with water, and similar references to a Polynesian sextant or sacred calabash (Lewis 1978:78).
   Davis proposes that an instrument of this kind, i.e. a coconut with holes drilled appropriately, can identify
   when the angle of a particular star above the horizon is of a predetermined size, not the 90° of a zenith
   star, but rather one of about 45°, this being known in advance as the declination of this star when over a
   particular destination. In other words, it signifies that one is on the same latitude as one's destination.
   Davis gives a fuller description of the instrument and its use in his autobiography (1992:70–73).

[18] Rigel is not an overhead or zenith star for New Zealand, so one must assume that its dual meaning has
   been brought from a place where it was, i.e. about 12°S latitude, far north of New Zealand


6.5.6 Star compass

   The fact that stars always rise and set at the same point on the horizon has in some
places led to the use of star names as cardinal compass points. A surviving example of a
siderial compass comes from the Carolines, where Goodenough in 1953 recorded a
compass with thirty two named star positions (Lewis 1994:102). The terms cannot be
equated precisely with the cardinal points of a European compass; they are not placed at
regular intervals but are bunched together at their eastern and western margins. The
primary compass point and basis of the Carolinian navigational system is the position
where Altair rises in the east, in our terms at 8°30’ N. Many of the stars identified in this
paper—Altair, Aldebaran, Pleiades, Orion’s Belt, Corvus and Antares—are represented on
the Carolinian compass by both their rising and setting positions. Polaris represents due
north. No fewer than five southerly directions are indicated by the various positions of the
Southern Cross, depending upon whether its axis is upright, lying at either diagonal or
horizontally on either side (Lewis 1994:103–106). Alkire describes the siderial compass
used by navigators on Woleai Atoll in the Carolines in almost identical terms. He gives the
name pāfis to the thirty two star points as they constitute the star path compass
(1970:41).19 The Puluwatese term pāfi the navigational stars in thirty two star positions’ is
cognate.

184    Meredith Osmond



6.6 Other navigational clues

6.6.1 Winds

   Navigators, steering primarily by sun and star, also need to take into account variable
factors such as winds and currents for which a steersman must compensate if he is to
maintain his course. Pacific wind systems and associated terminology are described in
detail in Chapter 5, where terms for seasonal winds and wind directions are reconstructed.


6.6.2 Wind compass

   Terms for seasonal winds also come to be applied to that section of the compass from
which the winds blow. Frequent reference is made in the literature to ‘wind compasses’.
Parsonson writes (1962:41) that ‘like the Arabs, the Polynesians divided the horizon into a
greater or lesser number of points, the Tahitians into 16 parts, the Cook Islanders 32, to
each of which corresponded a wind’. Lewis has recorded wind compasses in both the
Southern Cooks and Pukapuka, the Tokelaus and Tahiti, and refers to rather more nebulous
reports from the Carolines. He also reports a six-point wind compass from the Lau group
of Fiji (1994:112ff.). Feinberg writes (1988:92) that ‘Anutans have what might be
described as a rudimentary wind compass in that they know the prevailing winds at various
seasons and use the same term for the wind coming from a particular direction and the
name of the geographical bearing itself. However, the number of points is not great.’
Feinberg in fact lists six: tokerau (NW) ruatū (NE), toŋa (E), tuauru (SE), raki (SW) and
pakatiu (W). He reports that Firth gave a similar description for Tikopia wind points,
although the latter are rotated roughly 40° clockwise from the Anutan ones. Wayan Fijian
distinguishes six wind directions/compass points: ðeva (S), tokalau (E), tokalau ðeva ðeva
(SE), vualiku (N), vua i ata (also E), vua i rā (NW), and vua i roro (SW) (Andrew Pawley
pers. comm.). Lewis mentions a rare Western Oceanic example, from the Vitiaz Strait
between New Guinea and New Britain, where a five-point wind compass from Siassi has
been recorded (Lewis 1994:118–119, quoting from Chappell).

   There is general agreement that winds can equate with cardinal directions only in a very
loose sense. Both Lewis and Gladwin reiterate that directions for the navigator need not be
precise in the cartographer’s sense; they only must be good enough to enable him to get
where he wants to go with some margin for error. Winds indicate approximate directions;
star bearings are absolute.

[19] pāfüs in the orthography used here.

                                                               Navigation and the heavens           185


6.6.3 The seascape

   In the area of sea signs, my hunt for terms has been much less successful than with
heavenly bodies. There are a number of terms—for the sea itself, and for current, drift,
wave and reef—which are not restricted to navigation, and which have been reconstructed
in Chapter 4. A small group of terms may be considered as particularly significant to
navigation. These are discussed below.


6.6.3.1 Swell

   Ocean swells are unbreaking waves which have their origin in regions of strong and
persistent winds such as the tradewinds or the monsoons. They travel beyond the wind
systems that generate them, and remain after the wind has died away (Lewis 1994:124).
Although they vary with the seasons, and to some extent with local weather conditions,
their behaviour tends to be long-term, and thus reasonably predictable for any particular
journey. Typically, two, three or more swells will move across or through each other
simultaneously, requiring a high degree of skill on the part of the navigator first to
distinguish and then to compensate for when maintaining course. Any known sea route can
be expected to have its own probable swell pattern, with individual swells likely to be
given local names. Gladwin (1970:170) describes Puluwat as having three main swells,
Big Wave, North Wave and South Wave. Lewis writes that in the Santa Cruz Group,
(presumably Pileni), three swells are considered to be present all year round. They are hoa-
hua-loa, the long swell from the southeast, hoa-hua-dela-tai, the sea swell from east
northeast and hoa-hua-dela-hu from the northwest. Lewis suspects that these originate
from the southeast trades, the northeast trades and the northwest monsoon respectively,
and considers that this is a fairly general pattern in this segment of the Pacific. ‘Further
eastward, but still south of the equator, we might expect the effects of the monsoon to be
lost, and, once clear of the big Melanesian islands, for the Southern Ocean swell to sweep
unhindered up from the south. This indeed is the pattern in the Gilberts and Tonga, with
their “great swells” from the east and south.’ (Lewis 1994:128).

   We have two POc reconstructions, *bayau, which probably refers specifically to swells,
and a second, *ŋalu(n), where there is some doubt as to whether the reference is to swells
or to ocean waves of all kinds. (For cognate sets see Ch.4, §2.4.)

   Heyen (1962:67) lists a further two Kiribati terms, ao-meaŋ ‘the sea swell from the
north’ and ao-maiaki ‘the sea swell from the south’. Feinberg (1988:114) lists terms from
Tikopia—ŋaru fenua, and Anutan—ŋaru penua, which refer to swells which have been
reflected back from a land mass, and thus serve as indicators that land is close.


6.6.3.2 Deep phosphorescence

   This phenomenon is distinct from surface phosphorescence. It comprises streaks and
flashes of light a metre or so below the surface, and is in constant motion.

|     Its flashes dart out from the directions in which islands lie, or else flicker to and fro in
|     line with these bearings. It is best seen ‘in the middle sea, 80–100 miles out’, but it
|     invariably indicates the direction of land. As you approach land, it becomes scanty
|     and finally disappears by the time the island (if an atoll) is well in sight. (Lewis
|     1994:253)

186    Meredith Osmond

It is particularly marked on dark rainy nights, when it becomes the main direction finder.
Lewis has recorded names for it in Pileni in the Reef Islands, in Tonga, and also in
Micronesia, although the names are unrelated. In Pileni the term is lapa, a reflex of
*lap(w)a(r,R) ‘lightning, phosphorescence’ (Ch.5, §5.4). In Tonga it is ulo ʔa e tahi,
literally ‘flame of the sea’. In Kiribati it is called te mata, here in its sense of light or
something used to give light. The only other reference to it is a Marshallese term given by
Lewis (1978:119) as drojet, which I cannot locate in the Marshallese dictionary although
the second element -jet (-cet) is from *tasik ‘sea water’ (Ch.4, §2.1).


6.6.3.3 Reference islands

   Lewis’s books make frequent reference to etak islands, used as ‘moving’ reference
points by Puluwat navigators. A voyage is conceived of as being divided into stages or
segments with reference to a sequence of islands lying away to one side of the course.
Each island is in turn conceptualised as moving while the canoe’s position is held to be
fixed relative to that of a given star with which each island is aligned. Etak refers both to
the concept of dividing up the voyage in this way, and to the stages themselves.

|      An etak is a variable distance ... [but] the etak island is generally so chosen as to
|      make an etak segment somewhere around 20 miles. The first and last two etaks of a
|      voyage are exceptions. These are the ‘etak of sighting’ and the ‘etak of birds’, and
|      both are absolute distances of 10 miles. (Lewis 1978:147)

See also Gladwin (1970:181–186).

   The only reference to etak as a concept is from the Carolines (etak in Puluwatese and
Satawalese, hatag in Woleaian20). However, Lewis believes that the navigator Tevake,
from the Polynesian outlier Pileni, must have used a similar system. He writes:

|      His [Tevake’s] ability to point out the direction of invisible islands whenever he
|      wished is presumptive evidence that he was thinking in terms of some form of home-
|      centre reference system.

and again,

|      One cannot say whether or not Tevake’s orientation concepts resemble the Carolinian
|      one of etak. One can, however, be certain to this extent about the picture that his mind
|      composed of the changing relationships of islands 50 and 100 miles from his course.
|      This was of a similar order of accuracy and enabled him to point out the direction of
|      invisible islands, in the same manner as the etak system. (Lewis 1994:171)

I have not been able to trace the term elsewhere.


6.6.3.4 Sea marks

   Lewis (1994:291) writes that:

|      The term ‘sea mark’ (betia) is a Gilbertese one, but the conception is not unique to
|      that archipelago or to Micronesia. Carolinian navigators, for instance, learn sequences
|      of what they call ‘sea-life’. These, much more frequently than their Gilbertese
|      counterparts, are transitory phenomena such as sightings of certain fish, and the like.
|      Some, however, like a whirlpool on Uranie Bank, have real and permanent existence.

[20] These forms are in Lewis’s (1978) orthography.

                                                              Navigation and the heavens         187


Lewis then includes a quote from Grimble:

|      There were certain traditional signs by which navigators judged their distance
|      westward of the land. The safety limit to leeward (i.e. westward in the trade season)
|      was called the Fish Wall of Kabaki. It consisted of a line of leaves and rubbish
|      scattered over the sea from Makin to Samoa far to the westward of the land. This is
|      probably quite true, the rubbish being carried by some current.

   Betia is a reflex of a Proto Micronesian term *peti (N,V) ‘float’. I have no record of any
term for sea marks outside the Gilberts.


6.6.3.5 Expansion of target

   Pacific navigators reduced their risk of missing a target island through various strategies
designed to expand the target. As a general rule, low islands with trees are visible for a
distance of about 10 miles. Bird sightings can at least double this range. Terns, noddies and
boobies are all species that spend their days flying over off-shore fishing grounds. As night
approaches they will drop low over the water and make a beeline for their land roosts. The
reverse occurs at dawn. Terns and noddies will range up to 20–25 miles offshore, while the
range of boobies is 30–35 miles (Lewis 1978:30). Other indicators of nearby land include
the presence of off-shore reefs, a change in the patterning of swells as one nears land
caused by their refraction at a different angle, change in water colour, and particular effects
in the clustering and colour of clouds that gather over land. Although these indicators are
put to practical use in various parts of the Pacific, we have insufficient linguistic data to
draw any conclusions about origins of these concepts.


6.7 Navigation in Western Oceania and the Admiralties

6.7.1 Navigation in Western Oceania

    There is little information on navigation among the people of the Western Oceanic
region. One might expect such skills to have been most developed on small islands distant
from a large landmass, where trade was essential to the community’s livelihood. Such
islands would have included the western outliers of the Admiralties, and Nissan Island
between New Ireland and Buka. However, navigational skills were not necessarily limited
to such islands. Malinowski wrote in 1922 about the navigational skills of the Trobriand
Islanders and the people of the Amphlett group, who were involved in the ‘Kula ring’, the
ceremonial trading cycle which flourished until a few decades ago among the islands of the
region off the tip of Papua:

|      Taking the bearing by sight, and helped by the uniformity of winds, the natives have
|      no need of even the most elementary knowledge of navigation. Barring accidents they
|      never have to direct their course by the stars. Of these, they know certain outstanding
|      constellations, sufficient to indicate for them the direction, should they need it. They
|      have names for the Pleiades, for Orion, for the Southern Cross, and they also
|      recognize a few constellations of their own construction. (Malinowski 1922:225–226)

   Malinowski also mentions a particular Trobriand village, Wawela, as the traditional
centre of astronomical knowledge, but its function seems to be restricted to regulation of a
calendar and the fixing of significant dates (p.68).

188    Meredith Osmond

    Lauer (1976:86) has provided some information on the Amphlett Islanders, whose home
is a small group of high islands situated south of the Trobriands.

|      The Amphlett Islanders do not appear to have developed sophisticated techniques for
|      orientation and navigation. For example, although Amphlett men commonly know
|      many stars by name they do not attempt to use their knowledge of the stars to guide
|      them when sailing at night. The relative lack of sophistication in the navigation
|      techniques of the Amphlett Islands, as well as those of their neighbours in the
|      northern Massim, can probably be explained by the character of the voyages made in
|      the area. The voyages are all short [no more than 75 km]. Land, except during bad
|      weather, is always visible. ... And the island targets are all large.

   Lewis (1994:126, 134) interviewed two men in 1966 who had participated in the hiri
trading voyages of the Motu people across the Gulf of Papua and reported using the deep
ocean swells and star paths to guide their vessel. No terms were recorded.

   Blackwood (1935:380–382) has given a description of voyaging undertaken by Buka
people in the northwest Solomons.

|      The people of the North Bougainville coast are not great sailors, and seldom venture
|      on trips more than a few miles from the shore. Those of Buka ... are more
|      venturesome, and go, on occasion, as far as the island of Nissan, a trip involving little
|      short of a hundred miles, mostly of open and sometimes stormy sea, to buy the pigs
|      for which Nissan is famous.

These voyages are made in paddling, not sailing canoes. Voyages are made at night, and a
star path is followed. Although Blackwood does not give this method of navigation by star
path a particular name, it is obviously the same technique as that developed on such a
broad scale in Polynesia and Micronesia.


6.7.2 Navigation in the Admiralties and St Matthias

   I have not been able to locate any record of navigation techniques in this area apart from
the brief description given by David Lewis on Ninigo, which lies 120 miles west of Manus
and the same distance north of New Guinea. Although he sailed with the Islanders in their
50 foot canoes and referred to them as ‘true deep-sea navigators’, his description of their
technique is brief, and he does not give local terms. He summarises:

|      It soon became apparent that it [Ninigo navigation] followed the general oceanic
|      pattern. Steering was by stars rising or setting a little above the horizon; currents were
|      known to vary with the monsoon and trade wind seasons and particular wave forms
|      were regarded as being characteristic of different currents. There was also an
|      unfamiliar high star technique, reminiscent of one sketchily reported from Samoa and
|      the Tokelau Islands, which I was never able to fathom out. (Lewis 1978:93)


6.8 Conclusions

   Reconstructions of navigation terms for Proto Oceanic, Proto Micronesian and Proto
Polynesian are listed in Table 4.

                                                                     Navigation and the heavens     189

__pre__
            Table 4: Reconstructions of heavenly body and other navigation terms
Term                 POc                               PMic                     PPn
sun                  *qaco ‘sun, daytime’              *alo ‘sun’                *qaso ‘day as time span’
                                                                                 PNPn *qaho ‘daytime’
                     *raqani ‘daytime’                 *rāni ‘day’               …
                     *[dr,r]aqaa ‘sun’s heat, light’                             *laqā ‘sun’
                     *raraŋ ‘be warm’                  *raŋ                      *rara ‘heat over fire’
                     *sinaR ‘to shine, sun’            *sina ‘light, shine’      *mā-sina ‘moon’
moon                 *pulan                            …                         *pula ‘to glow’
                     *(d)rama(R) ‘light’               *marama                   *marama ‘moon’
                                                                                 *mā-rama ‘light, bright’
star (generic)       *pituqun                          *fitū                     *fetuqu
Venus                *ma-dala                          *matal                    …
                     …                                 *fituu rāni               *fetuqu qaho ‘day star’
Bird constellation   *manuk                            *ma(a)nu                  *manu
Sirius?              …                                 …                         *takulua
star in Orion        …                                 …                         *tākelo
Orion’s Belt         *tolu-                            *telu-                    *tolu-
Pleiades             *bulu(q)                          …                         …
                     …                                 …                         *mataliki
Southern Cross       ? *paRi                           …                         …
                     …                                 *pwupwu                   …
Pointers             …                                  …                        PNPn *rua taŋata
Aldebaran            …                                 *u(C)unu                  …
Polaris              …                                 PChk *fitū mwakut         …
Altair               …                                 PChk *mai-lapa            …
                                                                                         continued over …
190       Meredith Osmond


Term                     POc                         PMic                        PPn
Antares                  …                          *(d,z)umuri                  …
                         …                          …                            PNPn *mele-mele
                                                                                 PCEPn *refua
Pegasus                  …                          *lakV                        …
Dolphin constellation    …                          *kua                         …
Cassiopeia               …                          PChk *ukulīk                 …
Bowl constellation       …                          *tapia                       …
(Delphinus)
Arcturus                 …                          *aremoi                      …
Corvus constellation     …                          PChk *taropwolu              …
Leo constellation        …                          PChk *ici                    …
Vega                     …                          PChk *mul                    …
Dip net constellation    …                          PChk *caw                    …
(Corona Borealis)
stars in Ursa Major      …                          PChk *wuleko                 …
Equeleus constellation   …                          PChk *tə̄(d,z)a              …
Magellanic Clouds        …                          …                            *maqafu
Milky Way                …                          …                            *kaniwa
sky                      *laŋit                     *laŋi                        *laŋi
                         …                          *kadawa ‘heavens’            …
horizon                  …                          PChk *pai-laŋi               *tafa-qaki-laŋi
star path (that which    …                          …                            *kaweiŋa
is steered for)
star rise                *sake ‘to rise, upwards’   *sake                        *hake ‘upwards’
star set                 *sipo ‘to go down,         *tipwo                       *hifo ‘downwards’
                         downwards’
                         …                          *zolo ‘to descend,           …
                                                    disappear (below horizon)’
ocean swell              *ŋalu(n) ‘wave, swell’     *ŋalu ‘wave, swell’          *ŋalu ‘wave’
wave, swell              *bayau ‘ocean swell,       *peau                        …
                         whether breaking or not’
lightning                *lap(w)a(r,R)              …                            *lapa ‘flash of light’
open sea                 *masawa(n,ŋ)               *masawa                      *moana
sea, salt water          *tasik                     *tasi                        *tahi ‘shallow sea’
deep blue sea            *laman                     …                            …
current                  *qaRus                     *aus                         *qau
reef                     *sakaRu                    *sakau ‘reef, shoal,         *hakau ‘coral reef’
                                                    reef island’

   From the table, it can be seen that *manuk ‘bird’ and *tolu ‘three’ for Orion’s Belt, are
the only star reconstructions with reflexes in both Polynesian and Micronesian languages.
Success in reconstructing non-western constellation names has been almost entirely limited
to Micronesia, with its descriptive names like PMic *kua ‘Dolphin constellation’, PMic
*tapia ‘Bowl constellation’ and PChk *caw ‘Dip net constellation’. This may simply
reflect the adequacy of our sources, with more star terms being included in Micronesian
dictionaries than Polynesian, perhaps because the terms have been retained more recently
in Micronesian memory. Makemson, my most consistently useful source for Polynesian
star names, lists a number of Polynesian constellation names by their English translation
and with western equivalents where they exist. They are The Seven (Big Dipper), the Darts
(Orion’s Belt), the Wild Duck (Crux), the White Sea-swallow (Cygnus), the Pigeon-roost,
the Birdsnare (Orion) and the Canoe of Tamarereti (Tail of the Scorpion) (1941:197–198).
However, I have been unable to reconstruct any of these as PPn constellation names on
linguistic evidence, and there is no evidence that the same images are used in Micronesian
terms.

    Lewis (1994:353–354), more concerned with the practices of navigation and less so with
its labels, has written:

|       Particular ideas or techniques were favored in different archipelagos in accordance
|       with local geographical and social factors. However, so far as can be determined by
|       haphazardly recorded items of information, and by what is still remembered, the
|       methods used were surprisingly homogeneous. So much so that it would overstep the
|       evidence if one were to speak of separate or typical Polynesian and Micronesian
|       systems. Navigation seems to have been equally efficient in both areas, and the
|       techniques were very often identical.

   In spite of our inability to reconstruct many terms at a level higher than PMic or PPn,
there remains a fair degree of conformity among the Austronesian speakers of the Pacific
in the way they describe their physical world of sea and sky. Among the stars and star
groups, for instance, Venus is typically labelled as the ‘day star’ or in association with
events of dawn or dusk; Alpha and Beta Centauri are ‘the two men’; Taurus is ‘tongs’;
Polaris is ‘the star that does not move’. The horizon, predictably, is ‘base of sky’ or ‘edge
of sea’. What is particularly striking about the data collected is the degree of apparent
reinvention of terms for similar concepts. Many are transparent compounds, as if the
concept is being described for the first time.

                                                         Navigation and the heavens     191


   My guess as to why this should be so, is to relate it to the fact that these are island
communities scattered over a vast area. Each has its own regularly trafficked sea routes,
marked by star paths or star clusters possibly relevant only to that community. Each is its
own physical world, with its own particular collection of weather patterns and physical
features. The stars, for instance, are not only navigational aids. Together with the sun and
moon they are a community’s clock and calendar. But places separated by 30° latitude will
have different seasonal cycles marked by the appearance of different stars. Significant
events for a local community will be such things as the time for harvesting breadfruit, the
time for particular fish to be plentiful, the time for fair-weather sailing and the time of
storms. Local events motivate local names.

   The terms which show fewest cognates are the most specialized navigational terms. The
body of navigational knowledge held by a community was a precious commodity. In
extreme cases, as in Tonga, such knowledge was closely guarded. There it was held by
senior members of particular clans, and passed only to their descendants. Although all
members of a community would be aware in a general way that star paths, swells and so on
were aids to navigation, the actual terms used would in some places belong to secret usage.
But even in less stratified communities, there would have been few skilled navigators at
any one time. Arthur Grimble wrote that of the thirty thousand inhabitants of the Gilbert
Islands in his time there (around the 1920s), fewer than twenty could speak with authority
about the stars; and ‘those who have the knowledge are often most unwilling to impart it,
for of all the secrets treasured by the native, those connected with navigation are still
perhaps the most jealously prized and guarded’ (Grimble 1931:197). And, as has been well
exemplified by Stephen Thomas (1987) in his book The Last Navigator, this knowledge
could be lost within a generation or two.

   So although we can recognize the same navigational techniques such as the use of star
paths and swells in places as far apart as the Papuan Gulf, the Admiralties, the Solomons,
Micronesia and Polynesia, and techniques involving a wind compass and deep
luminescence in Micronesia and Polynesia, comparative linguistics provides no proof that
these shared techniques evolved from a common knowledge base at the POc stage.

   However, it seems that gains have been made in another, unexpected, direction. At least
in the subgroups for which we have most data, that is, in the Southeast Solomonic,
Polynesian and Micronesian, the data are unusual in that the terms for what we might
describe as cosmic features—heavenly bodies, the horizon, the solstices and the like—are
not arbitrary names. They are overwhelmingly descriptive terms, transparent compounds
that (a) reflect some specific function or aspect of the feature, whether they be calendar or
navigation stars, or (b) that underpin their role in creation mythology. The Oceanic
Lexicon Project is organized on semantic principles partly in the belief that this will
provide a basis for cultural reconstruction. In this sense, I believe that star names have
offered us some rare clues as to the values and world view of Proto Oceanic speakers.



7                 Properties of inanimate objects

7.1 Introduction

    The terms reconstructed in this chapter denoted properties of inanimate objects in POc.
It is impossible to draw a clear line between the properties of inanimate objects and the
properties of living beings as there are some properties, for example, ‘big’ and ‘small’,
which were almost certainly used of both inanimate objects and animate beings. However,
there are also many property expressions which were evidently used only of animate
beings, and these are not considered here.[1]

    Oceanic languages make some distinctions between properties of inanimates and
properties of animates that are not made in European languages, and vice versa. In most
Oceanic languages there are distinct words for ‘old’ as applied to inanimate objects and
‘old’ as applied to human beings, and different temperature terms for the physical
environment and for the human body. This appears to have been true in POc as well, where
*[ma]tuqa ‘ripe, mature, adult, old’ was used of animates and POc *tuqaRi ‘long ago, old’
and *rapu-ka ‘old’ of inanimates.

    Property words in European languages are typically adjectives. It is fairly certain,
however, that POc did not have a separate adjective word class. Instead, it had a small
subclass of nouns and a large subclass of verbs that were used to express properties (see
vol. 1, pp.34–35). For convenience, I have named these adjectival nouns and adjectival
verbs. The test of whether a noun or verb is adjectival is that it can occur without any
additional morphology as the modifier of a noun. However, these subclasses have
undergone various redistributions in different Oceanic languages, and this can sometimes
make it difficult to determine whether a given reconstruction was a noun or a verb. Ross
(1998a) gives a detailed study of the syntax of POc adjectival categories and of subsequent
developments, and a second study (Ross 1998b) focuses on the fate of adjectival verbs and
nouns in certain Western Oceanic languages.

[1] I am indebted to John Lynch for reading two drafts of a paper of which this chapter is a revised extract
  and for commenting in detail on South Vanuatu reflexes and for providing corrections and additional data.
  I am also grateful for comments by John Bowden, Bethwyn Evans, Françoise Ozanne-Rivierre and
  Andrew Pawley.

194     Malcolm Ross


    Languages in which there is no adjective class or in which there is a small class of
adjectives or adjective-like words are fairly common among the world’s languages, as
Dixon (1977, 1982) has shown, and, if we count the small class of adjectival nouns as
more adjective-like than adjectival verbs, then Dixon’s generalisation extends to POc.
Dixon divides properties into seven semantic categories: dimension, age, value, colour,
physical property, human/animal propensity, and speed. In Oceanic languages, speed
belongs with strength and toughness, a subcategory of physical property, and so I treat
it thus (§5.3). Of Dixon’s categories, I will here not discuss value (‘good’, ‘bad’), human/
animal propensity (e.g. ‘kind’, ‘clever’, ‘happy’, ‘jealous’, ‘tame’) or speed (‘quick’,
‘slow’), as these are applied either entirely or generally to animate rather than to inanimate
entities. The category of physical properties is a large one, and some of its subcategories
will also be ignored here, for similar reasons.[2] This leaves the following semantic
categories which include properties of inanimate objects:

__ol__
   1.    dimension and distance: e.g. ‘big’, ‘small’, ‘long’, ‘short’, ‘wide’, ‘narrow’, ‘near’, ‘far’
   2.    age: e.g. ‘new’, ‘old’
   3.    colour: e.g. ‘red’, ‘black’, ‘white’, ‘yellow’
   4.    physical property:
         a. form: e.g. ‘straight’, ‘flat’, ‘rough’, ‘smooth’
         b. weight: ‘heavy’, ‘light’
         c. strength, toughness and speed: ‘strong’, ‘weak’, ‘hard’, ‘soft’
         d. content: ‘full’, ‘empty’
         e. temperature: e.g. ‘hot’, ‘cold’
         f. wetness and dryness: e.g. ‘wet’, ‘dry’

This categorisation is somewhat ad hoc, but, other than colours, its terms situate the object
they describe relative to ‘a contextually determined standard of evaluation’ (Croft
1990:260). These standards of evaluation are the basic human standards of dimension, age
and so on. I add distance to Dixon’s dimension category, as terms for ‘near’ and ‘far’
overlap with dimension terms in Oceanic languages.

   Dixon assigns languages to one of three broad types with regard to the grammatical
behaviour of their property terms. There are:

__ol__
  A.     languages like English, where there is a large open class of adjectives;
  B.     languages like Samoan, where there is no distinct class of adjectives, but an open class of property terms which is a subclass of verbs;
  C.     languages like Hausa, which have a closed, usually rather small, class of ‘adjectives’ and one or more open classes of property terms which are subclasses of nouns and/or verbs.

I have placed ‘adjectives’ in inverted commas in Type C because Dixon defines this class
in terms of its meanings rather than in terms of its grammatical behaviour. In languages of
Type A, there is an adjective class, i.e. a class of property terms whose grammatical
behaviour is distinct from nouns or verbs. In languages of Type B, there is no such class.
In languages of Type C, there is a closed class of property terms. Dixon does not discuss

[2] These include natural states, e.g. ‘raw’/‘unripe’ (vol. 1, p.155), ‘ripe’ (vol. 1, p.157), ‘rotten’, and physical
  conditions of animate beings: (e.g. ‘alive’, ‘dead’, ‘healthy’, ‘sick’, ‘hungry’, ‘thirsty’).

                                                      Properties of inanimate objects   195

their grammatical behaviour in depth, and one can envisage several subtypes of Type C,
depending on (i) whether the members of the closed class are adjectives (i.e. behave
differently from nouns and verbs) or form a subclass of nouns or verbs, and (ii) whether
the one or more open classes are subclasses of nouns and/or verbs. He indicates, however,
that the closed class is more likely to grammatically resemble nouns than verbs (1982:56).
As I indicated above, POc was evidently a Type C language where the closed class was
indeed a subclass of noun, the open class a subclass of verb.

   One of Dixon’s central findings is that in a Type C language, the members of the closed
class usually belong to the semantic domains of dimension, age, colour and value.
However, the converse is usually not true: not all property terms in these domains are
adjectives. Instead, there are semantic oppositions where one pole is denoted by an
adjective, the other by a verbal form. Often, the verbal form denotes the outcome of an
event (e.g. cooked) whereas the adjective denotes the state prior to such an event (e.g.
raw).

   Basically, POc property terms conformed to these generalisations (Ross 1998a). The
members of the adjectival noun class did indeed belong to the semantic domains of
dimension, age, colour and value. However, they offer a small variation on Dixon’s
typology in that there were no underived adjectival nouns denoting colours. Instead, colour
adjectival nouns were derived from other nouns (§4), a complication which apparently
does not occur in any of the languages in Dixon’s sample.

   I have found twenty Oceanic languages which have a small property-term class for
which a probably exhaustive list of underived members is available. The meanings
represented in these small classes are listed below, together with the number of languages
in whose small class each meaning is represented:

__pre__
  dimension               age              value                   strength/toughness
  ‘big’        17         ‘new’ 9          ‘good’         5        ‘hard, strong’ 1
  ‘small’      16         ‘old’ 6          ‘bad’          4        ‘soft’         1
  ‘long, tall’ 6          ‘ripe’ 1         ‘true, real’   2
  ‘short’       4                          ‘beautiful’    1
  ‘thin’        1
  ‘far’         1

Except for one language (Sye) in which terms denoting strength/toughness belong to the
small class, these meanings all fall into the domains of dimension, age and value.

   The small-class terms in the twenty languages for the three most frequent meanings,
‘big’, ‘small’ and ‘new’, are listed below:

__pre__
                          ‘big’                     ‘small’                 ‘new’
 Maleu                    amviŋe                    kapori-                 —
 Mangap-Mbula             biibi                     musaana                 —
 Gumawana                 —                         —                       vau
 Tawala                   banei-                    habulu-                 wou-
 Saliba (Suau)            woiyawaudoi               gagili                  —
 Bali-Vitu                kapou                     kakauku                 vahoru
 Nakanai                  uru                       bisi                    halaba
 Tigak                    lavu                      —                       —
 Halia                    pani                      —                       —
 Teop                     —                         rutaa                   —
 Zabana                        leɣaha                           rekaha                       foforu
 Longgu                        bweina, vae                      kiki                         —
 Tamambo                       tawera                           vorivori                     —
 Paamese                       haitamene                        havivii                      haiitee-haau
 Lewo                          —                                —                            viu
 Sye                           oroŋ, nmah                       viroɣ                        —
 Tinrin                        d̡oṛo                           hɯwɯ[-n̡ã]                   hãmã[-n̡ã]
 Xârâcùù                       mwƭƭ                             —                            —
 Mokilese                      soapoan, leklekin                —                            —
 Bauan                         levu                             lailai                       vou

196     Malcolm Ross

Although the same meanings occur in the small class across a number of languages, only
for one of these, ‘new’, reflecting POc *paqoRu (p.209), are the majority of the items
cognate with each other. This means that the other meanings listed above, including ‘big’
and ‘small’, have remained in the small class in most of these languages, but that lexical
replacement has occurred.

    The practical consequence of these observations is that, among underived property
terms, only POc *paqoRu ‘new’ can be assigned to the class of adjectival nouns on the
basis of this list. However, there is morphological evidence, noted below, that POc *lapuat
‘big’ (p.197), *qitik/*qitek ‘small’ and POc *riki(t,q)/*ri-riki(t,q) ‘small’ (p.200) were also
adjectival nouns.

    With other underived items, we encounter the problem noted in volume 1, p.35: it is
often impossible to assign a POc reconstruction to the appropriate word class. But the
situation is not all gloom in this regard. One indicator of the class of a property term is
derivational morphology.

    Two morphemes occurred with some frequency in the derivation of these words, and
others more rarely. The suffix *-ka derived adjectival nouns, whilst the prefix *ma-
occurred in adjectival verbs. There is an important difference in the statuses of these
affixes in POc, however. POc *-ka was apparently a productive suffix (Ross 2000; see
below, for example *[tubu]tubu[-ka] ‘thick’ (p.208); *rapu-ka ‘old’ (p.211); *keja-ka
‘green’ (p.217)). PMP *ma- was a prefix that derived stative verbs, often from abstract
nouns, and occurred as a fossil in a number of POc adjectival verb forms (Evans & Ross
2001),[3] for example, POc *mataq ‘raw’ (vol. 1, p.155), *maosak ‘ready to be eaten’
(vol. 1, p.157), *maqasin ‘be salty’ (vol. 1, p.159, this volume Ch. 3, §7.8, and several
below). In a good many cases, forms with and without *ma- are reconstructable in POc,
with no obvious difference in meaning (e.g. *[ma]lago ‘long, tall’ (p.204); *[ma]lawa
‘long, tall, far away’ (p.204); *[ma]tuqa ‘ripe, mature, adult, old’ (p.211)).[4]

    More rarely occurring derivational morphemes are POc *ka-, a fossilised alternant of
*ma-,[5] (Huang 2000, Zeitoun & Huang 2000); *pa- and *paka-, the productive POc
causative prefixes (vol. 1, pp.26–27), which were also used to form adverbs; and POc *ta-,
which was productive and derived agentless statives from dynamic transitive verbs.


[3] The story of *ma- in Evans and Ross (2001) is better founded than that in vol. 1, p.25.

[4] This circumstance is discussed at length by Evans and Ross (2001).

[5] At a very early period (PAn/PMP), *ka- was a morpheme that derived statives, whilst *ma- was the
  corresponding finite form (from *‹um› + *ka-; with regard to *‹um› see vol. 1, p.29). Thus Huang
  (2000:378) shows that in Mayrinax Atayal (Formosan) statives that take ma- in their declarative
  affirmative form take *ka- in their negative form. Zeitoun and Huang (2000) show that in Pazeh, ma-
  statives have ka- in the irrealis (p.402), the imperative (p.406), and in non-‘actor’ focus forms of statives,
  e.g. ka-kelem-an ‘be oversalted (of cooked food)’ vs ma-kelem ‘be salty’ (p.407).

                                                             Properties of inanimate objects        197

   The remainder of this chapter is concerned with reconstructed forms for POc property
terms. In all domains except colour, property terms tend to fall into antonym pairs, and are
presented here in these pairs wherever appropriate.

7.2 Dimension and distance

7.2.1 ‘big’/‘small’

   It was noted above that lexical replacement of terms for ‘big’ and ‘small’ is common,
whilst ‘new’ has tended to remain constant since POc times. A moment’s reflection shows
that this is also true in English, apparently because people tend to exaggerate size and to
play word games with the terms for it. As well as big we find large, great, huge, gigantic,
enormous, immense, colossal, mammoth, massive, prodigious and more recently
ginormous and humungous. However, what seem to have been the basic POc terms are
reconstructable. They are *lapuat ‘big, large, important’, *qitik, *qitek ‘small’ and
*riki(t,q) ‘small’, and the circumstantial evidence presented above suggests that they were
adjectival nouns. This inference is moderately supported in the case of *lapuat by the
presence of two reflexes of the reduplicated intensified form *lap(u)-lapuat (Tigak lap-
lavu, Marshallese lɯap-lɯap) and one of a reduplicated plural form *la-lapuat
(Marshallese lɯ-lɯap). Both reduplication strategies characterised adjectival nouns in POc
(Ross 1998a).

    Elsewhere I have reconstructed the term for ‘big’ as *labwat (Ross 1998a:109), as the
medial consonant in many of the forms below seems to reflect either *b or *bw. The Loniu
and SV forms offer apparent disambiguation in favour of *bw. Whilst *labwat must have
occurred in the history of many of the forms below, it is not reflected by the Roviana,
Hoava, SES, Mota or Raga forms, where the medial consonant appears to reflect *p The
form *lapuat accounts for apparent reflexes of both *-bw- and *-p-. The forms which
appear to reflect *-p- do just that. Moreover, Tigak lavu, West Kara labu, Raga lavoa and
Bauan levu directly reflect medial *-pu-.[6] The forms which appear to reflect *-bw- also do
just that, but this *-bw- reflects a later interstage: POc medial *-pua- became first *-pwa-,
then *-bwa-.

[6] For Tigak and W. Kara the interstages *-pwu-, then *-bu- must be posited. For Bauan, where we find levu
  for expected **lavua, we must infer irregular raising of *-a- to -e- and loss of later final *-a.

    The sound changes in the paragraph above remain tentative, as there are few cases to
compare this cognate set with. However, the least obvious step proposed above is that
*-bwa- developed from *-pwa-, and there is reasonably good evidence for the step from *pw
to *bw (vol. 1, p.16).

    The Mapos Buang and Mumeng Patep forms may be non-cognate, as their final -k
reflects POc *-R, *-k or *-q.

<
POc *lapuat ‘big, important’ (Lichtenberk 1986:350: *la(m)pat ‘(be) big, great’)
 Adm: Seimat              la-lap             ‘big, important’
 Adm: Loniu               lapʷa(na-n)        ‘big, important’
 Adm: Koro                laba-n             ‘chieftain’
 Adm: Mussau              (kula)laba         ‘big, important’
 NNG: Manam                     laba                   ‘big, wide’
 NNG: Manam                     labata-                ‘width’
 NNG:     Terebu                labi                   ‘big, important’
 NNG:     Kairiru               (wo)lab                ‘big, important’
 NNG:     Ulau-Suain            laba                   ‘big, important’
 MM:      Lavongai              lava                   ‘big, important’
 MM:      Tigak                 lavu                   ‘big, important’
 MM:      Tigak                 lap-lavu               ‘very big’
 MM:      Kara (West)           labu                   ‘big, important’
 MM:      Nalik                 laba                   ‘big, important’
 MM:      Roviana               lavata                 ‘great’
 MM:      Hoava                 lavati                 ‘be big’
 SES:     Talise                lava                   ‘big, important’
 SES:     Lau                   (a)lafa                ‘chieftain’
 SES:     Arosi                 (a)laha                ‘chieftain’
 SES:     Sa’a                  raha                   ‘big, important’
 NCV:     Mota                  lava                   ‘big, important’
 NCV:     Raga                  lavoa                  ‘big, important’
 NCV:     Lewo                  lapa                   ‘fat’
 NCV:     Nguna                 lapa                   ‘big, important’
 SV:      Lenakel               ipwər [7]                 ‘big, important’
 SV:      N Tanna               empwət                 ‘big, important’
 SV:      Whitesands            epwət                  ‘big, important’
 SV:      Anejom                (a)lpwas               ‘big, important’
 Mic:     Marshallese           lɯap                   ‘great, large’
 Mic:     Marshallese           lɯ-lɯap                ‘great, large (PL)’
 Mic:     Marshallese           lɯap-lɯap              ‘very great, very large’
 Mic: Woleaian                  rap                    ‘big, important’
 Fij:      Bauan                levu                   ‘big, important’
 cf. also:
 NNG: Mapos Buang               levk                   ‘big, important’
 NNG: Patep                     lɛvak                  ‘big, important’
>

[7] John Lynch (pers. comm.) points out that the initial i- of Lenakel ipwər is the regular reflex of POc *l-,
  whilst the initial e- of N. Tanna empwət and Whitesands epwət reflects a sequence of accreted *a- (cf.
  Anejom a- in (a)lpwas) and *-i- reflecting POc *l-.

198    Malcolm Ross


   Inherited POc terms for ‘small’ were *qitik, with a variant *qitek, and *riki(t,q)/*ri-
riki(t,q). There is reasonable evidence in the cognate set below that POc *ri-riki(t,q) was a
plural form. Since reduplication of the kind reflected in POc *ri-riki(t,q) was one of the
ways in which POc plural adjectival nouns were marked (Ross 1998a),we can infer that
POc *riki(t,q) was singular. In a number of languages which reflect *ri-riki(t,q), however,
there is a suppletive singular form (another indicator that this was an adjectival noun, not
an adjectival verb; Ross 1998a).

                                                          Properties of inanimate objects      199

   In Proto Polynesian, *riki (reflecting POc *riki(t,q)) had become plural, contrasting
with PPn *qiti ‘small (SG)’ (from POc *qitik), but there is no evidence that this had
occurred at an earlier interstage. This contrast is reflected in the following compounds,
which reflect PPn *tama ‘child’ (from POc *tama- ‘father’):

__pre__
      PPn                      *tama-qiti                 *tama-riki
                               ‘child’                    ‘chidren’
      Tongan                   (tama-siʔi)[8]               tama-iki
      E Uvean                  (tama-siʔi)                tama-liki
      Rennellese               tama-ʔiti-ʔiti             tama-giki
      Hawaiian                 kama-iki (rare)            kama-liʔi
      Tahitian                 tama-iti                   tama-riʔi
      Rarorongan               tama-iti                   tama-riki
      Maori                    tama-iti                   tama-riki

[8] Tongan and E. Uvean -siʔi would reflect apparent PPn *tiqi, and are therefore perhaps metathesised
  reflexes of PPn *qiti.

The reconstruction of PPn *riki is complicated by the fact that Tongan has two forms: iki,
reflecting *riki, and liki, which occurs only in compounds. The latter may be a borrowing.
On the other hand, it may reflect the separately reconstructable form POc *liki (see below).
If it does, then we are left with the possibility that some of the Polynesian forms here
attributed to POc *riki(t,q) instead reflect POc *liki, as POc *r and *l have merged in all
Polynesian languages other than Tongan and Niuean.

    Also apparently reconstructable are *drik(i), *liki, *siki and *kiki. Despite their
similarity, there is no point in trying to derive these from each other. Rather, the human
affection for small creatures, and prototypically for babies, has resulted in the same kind of
word play among Oceanic speakers as we hear in English tiny, teeny, teeny-weeny and wee.
If we ignore the criteria for reconstructing POc items and look for further candidates for
word-play, we find for example siʔi ‘small, younger’ in Tongan, sisi in Futuna-Aniwa
(Polynesian), and a long list in Puluwatese: kitikit, iyekkit, kikkit, lekit, rik, rirrik, mettik,
rarikrik. It may well be, for example, that the items listed under *kiki are not due to shared
inheritance but to independent parallel word play. It also seems, despite the doubts that
have been expressed about this kind of sound symbolism (Hinton, Nichols & Ohala
1994:4), that Oceanic speakers have a preference for the high front vowel in terms for
‘little’, a phenomenon which is common in other areas of the world too (Ultan 1978).

<
PMP *qitik ‘small, little; few’ (Blust 1986; ACD)
POc *qitik, *qitek ‘small’
 Yap: Yapese              ʔacīg
 NNG: Gitua               keteka
 NNG: Gedaged             kitik
 NNG: Bukawa              atiʔ
 NNG: Zenag               ktok
 MM: Roviana              ɣiteke
 MM: Zabana               te
 SES: Kwara’ae            tiʔ-tiʔ
 Mic: Carolinian          xit
 Pn:    Rapanui           ʔiti-ʔiti
 Pn:    Samoan            iti-iti
 Pn:      Rennellese       ʔiti-ʔiti      ‘be small, not much, nor many’
 Pn:      Hawaiian         iki
 Pn:      Tahitian         iti
 Pn:      Tuamotuan        iti
 Pn:      Rarotongan       iti
 Pn:      Maori            iti
>

200    Malcolm Ross

<
PAn *diki[t,q] ‘little, few, small in amount’ (ACD)
POc *riki(t,q) ‘small’
POc *ri-riki(t,q) ‘small (PL)’
 MM: Bali                  (ma)ri-(ma)riki ‘small (PL)’ (cf. kakauku SG)
 NCV: Mota                 -rig              ‘small’
 NCV: Tamambo              (wa)ri-riɣi       ‘small (PL)’ (cf. vorivori SG)
 NCV: Raga                 -rigi             ‘small’
 Fij:   Rotuman            ri-riʔi           ‘small, young (PL)’ (cf. meʔa-meʔa SG)
 Pn:    Tongan             iki               ‘small’
 Pn:    Tongan             i-iki             ‘small (non-singular)’
 Pn:    Niuean             iki-iki           ‘small’
 Pn:    Tokelauan          liki              ‘small-sized’
 Pn:    Tuvalu             liki              ‘small (of person or chicken)’
 Pn:    Rennellese giki                     ‘small’
 Pn:    Tikopia            riki              ‘small’
 Pn:    Sikaiana           liki-liki         ‘small’
 Pn:    Sikaiana           li-liki           ‘small (PL)’
 Pn:    Hawaiian           liʔi              ‘small’
 Pn:    Tahitian           riʔi              ‘small (PL)’ (cf. iti SG)
 Pn:    Rarotongan         riki              ‘small’
 Pn:    Maori              riki              ‘small’
 Pn:    Maori              ri-riki           ‘small (PL)’
 Pn:    Tuamotuan          riki              ‘small’
 Pn:    Futuna-Aniwa rik-riki                ‘small (PL)’ (cf. sisi SG)
>

<
POc *drik(it,iq) ‘small’
 NNG: Amara               di-dik          ‘small’
 Mic: Kosraean            ṣik            ‘small’
 Mic: Carolinian          -ṣix           ‘small, little, weak (in compounds only)’
 Mic: Marshallese ṛik                    ‘lowly, small’
 Mic: Marshallese         ṛ-ṛik         ‘lowly, small (PL)’
 Mic: Marshallese         ṛik-ṛik       ‘very lowly, very small’
 Mic: Puluwatese          ṛik            ‘be small (usually as a qualifier)’
 Mic: Puluwatese          ṛirrik         ‘small’
>

<
POc *liki ‘small’ (perhaps only in compounds)
 NNG: Arove             (tu)lik-lik     ‘small’
 MM: Lavongai           lik             ‘small’
 MM: Tigak              (lak)lik        ‘small’
 MM: Lihir              (ia)lik         ‘small’
 MM:     Madak             (kaka)lik       ‘small’
 MM:     Tolai             (iki)lik        ‘small’
 MM:     Minigir           (siki)liki      ‘small’
 MM:     Label             (si-sik)lik     ‘small’
 MM:     Label             (kak)lik        ‘boy’
 Pn:     Tongan            -liki           ‘small (in compounds only)’
 Pn:     Samoan            liʔi            ‘scattered in small fragments’
 Pn:     Ifira-Mele        -riki           ‘small’
 Pn:     Takuu             -riki           (diminutive)
>

                                                       Properties of inanimate objects   201

<
POc *kiki ‘small’
 MM: Torau                 kiki-(na)
 SES: Gela                 kiki
 SES: Talise               ki-kiki
 SES: Longgu               kiki
 NCV: Axamb                kiki
 NCV: Port Sandwich        kekei
PWOc *siki ‘small’
 NNG: Adzera               (i)siʔ
 NNG: Manam                siʔi-siʔi
 MM: Minigir               siki(liki)
 MM: Label                 si-sik(lik)
 MM: Babatana              (va)siki
>

   There is good evidence that POc had at least two lexicalised possessee-like attribute
constructions, whereby ‘mother of an X’ meant ‘big X’, and ‘child of an X’ meant ‘small
X’. A number of Oceanic languages in all three primary subgroups use reflexes of ‘mother
of’ and ‘child of’ as the usual adjectives meaning ‘big’ and ‘small’, or perhaps ‘biggest’
and ‘smallest’, respectively.

<
POc *tina-ña ‘her/his mother; big, biggest’
 Adm: Bipi               tinan            ‘big’
 Adm: Nyindrou           tinan            ‘large, big’
 NNG: Tami               tina-tin         ‘very big, monstrous’
 NNG: Malai              tina             ‘big’
 NNG: Takia              tinan            ‘huge’
 MM: Label               tna              ‘big’
 NCV: Fortsenal          tina-na          ‘mother, huge, large’
POc *natu-ña ‘her/his child; small, smallest’
 Adm: Drehet             neci             ‘child; small, little’
 NNG: Dami               nālu             ‘small, little’
 MM: Patpatar            nat              ‘small’
 MM: Tolai               nat              ‘small’
 NCV: Lewo               nari-            ‘child, smallest’
>

202      Malcolm Ross


These attributes turn up in odd lexicalised expressions, for example, Motu (PT) sina-vai
‘river’ (literally ‘mother of waters’ (Ch. 3, §6.1)); Gedaged boi tinan ‘Morning Star’
(literally ‘mother of stars’ (Ch. 6, §5.2.1)).

    The reconstructable POc possessive construction was probably as follows:[9]

[9] This differs from the possessive-like attribute constructions reconstructed by Ross (1998b). There, the
  possessor is non-specific; here the possessor is apparently specific.

__pre__
    *a     tina-ña         Rumaq
    ART mother-P:3S house
    ‘a/the big house’ (more literally: ‘a/the mother of house(s)’)

This seems to have remained a live metaphor for a long time (and is perhaps still alive in
some Oceanic languages). Evidence for this is that where the reflex of *tina- or *natu- has
been replaced in a language, this construction often shares in the lexical replacement. Thus
in Lewo (Early 1994a), the term for ‘little’/‘child’ still reflects *natu-ña, but the term for
‘very big’/‘mother’ has undergone lexical replacement:
Lewo (NCV):

__pre__
a. nari-n         sisi
   offspring-n child
   ‘a little kid’ (more literally ‘the offspring of children’)
b. ane-n     laŋi
   mother-n wind
   ‘an immensely powerful hurricane’ (more literally ‘the mother of winds’)

Similarly in Tinrin (New Caledonia) hɯwɯ[n̡ã] is both ‘small’ and ‘child of, sprout of’.

   Matisoff (1992) has examined ‘mother of’ and ‘child of’ constructions which serve as
augmentatives and diminutives in a range of Asian languages. Interestingly, whilst he
reports a number of cases where ‘mother of’ and ‘child of’ are lexicalised in collocations
where they mean something like ‘the most important’ and ‘a component/member of’, in
none of these cases do ‘mother of’ and ‘child of’ seem to have been lexicalised as
independent lexemes meaning ‘large’ and ‘small’.


7.2.2 Other dimensions

   English (and other European languages) have several antonym pairs denoting
dimensions. Tall refers to the longitudinal dimension of a vertically oriented object, long to
the longitudinal dimension of a horizontally oriented object. Short is the antonym of both
tall and long. Wide and narrow refer to the transverse dimension of a flat object, thick and
thin to the transverse dimension of an object which is not flat. Far and near(by) refer to
distances, not to objects.

    POc evidently made no horizontal/vertical distinction, so that *b(w)arapu, *[ma]lago
and *[ma]lawa were used for ‘tall’ and ‘long’, and the two latter items evidently also for
‘far’ (§2.2.1). There are fewer reflexes of *tuku and *botoŋ ‘short’, so it is harder to know
just how they were used (§2.2.2).

    On the surface there appear to have been no POc etyma with the basic meanings ‘wide’
and ‘narrow’. However, it is just possible that *[ma]lawa simply denoted a large
dimension, regardless of whether it was longitudinal (‘long’) or transverse (‘wide’). The

                                                        Properties of inanimate objects     203

evidence for this is indirect. POc *[ma]lawa ‘long, tall’ continues PMP *lawa, glossed
‘wide’, but a number of non-Oceanic reflexes also mean long: Malagasy lava, Manggarai
lewe, Ngadha leva, and Palue lawa all mean ‘long’. Fordata lawa is glossed ‘length’
(ACD). It therefore seems likely that PMP *lawa also meant ‘long’, and possible that POc
*[ma]lawa meant both ‘wide’ and ‘long’.

   In a number of daughter languages reflexes of POc *ta-pola(s) ‘spread out (as of a
mat)’ (derivationally related to *polas-i- ‘spread (s.t.) out (VT)’; see p.208) are by
extension used to mean ‘wide’ (§2.2.4). In some Western Oceanic languages a reflex of
*baban ‘flat; board, plank, canoe strake; flat shelf of rock’ is used for ‘wide’, but this is by
extension from ‘flat’. Fijian raba ‘wide, broad’ reflects POc *raba(r), the basic meaning of
which was also ‘flat, level’. Terms for ‘flat’ are covered in §5.1. No POc term for ‘narrow’
is reconstructable. Most modern languages use the terms for ‘big’ and ‘small’ with
reference to the width of a path or a beach, and I infer that the same was true of POc.

   POc terms for ‘thick’ were POc *ma-tolu, *kuba and *[tubu-]tubu(-ka), for ‘thin’
*manipis and *ma-tipi(s) (§2.2.5).


7.2.2.1 ‘tall’, ‘long’

    Of the three terms for ‘tall’ and ‘long’, *b(w)arapu is underived and its Tamambo,
Cèmuhî, and Bauan reflexes belong to the small closed adjectival class in their respective
languages, so it is possible that *b(w)arapu belonged to the small class of adjectival nouns.

    The other two terms, *[ma]lago and *[ma]lawa, clearly are derived. The final *-a of
*[ma]lawa is reconstructed on the basis of the non-Oceanic evidence. A number of
Western Oceanic languages (Lou, Titan, Nyindrou, Bing, Takia, Kayupulau, Gumawana,
Torau) appear to reflect a final *-e. We can posit two possible sources of this, although
neither reflects a regular process. The first is that in many Western Oceanic languages, an
adjective takes a reflex of the third person possessor suffix *-ña either by default or when
it agrees with a singular head noun. The palatal nasal *-ñ- may have caused the *-a- of
*[ma]lawa-ña to be raised to *-e- in *[ma]lawe-ña. This is a reasonable interpretation of
the Lou, Titan, Takia, Gumawana and Torau reflexes. Alternatively, in many Western
Oceanic languages of the NNG and PT linkages, there is a locative postposition -i or -ai
(relecting the POc locative proform *iai), and forms like Sio malawa-e and Bing malwe-i
suggest that some instances of -e may reflect final *-a-i resulting from its capture.

<
POc *b(w)arapu ‘long, tall’
 PT:    Kiriwina        -vanau              ‘long’
 MM: Kara (East)        vaiaf               ‘long’
 MM: Nalik              baraf               ‘long’
 MM: Siar               ba-baraf            ‘long’
 MM: Nehan              barah               ‘long’
 MM: Maringe            brahu               ‘long’
 SES: Bauro             borahu              ‘long’
 NCV: NE Ambae          gwaravu             ‘long’
 NCV: Tamambo           baravu              ‘long’
 SV:    Anejom          (o)pra              ‘long’
 NCal: Cèmuhî           pílɛh́ɛ̃́-          ‘tall, big, enormous; size’
 Fij:   Bauan           balavu              ‘long, tall’ (l for expected *r)
>

204   Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *[ma]laŋkaw  [10] ‘high, tall’ (ACD: *laŋkaw)
POc *[ma]lago ‘long, tall’
 NNG: Amara            melak            ‘far away’
 NNG: Arove            malak            ‘long, far away’
 NNG: Kaulong          (no)malak        ‘long’
 MM: Meramera          lago             ‘long’
>

[10] A PMP form with *ma- is reflected by Palawan mblaŋkbw, Molbog molaŋkow, and Uma molaŋko, all
   ‘tall’ (data from Tryon, ed. 1995).

<
PMP *lawa ‘wide’ (ACD)
POc *[ma]lawa ‘(?) long, tall, far away; wide’
 Adm: Lou              ɛlɛwɛ-n            ‘long, tall’
 Adm: Titan            aláwe-n            ‘long, tall’
 Adm: Nyindrou         lawe               ‘long, tall’
 NNG: Gitua            malawa             ‘long; far away’
 NNG: Malai            malau              ‘long; far away’
 NNG: Mangap           molo               ‘long, tall’
 NNG: Sio              malawa             ‘a long time’
 NNG: Sio              malawa(e)          ‘a long way’
 NNG: Bebeli           lo-loi             ‘long’
 NNG: Bing             malwe(i)           ‘long’
 NNG: Takia            milae-n            ‘long’
 NNG: Kairiru          milawo-ŋ           ‘long’
 SJ:   Kayupulau       marawe             ‘long’
 PT:   Gumawana        manawe-            ‘long’
 PT:   Mekeo           maeva              ‘long’
 MM: Nakanai           malau              ‘long’
 MM: Nalik             laua-lau           ‘far away’
 MM: Tolai             lo-lovi            ‘long’
 MM: Petats            ra-ro-n            ‘long’
 MM: Torau             marae-la           ‘long’
 SES: Kwaio            la-lau             ‘far’
 SV:   Ura             lau(pe)            ‘long, tall’
 SV:   Anejom          lau, laulau        ‘long (of time)’
 Pn:   Niuean          loa                ‘long, tall’
 Pn:   Samoan          loa                ‘be old, ancient; be a long time’
 Pn:   Maori           loa                ‘long, tall’
>

7.2.2.2 ‘short’

   Two terms for ‘short’ are reconstructed. All the supporting data for *tuku are from
Western Oceanic languages except for Mussau tuku. In the unlikely event that the latter
were a borrowing, *tuku would then be of Proto Western Oceanic, rather than of POc,
vintage.

                                                    Properties of inanimate objects      205

<
POc *tuku ‘short’
 Adm: Mussau            tuku            ‘short’
 NNG: Mutu              tuku            ‘short’
 NNG: Bilibil           tu-tuk          ‘short’
 NNG: Manam             -tuku(ra)       ‘short’
 MM: Label              tuk             ‘short’
 MM: Babatana           tuko            ‘short’
>

<
POc *botoŋ ‘short’
 MM: Bali               botoŋo          ‘short’
 MM: Meramera           boto            ‘short’
 MM: Tigak              poto            ‘short’
 SES: Arosi             pwa-pwatu       ‘short’
 Fij:   Wayan           boto            (postposed particle) ‘restrictive, only, just’
 Fij:   Rotuman         pofo            ‘tiny; lump, small projection’
 Pn:    Mele-Fila       pō-poto         ‘short’
 Pn:    Rapanui         poto-poto       ‘short’
 Pn:    Maori           poto            ‘short’
>

7.2.2.3 ‘far’/‘near’

   There is a tendency to replace terms denoting ‘far’ and ‘near’ with something more
specific, so that instead of generic ‘far’ we get ‘beyond the horizon’ or ‘a long path’.
Indeed, from the vantage point of a smaller island, ‘far away’ inevitably entails ‘beyond
the horizon’. The hypothesis that ‘far away’ was sometimes replaced by ‘a long path’
receives some support from the fact that reflexes of POc *[ma]lago ‘long, tall’ and POc
*[ma]lawa ‘long, tall’ (p.204) are sometimes used in the sense of ‘far away’.

   A POc verbal root *sauq (V) ‘be far away’ is reconstructable.

<
PMP *Zauq ‘far away’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *sauq (V) ‘be far away’
POc *sau-sauq (ADV) ‘far away’
 PT:    Tawala          dau             (V) ‘be far’
 PT:    Tawala          dau-dau-na      (ADJ) ‘far, long’
 PT:    Motu            dau-dau         (ADV) ‘far away’
 MM: Bali               zauku           ‘far away’
 MM: Vitu               ðau             ‘far away’
 MM: Roviana            seu             ‘far’
 MM: Hoava              seo             ‘far’
 SES: Gela              hau             ‘far’
 SES: Bugotu            hau             ‘far’
 SES: Talise            sau-na          ‘far’
 SES: Birao             sau             ‘far’
 SES: Longgu            tau             (V) ‘be far’
 SES:    Kwaio           tau              ‘far’
 SES:    Sa’a            tau              ‘far off, distant’
 NCV:    Raga            hau(tu)          (ADV) ‘far’
 NCV:    Paamese         sau(tin)         (ADV) ‘far’
 SV:     N Tanna         (i)sou           (ADV) ‘far’
 Mic:    Kiribati        rā-roa           (ADV) ‘far’
 Mic:    Ponapean        tō               (ADJ) ‘distant, far off’
 Mic:    Mokilese        tō               ‘far’
 Mic:    Chuukese        tōw              ‘far’
 Mic:    Carolinian      tāw              ‘far’
 Mic:    Woleaian        ttāw             (ADV) ‘far’
 Fij:    Rotuman         sou-sou          (ADV) ‘far’
>

206   Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *ma-Zauq ‘far away’ (Blust 1981b)
POc *ma-sauq (V) ‘be far away’
 Adm: Mussau           masau         ‘far away’
PWOc *ka-sauq (V) ‘be far away’
 NNG: Takia           asau                (ADV, ADJ) ‘far away’
 NNG: Manam           kasau               (ADJ) ‘far away’
 NNG: Manam           kasau(ba)           (ADV) ‘far away’
 MM: Babatana         köu                 ‘far’
 MM: Sisiqa           kəu                 ‘far’
 MM: Nduke            (ɣa)sau             ‘far’
>

In Ysabel (MM) languages, POc *sauq is reflected with the reciprocal prefix *paRi-, as in
Kia (vari)hau ‘far’ and Laghu (vari)hau ‘far’. I take it that the sense was formerly ‘far
from each other’. In Southeast Solomonic languages it occurs with reflexes of the POc
causative *pa- or *paka-, also used to form adverbs, and I assume this is the function of
the prefix here:

__pre__
 SES: W Guad.            (va)sau          ‘far’
 SES: Sa’a               (haʔa)tau        ‘far’
 SES: Arosi              (haʔa)tau        ‘far’
 SES: Bauro              (haɣa)tau        ‘far’


   The POc antonym of *sauq ‘be far away’ was the root *raŋi ‘be near’. However, *raŋi
is not reflected without verb-deriving prefixes and is thus not reconstructable alone in POc.
Most commonly it is reflected with *ga-, a prefix that I do not recognise: it may be a
variant of *ka-, which also occurs with *raŋi.

                                                            Properties of inanimate objects      207

    POc *raŋi appears to be descended from PMP *dani. The replacement of *-n- by *-ŋ-
evidently occurred earlier than POc, as we find Buru (Central Malayo-Polynesian) b-raŋi-n
(ADV) ‘near’.

<
PMP *dani, *Sa-dani, *ma-dani ‘be near’[11]
PCEMP *daŋi ‘be near’
POc *garaŋi ‘be near’
 NNG: Takia           giriŋe-n                     ‘close, near by’
 NNG: Dami            garan                        ‘to, near’
 SES: Lau             garaŋi                       (ADV) ‘near’
 SES: Kwaio           galani, galaŋi               (ADV) ‘near’
 SES: Kwaio           galani-a, galaŋi-a           (V) ‘be near’
 SES: Arosi           garaŋi                       ‘near’
 SES: Fagani          karaŋi                       ‘near’
>

[11] Supporting evidence for PMP *dani is Kagayanen Manobo dani (ADV) ‘near’, Dobel ren (ADV) ‘near’.
   Evidence for *Sa-dani is Isneg (N. Cordilleran) adanni (ADV) ‘near’, Limos Kalinga (C. Cordilleran)
   adaní (ADV) ‘near’, N. Samareño, Samar-Leyte, Waray (Bisayan) ha-ráni, Masbateño, Sorsogon, Gubat
   (Danaw) ha-raní. Evidence for *ma-dani is Maranao, Iranun (Danaw) ma-rani, Ata, Dibabwon, Tigwa
   (Manobo) ma-dani, Ilianen mi-rani.

<
POc *karaŋi ‘be near’
 Adm: Mussau          kala-kalangi-na              (ADV) ‘near’
 NNG: Mangap          kolouŋa-na                   (ADV) ‘near’
 NNG: Poeng           ko-koroŋo                    (ADV) ‘near’
 SES: Gela            ɣaraŋi                       ‘near’
 SES: Bugotu          ɣarani                       ‘near’
 SES: Talise          ɣaraŋi                       ‘near’
>

<
POc *pa-raŋi, *paka-raŋi ‘be near’
 SES: W Guad.         va-raŋi                      ‘near’
 SES: Bauro           haɣa-raŋi                    ‘near’
 SES: Kahua           haɣa-raŋi                    ‘near’
>

  There was also a POc term *tata ‘near’, perhaps an adverb:

<
POc *tata (ADV) ‘near’
 MM: Lungga            tata                        ‘near’
 MM: Nduke             tata                        ‘near’
 MM: Roviana           tata                        (ADV) ‘near’
 MM: Hoava             tata                        ‘near’
 Pn:    Tongan         tata                        ‘be near’
 Pn:    Tahitian       fa-tata                     (ADV) ‘near’
 Pn:    Maori          tata                        ‘be near, close’
>

7.2.2.4 ‘wide, spread out’

<
PMP *belaj ‘spread out to dry’ (ACD)
POc (?) *ta-pola(s) ‘spread out (as of a mat); wide’
 NNG: Poeng             (sasa)pola             ‘wide’
 SES: Bugotu            tavoða                 ‘wide’
 SES:     Lau            afola               ‘wide’
 SES:     Arosi          ahora               ‘wide’
 NCV:     Raga           tavola              ‘flat, wide, smooth’
 Pn:      Tongan         tafola              (VI) ‘be spread out, scattered about’
>

208    Malcolm Ross


This term is related derivationally to POc *polas, *polas-i- ‘spread (s.t.) out’, reflected in
(NCV) Tamambo vuolasi ‘spread (mat)’, Paamese hoosi ‘lay out (mat)’ and in (Pn)
Tongan and Samoan fola ‘spread’ and Tongarevan ho-hora ‘spread out; wide open’. It is
probable that -pola in Poeng sasapola is derived independently from a reflex of POc
*polas. If so, then *ta-pola(s) is reconstructable only in PEOc.


7.2.2.5 ‘thick’/‘thin’

   Three forms can be reconstructed for ‘thick’. The third, *[tubu]tubu[-ka], is derived
from *tubuq ‘grow’.

<
PCEMP *telu ‘thick’
POc *ma-tolu ‘thick’ (Clark 1996)
 NNG: Manam             matoli
 NNG: Sio               mata-tola
 MM: Nakanai            bitolu
 SES: W Guad.           matolu
 NCV: Mota              matol-tol
 NCV: Paamese           mate-tel
 NCV: Nguna             matolu
 SV:   Anejom           (a)mesej
 Mic: Marshallese       micel
 Mic: Ponapean          mosul
 Fij:  Rotuman          mafolu
 Pn:   Tongan           matolu
>

<
PMP *[ma-]kumba ‘thick (in dimension)’[12]
POc *kuba ‘thick (in dimension)’
 Fij:  Nadrogaa         kuba
 SV:    Kwamera         -kum-kum
>

[12] The reconstruction of PMP *[ma]-kumba ‘thick’ is supported by the Oceanic data listed here and by
   Da’a na-kumba, Uma mo-kumpa, Buginese ma-umpəʔ.

<
POc *[tubu]tubu[-ka] ‘thick (in dimension)’
 MM: Tolai             tubu
 SES: Lau              ūbu-ūbu-a
 SES: Kwaio            ubu-ubu
 SES: Arosi            ub-ubu-ʔa
>



                                                              Properties of inanimate objects        209


   Two formally related terms are reconstructable for ‘thin’: *ma-tipi(s) and *manipis.
Although at first sight they look like forms derived with PMP *ma- and *maN-
respectively, *manipis has cognates in Taiwan, reflecting PAn *maLipis. The prefix
*maN- in any case dates only from PMP, and so cannot be reflected in *manipis. Instead,
the two forms evidently reflect the same PAn monosyllabic root *-pis ‘thin, tenuous, fine’
(Blust 1988; see vol. 1, pp.27–28) and presumably differed in meaning by some subtlety
which is not clear from their reflexes.

<
PMP *tipis ‘thin’[13]
POc *ma-tipi(s) ‘thin’
 SES: Talise                matipi              ‘thin’
 SES: Birao                 matipi              ‘thin’
>

[13] The reconstruction of PMP *tipis ‘thin’ is supported by the Oceanic data listed here and by Indonesian,
   Javanese and Balinese tipis ‘thin’.

<
PAn *[ma]Lipis ‘thin’[14]
POc *manipis ‘thin’
 NNG: Malai             manipi                  ‘thin’
 NNG: Manam             manipi                  ‘thin’
 MM: Roviana            manivisi                ‘thin’
 MM: Maringe            manivi                  ‘thin’
 SES: Bugotu            manivi                  ‘thin’
 SES: Arosi             manihi                  ‘thin’
 NCV: NE Ambae          manivi-nivi             ‘be/become shallow, low tide, thin’
 NCV: Raga              manev-nevi              ‘thin’
 NCV: Paamese           mahini-hin              ‘thin’ (metathesis)
 Mic: Kiribati          mmani                   ‘thin’
 Mic: Ponapean          menipi-nip              ‘thin’
 Fij:  Rotuman          mahini                  ‘thin’ (metathesis)
 Pn:   Tongan           manifi                  ‘thin’
 Pn:   Tongan           manifi-nifi             ‘comparatively thin’
 Pn:   Samoan           manifi                  ‘thin’
 Pn:   Samoan           mānifi-nifi             ‘thin’
>


[14] Tsuchida (1976:139) reconstructs PAn *Nix1epis, in the orthography of Ross (1992) *Lihepis. However,
   the only reflex of *-h- occurs in Saisiat (Taiwan) lih-lihpih-an, which may be the result of modifying
   *-li- to rhyme with *-pih. Accordingly I reconstruct PAn *Lipis, PMP *nipis.


7.3 Age

   Two POc terms for ‘new’ can be reconstructed: the adjectival noun *paqoRu, which
was also applied to animate beings in the sense of ‘young’ (Pawley 1982b), and
*ka(l,r)abwa, which has fewer reflexes, but as these occur in both MM and NCV
languages, it must be reconstructed as POc. Meso-Melanesian reflexes of the latter reflect
*-l-, North and Central Vanuatu reflexes reflect *-r-.

210     Malcolm Ross

<
PAn *baqeRuh ‘new’ (ACD)
POc *paqoRu ‘new; young, recent’
PNGOc *paqu, *paqoRu ‘new, young’
 Adm: Mussau         ou                            ‘new’
 Adm: Lou            pa-pa-peu-n                   ‘new’
 Adm: Nyindrou       haʔun                         ‘new’
 NNG: Bariai         pau                           ‘new’
 NNG: Mutu           pagu                          ‘new’
 NNG: Gitua          pagu                          ‘new’
 NNG: Lukep          pau-nu                        ‘new’
 NNG: Mangap         po-po-ŋana                    ‘new’
 NNG: Kilenge        pau-a                         ‘new’
 NNG: Poeng          pau                           ‘new’
 NNG: Takia          fau-n                         ‘new’
 NNG: Numbami        wou                           ‘new’
 NNG: Yabem          wakuʔ                         ‘new’
 NNG: Manam          wau-wau                       ‘new’
 SJ:    Sobei        fe-fou                        ‘new’
 PT:    Tawala       wou-na                        ‘new’
 PT:    Misima       va-valu-na                    ‘new’
 PT:    Kiriwina     -vau [15]                     ‘new’
 MM: Bali            vaɣoru                        ‘new’
 MM: Nalik           fakur                         ‘new’
 MM: Tabar           vouru                         ‘new’
 MM: Teop            von                           ‘new’
 MM: Mono            haolu-na                      ‘new’
 MM: Zabana          fo-foru                       ‘new’
 SES: Gela           vaolu                         ‘new; young, fresh, beautiful, in one’s prime; renew’
 SES:      Arosi             haoru                 ‘new, recent, youthful, vigorous’
 NCV:      Paamese           hāu                   ‘new’
 NCV:      Nguna             vau                   ‘new’
 SV:       Sye               (it)vau               ‘new, clean’
 SV:       Ura               vau                   ‘new’
 SV:       Lenakel           vi                    ‘new’
 Mic:      Woleaian          fe                    ‘new, cleaned’
 Fij:      Bauan             vou                   ‘new; newly, recently’
 Pn:       Tongan            foʔou                 ‘new, fresh; strange, unfamiliar’
 Pn:       Samoan            fou                   ‘new; fresh’
>


[15] This form is always suffixed to a classifier.

                                                      Properties of inanimate objects   211

<
POc *ka(l,r)abwa ‘new’
 MM: Bulu              kalaba(ka)         ‘new’
 MM: Nakanai           halaba [16]           ‘new’
 MM: Tolai             kalama             ‘new’
 NCV: Tamambo          haramba            ‘new’
 NCV: Mota             garagʷa            ‘new’
 NCV: Raga             gara               ‘new’ (unexpected loss of final syllable)
 NCV: Tolomako         garavu             ‘new’
 NCV: Nduindui         karaᵑgʷa           ‘new’
>

[16] Nakanai h reflects POc *q, not *k.

   The antonym of *paqoRu ‘new, young’ was evidently *[ma]tuqa ‘ripe, mature, adult,
old’. A difficulty in reconstructing this term is its formal and semantic similarity to POc
*matuqu ‘coconut growth stage: ripe, brown but has not fallen yet’ (Ross 1996d). It is
sometimes quite difficult to determine which of the two reconstructions a reflex like, for
example, Sursurunga matuk ‘ripe, well-developed, ready to harvest’ should be assigned to,
and I suspect that reflexes of the two items have been conflated in some languages.

   It is hard to avoid the conclusion that *tuqaRi ‘(be) long ago; take a long time, old (of
inanimates)’ is historically related to *[ma]tuqa. If, as seems likely, Proto Buang *tkwi
‘old’ (Patep tkwe, Kapin takwi) reflects *tuqaRi, then it provides evidence for the putative
*-q-. However, I do not know where final *-Ri comes from. There are signs that *[ma]tuqa
and *tuqaRi may occasionally have been conflated: a putative *ma-tuqaRi seems to be
reflected in Gapapaiwa maturi and Tubetube matuli where *[ma]tuqa is expected, and in
Tabar ma-cari where *tuqaRi is expected.

    Whereas *[ma]tuqa probably referred mainly to animates and to the vegetable world,
*rapu-ka (with adjectival-noun suffix *-ka added to an unidentified root *rapu) apparently
modified nouns referring to lifeless objects.

<
PAn *CuqaS ‘mature, elder’ (ACD)
POc *[ma]tuqa ‘ripe, mature, adult, old’
 Adm: Lou             matak            ‘old person’
 NNG: Poeng           matua            ‘ripe’
 PT:   Dobu           matua            ‘ripe’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa      maturi           ‘half-ripe’
 PT:   Tubetube       matuli           ‘ripe’
 PT:   Misima         matua            ‘ripe’
 MM: Patpatar         matuko           ‘ripe’
 SES: Arosi           maua             ‘ripe’
 NCV: Mota            matua            ‘full-grown, ripe’
 NCV: Raga            metua            ‘full-grown, mature’
 NCV: Paamese         matū             ‘(s.o.) old’
 NCV: Nguna           matua            ‘old, ancient, mature, ripe, big’
 SV:   Lenakel        matak            ‘ready to be eaten: ripe, cooked’
 SV:   Anejom         metou            ‘(fruit) ripe, mature, ready to pick’
 Fij:  Wayan          mātua            ‘mature, full-grown, adult, ripe’
 Fij:  Rotuman        mafua            ‘old’
 Pn:      Tongan            motuʔa           ‘old’
 Pn:      Samoan            matua            ‘old (person)’
>

<
POc *tuqaRi ‘(be) long ago; take a long time, old (of inanimates)’
 NNG: Ali               care-ŋ         ‘old’
 MM: Tabar              (ma)cari       ‘old’
 MM: Sursurunga         torai-n        ‘old’ (metathesised)
 MM: Patpatar           tuare          ‘old’
 MM: Ramoaaina          turəi          ‘old’ (metathesised)
 MM: Siar               turai          ‘old’ (metathesised)
 MM: Uruava             tuari          ‘old’
 MM: Mono               tuali-na       ‘old’
 MM: Ririo              cuer           ‘old (thing)’
 SES: Bugotu            tuali          ‘(thing) old’
 SES: Lau               kwali          ‘be old, worn out (house, net, etc.); descendant’[17]
 SES: Arosi             wari           ‘old, chiefly of living things; old man’
 NCV: Mota              tuai           ‘of long duration, old’
 NCV: Tamambo           tuai           ‘of old’
 NCV: Neve’ei           tuɣoi          ‘a long time ago’
 NCV: Neve’ei           duɣoi          ‘old (inanimates)’
 NCV: Naman             toɣe           ‘a long time ago’
 NCV: Nguna             tuai           ‘long ago, (thing) old’
 SV:    Sye             (e)twai        ‘recently’
 SV:    Sye             (it-e)twai     ‘long time ago’
 SV:    Kwamera         tui            ‘old, previous, of the past, long ago’
 SV:    Anejom          (i)tuwu        ‘long ago’
 Fij:   Wayan           tuei           ‘take a long time, be slow, tardy, late’
 Pn:    Tongan          tuai           ‘be late, be late, take a long time’
 Pn:    Samoan          tuai           ‘be late, be delayed, take a long time’
>

[17] Blust (ACD) attributes these reflexes to *waRi ‘past (of time)’, but the current attribution is better
   supported by the set as a whole.

212    Malcolm Ross

<
POc *rapu-ka ‘old (of inanimates)’
 MM: Bulu               rapu-rapu-ka
 SES: ’Are’Are          rahu-ʔa
 SES: Sa’a              lahu-ʔa
>

7.4 Colour

   Most reconstructable POc colour terms fall into two formal groups, adjectival verbs
reflecting earlier *ma- + ROOT and adjectival nouns with either a reduplicated root, ROOT +
*-ka, or both (see p.196).

                                                     Properties of inanimate objects   213

    PMP terms were of the form *ma- + ROOT. Blust (ACD) concludes that PMP had a
classic three-term colour system, i.e. terms for black, white and red. Other terms were
derived from terms for natural objects or, in the case of ‘green’, unripeness (see vol. 1,
p.155). The same comments evidently applied to POc. The three PMP terms were *ma-
qitem ‘black, dark in colour’, *ma-iRaq ‘red’, and *ma-putiq ‘white, light in colour’. The
first two are continued in POc *maqeto(m) and POc *meRaq. Until recently, I thought that
*ma-putiq had been lost in POc and replaced by a plethora of terms, but two reflexes have
been found.

<
PMP *[ma]qitem ‘black, deep blue’ (ACD)
PCMP *ma-qitom, *ma-qetom ‘black; dirty’
POc *maqeto(m) ‘black’
 MM: Nalik            makit           ‘black’
 MM: Tabar            maketo          ‘black’
 SES: Gela            meto            ‘dirty’
 SES: Arosi           maeo            ‘full grown, ripe, black’
 NCV: Mota            maeto           ‘black’
 NCV: NE Ambae        maeto           ‘be black, blacken’
 NCV: Raga            meto            ‘black’
 NCV: Paamese         (na)meto        ‘k.o. black fish’
 NCV: Nguna           maeto           ‘angry’
>

<
PMP *ma-iRaq ‘red’ (Blust 1980b)
POc *meRaq ‘red’
 NNG: Kaulong         mhe                ‘red’
 NNG: Kairiru         mera-mer           ‘red’
 MM: Nalik            me-mek             ‘red’
 MM: Siar             me-merek           ‘red’
 SES: Bugotu          mela-              ‘red’
 SES: Longgu          mela-mela(ʔa)      ‘red’
 SES: ’Are’Are        me-mera(ʔa)        ‘red’
 NCV: Mota            me-mea             ‘red’
 NCV: NE Ambae        memea              ‘be red, redden’
 NCal: Xârâcùù        mĩã                ‘red’
 Pn:   Tongan         mea                ‘reddish’
 Pn:   Rapanui        mea-mea            ‘red’
 Pn:   Rapanui        mea                ‘light red, pink’
>

<
PMP *ma-putiq ‘white, light in colour’ (ACD)
POc *maputi(q) ‘white’
 SES: Arosi            mahui             ‘white’
 NCV: NE Ambae         mavute            ‘to be white, whiten’
>

   One colour term of the form *ma- + ROOT has no known non-Oceanic cognates. In the
southeast Solomons and Micronesia we find *marawa ‘green’ competing with
*[ma]karawa, indicating that both are derived from a base *rawa of unknown meaning.

<
POc *[ma]karawa ‘green, blue’
 PT:   Suau          ʔala-ʔalawa         ‘green’
 MM: Tigak           makago              ‘green’
 MM:      Nalik            marakaua            ‘green’ (metathesised)
 MM:      Sursurunga       məkrau              ‘green’
 MM:      Maringe          ka-kahra            ‘green, light blue’
 Mic:     Woleaian         xāẓawe-ẓaw        ‘green’
 Fij:     Rotuman          čarava              ‘blue’
 Fij:     Bauan            kara-karawa         ‘blue; k.o. blue-green fish’
 Fij:     Wayan            karawa              (V) ‘be blue, blue-green, green’
 Fij:     Wayan            kara-karawa         (V, ADJ) ‘blue, blue-green, green’
>

214     Malcolm Ross

<
PEOc *marawa ‘green, blue’
 SES: Talise          marao                    ‘green, blue’
 SES: Longgu          mʷarawa                  ‘green, blue’
 SES: Kwaio           malakʷa                  ‘green’
 SES: Arosi           marawā                   ‘green, blue (if bright)’
 Mic: Kiribati        māwawa                   ‘green, blue’
 Mic: Marshallese     maṛɯɔṛɯɔ                 ‘green’
>

   Blust (2001) observes that colour terms with a reduplicated root are common in Oceanic
languages. Generally, but not always, the initial CVCV- is copied. He infers that this
reduplication reflects the unmarking of an earlier use of reduplication to express intensity.
Whatever its origin, however, in many Oceanic languages reduplication is a derivational
process whereby a colour term is derived from a noun, and in some it appears to be a
productive process.[18] Blust’s examples are drawn from twenty-four languages. Among
them we find the following:

__pre__
Mussau (Adm):[19]
 bo-boŋi-e-na          ‘black’                            bo      ‘night’
 rae-rae-a-na          ‘red’                              rae     ‘blood’
 usou-usou-e-na        ‘white’                            (no unreduplicated root)
 vero-veroŋ-a-na       ‘black’                            (no unreduplicated root)
 riu-riu-e-na          ‘thin (of animates’)               riu     ‘bone’

__pre__
Kairiru (NNG):
 jir-jir               ‘black, dirty, old’                jir       ‘mangrove swamp’
 kiet-kiet             ‘black’                            kiet      ‘black paint’
 pun-pun               ‘white’                            pun       ‘pigeon’
 mera-mer              ‘red’                              mer       ‘red paint’
 yaŋ-yaŋ               ‘yellow’                           yaŋ       ‘yellow paint, white or yellow
                                                                      skinned people’


[18] Lichtenberk (1983:611) was offered the apparent nonce form taʔe-taʔe, from taʔe ‘faeces’ in Manam,
   when he asked an informant to identify a particular shade of brown.

[19] I have corrected Blust’s Mussau data on the basis of materials provided by John Brownie of the Summer
   Institute of Linguistics.

                                                      Properties of inanimate objects    215

__pre__
Manam (NNG):
 ziŋ-ziŋ     ‘black’                       ziŋ       ‘black ashes’
 jim-jim     ‘black’                       jim       ‘rain, cloud; black, dark deep (sea)’
 wa-wawa     ‘white’                       wawa      ‘discoloured (light) patch of skin)’
 dara-dara   ‘red’                         dara      ‘blood’
 ʔate-ʔateʔa ‘brown’                       ʔateʔa    ‘ground’

__pre__
Mota (NCV):
 me-mea         ‘red’                      mea       ‘red pigment’, mea-mea ‘k.o. red fish’
 sor-soroga     ‘dark red’                 soroga    ‘red, colour of pes nai when ripe’
 aŋo-aŋo        ‘yellow’                   aŋo       ‘turmeric; yellow’

From these examples we see that the colour term is often derived from a noun whose
referent has that colour as a salient characteristic. We also see that in closely related
Kairiru and Manam (Ross 1988:122–132) different derivations have occurred, indicating
that the process remains productive, or has done so until recently. This observation leads to
a reconstructive problem: we often find cognate reduplicated forms in a number of
different languages, and it is sometimes hard to determine whether the reduplication had
already occurred in POc or whether the reduplicated forms result from independent parallel
derivations. We can arrange cases on a rough cline. At one extreme is POc *[yaŋo]yaŋo
‘yellow’, whose reflexes occur so consistently across Oceania that it seems over-cautious
not to reconstruct it. The base form was POc *yaŋo ‘turmeric, Curcuma longa’ (Ross
1996d:216).

<
POc *[yaŋo]yaŋo ‘yellow’
 Adm: Seimat             aŋo-aŋ                 ‘yellow’
 Adm: Kele               aŋw-an                 ‘yellow’
 NNG: Kove               yaŋo-yaŋo              ‘yellow’
 NNG: Mutu               yaŋo-ŋa                ‘yellow’
 NNG: Lukep              yoŋo-no                ‘yellow’
 NNG: Amara              aŋo-ˀaiŋo              ‘yellow’
 NNG: Poeng              ŋ-aŋo                  ‘yellow’
 NNG: Gedaged            yaŋ-yaŋ                ‘yellow’
 NNG: Numbami            (me)yaŋo               ‘yellow’
 NNG: Yabem              yaŋ-yaŋ                ‘yellow’
 NNG: Mapos Buang        saŋ-saŋ                ‘yellow’
 NNG: Manam              zaŋ-zaŋ                ‘yellow’
 MM: Vitu                ɣaŋo-ɣaŋo              ‘yellow’
 MM: Nakanai             iala-lo                ‘yellow’
 MM: Kara (West)         iaŋ                    ‘yellow’ (East Kara ioŋ ‘turmeric’)
 MM: Taiof               aŋo-m                  ‘yellow’
 SES: Gela               aŋo-aŋo                ‘yellow’
 SES: Talise             aŋo                    ‘yellow’
 NCV: Mota               aŋo-aŋo                ‘yellow’ (aŋo ‘turmeric’)
 NCV: Raga               aŋo-ɣa                 ‘yellow, become yellow’
 SV:    Sye              (mel)yeŋ               ‘yellow’
 SV:      Ura                (mel)yeŋ, (un)iaŋ       ‘yellow’
 SV:      Anejom             yaŋ                     ‘yellow’
 Mic:     Ponapean           ɔŋɔ̄ŋ                   ‘yellow’ (ɔ̄ŋ ‘turmeric’)
 Mic:     Woleaian           yaŋo-yaŋ                ‘yellow’ (yaŋ ‘ginger’)
 Fij:     Wayan              aŋo-aŋo                 (V, ADJ) ‘(be) yellow’
 Pn:      Tongan             eŋa-eŋa                 ‘yellow’ (eŋa ‘turmeric’)
>

216     Malcolm Ross


Nearer the other extreme are reduplicated reflexes of POc *draRaq ‘blood’ (e.g. Mussau
rae-rae-ana ‘red’ and Manam dara-dara ‘red’ above). Here, reflexes have a much spottier
distribution, closely related languages often have different forms for ‘red’, and other terms
for ‘blood’ are also reduplicated to form terms for ‘red’. These facts suggest that the
reduplicated forms reflect independent parallel development and that there is not sufficient
evidence for a POc reconstruction **draRa-draRaq ‘red’.

    In this connection, it is worth noting that a number of reflexes of POc *meRaq ‘red’ and
*karawa ‘green, blue’, reconstructed above, also display reduplication. Since there were
originally morphologically complex forms (*ma-iRaq and *ka-rawa), and *meRaq, at
least, was originally an adjectival verb, these reduplications can be attributed to analogy.
That is, reduplication has moved in a number of languages from being a process which
derives colour terms from nouns to being simply a marker of a colour term. This suggests
that we should be very cautious about reconstructing POc reduplicated colour terms.

    Despite the need for caution, the fact that Blust finds reduplicated colour terms
scattered across Oceania suggests quite strongly that this derivational process was already
present in POc. It is true, as Blust notes, that the unreduplicated root often does not occur
in the data. This may be because it has been lost or simply because its meaning is such that
it has not been recorded in available sources (‘black’ is far more likely to be recorded, for
example, than the term ‘mangrove morass’ from which it is derived in a number of
languages).

    What is much less clear is the relationship of this POc reduplication to derivations with
*-ka. Forms with a reduplicated root, ROOT + *-ka, or both, tend to cooccur in cognate
sets. Note Longgu mela-mela(ʔa) and ’Are’Are me-mera(ʔa) ‘red’ and Raga aŋo-ɣa
‘yellow’ above. Reflexes of *-ka also crop up in Blust’s collection of reduplicated colour
terms in Mussau and Vitu and in To’aba’ita (SES). Since these three languages belong to
different primary subgroups of Oceanic (St Matthias, Western Oceanic and Eastern
Oceanic respectively), it is possible that reduplicated colour terms with *-ka also occurred
in POc. If so, however, we still have to account for reduplicated forms without *-ka (like
those listed under *[yaŋo]yaŋo ‘yellow’ above) and for unreduplicated forms with *-ka.
The simplest solution is to reconstruct two POc processes: (i) ROOT + *-ka forming
adjectival nouns and (ii) CVCV- reduplication forming colour terms and perhaps some
other property terms.20 Whether the words formed by process (ii) were verbs or nouns is
uncertain. In some languages, and particularly for colour terms, the two processes
combined, forming adjectival nouns.


[20] Blust’s 24-language survey suggests that property terms other than colour terms are only rarely
   reduplicated. This corroborates the research underlying Ross (1998a), where the only languages with a
   strong tendency to reduplicate property terms are those in Western Oceanic which have innovated a
   distinct adjective class.

                                                    Properties of inanimate objects    217


   In the light of this discussion, I reconstruct two pairs of POc colour terms, *keja-ka,
*[keja]keja ‘green’ and *biRiŋ-(k)a, *[biRi]biRiŋ ‘dark hue, dirty’, but I cannot be sure
that both members of each pair actually occurred in POc. The Tamambo reflex of the root
*keja refers to a kind of blue-green fish, and this may have been its POc meaning. POc
*biRiŋ perhaps meant ‘dirt’.

<
POc *keja-ka, *[keja]keja ‘green’
 NNG: Mangap            kes-keeze(ŋa-)   ‘green’
 NNG: Sio               kenza            ‘green’
 NNG: Apalik            -kes-kes         ‘green’
 NNG: Bebeli            ke-kese          ‘green’
 NNG: Mindiri           kiede            ‘green’
 NNG: Bilibil           yed-yed          ‘green’
 MM: Nakanai            ka-kesa          ‘green’
 NCV: Mota              gesa-gesa(ga)    ‘bright blue, or bright green’
 NCV: Raga              geha(ga)         ‘blue-green’
 NCV: Tamambo           ɣenja(ɣa)        ‘blue-green’ (ɣenja ‘k.o. blue-green fish’)
 NCV: Nguna             kesa-kesa        ‘blue’
 Pn:    Tikopia         kesa             ‘green, yellow-green, with suggestion of off-colour; greyish-green’
>

<
PMP *biRiŋ ‘dark hue, dark red (?)’ (ACD)
POc *biRiŋ-(k)a, *[biRi]biRiŋ ‘dark hue, dirty’
 NNG: Kove              vihi-vihiŋa      ‘green’
 NNG: Aria              -vir             ‘green’
 MM: Tiang              biliŋə           ‘dirty’
 MM: Madak              biliŋa           ‘dirty’
 MM: Patpatar           biliŋe           ‘dirty’
 SES: Gela              bili-bilia       ‘dirty’
 SES: Kwaio             bili-biliʔa      ‘dirty’
>

   There is one other reduplicated colour term which may be reconstructable, POc
*[pula]pula-n ‘white’, probably derived from *pulan ‘moon’. However, the dangers of
reconstructing reduplicated colour terms in POc apply here too, and these terms may be
independent innovations.

<
PMP *bulan ‘white’ (Blust 1989)
POc *[pula]pula-n ‘white’
 NNG: Sissano         owul-wul           ‘white’
 NNG: Psohoh          vul-vul            ‘white’
 Fij:   Bauan         vula-vula          ‘white’
 NCal: Nemi           pulo               ‘white’
>

218    Malcolm Ross

7.5 Physical property

7.5.1 Shape and surface texture

   Terms denoting the shape and surface texture of an object include the meanings such as
‘flat’, ‘round’, ‘rough’, ‘smooth’, ‘straight’ and ‘crooked’. However, it seems that there
were few POc lexemes with basic meanings in this domain. No word for ‘round’ is
reconstructable. The main term for ‘flat’ was probabaly POc *baban ‘flat; board, plank;
canoe strake; flat shelf of rock’, and we can be reasonably confident that it was a noun
denoting a flat surface or flat plank-like object (vol. 1, pp.58, 185).

<
POc *baban ‘flat; board, plank; canoe strake; flat shelf of rock’
 NNG: Mutu              babaga            ‘wide’
 NNG: Mangap            baba(ŋa-n)        ‘wide, broad’
 NNG: Gedaged           baba(ŋa-n)        ‘wide’
 NNG: Manam             baba              ‘flat; palm of the hand’
 PT:    Motu            papa              ‘flat rock’
 MM: Teop               babana(o)         ‘wide’
 SES: Kwaio             baba              ‘flat’
 SES: Lau               baba              ‘flat; long side board of canoe’
 Pn:    Tongan          papa              ‘flat hard sandstone forming a layer or bed at the coast in certain places; flat and smooth and hard, as a well-trodden track; board’
 Pn:    Samoan          papa              ‘rock; floor mat; plain, level, flat, as a rock, board, nose, etc.’
>

   The term *raba(r) may have denoted the property ‘flat’, but there are too few Oceanic
reflexes to be certain. Indeed, if the Tongan reflex is regularly descended from a POc
forebear, then the latter had initial *l-, not *r-. This suggests that the Polynesian terms may
not reflect POc *raba(r).

<
PMP *da(m)paD ‘flat, level’ (ACD)
POc *raba(r) ‘flat, wide, broad’
 Fij:     Bauan         raba               (N) ‘breadth, width’; (ADJ) ‘broad, wide’
 Fij:      Nadrogaa     raba               ‘wide, broad’
 cf. also:
 Pn:       Tongan       lafa-lafa          ‘flat’
 Pn:       Samoan       lafa-lafa          ‘flat; the level top of a mountain’
>

  No term for ‘rough’ is reconstructable, but ‘smooth’, also with the sense ‘slippery’ was
POc *madrali(s,t).

<
PAn *ma-dalis ‘smooth, slippery’ (ACD)
PAn *[ma]dalit ‘smooth, slippery’ (Blust 1986)
POc *madrali(s,t) ‘smooth, slippery’
 MM: Siar              ma-madal         ‘smooth’
 SES: Gela             madali           ‘slippery’
 SES: Arosi            madari           ‘wet and slippery, as rocks’
>

                                                          Properties of inanimate objects      219


   One shape concept for which POc evidently had terms was ‘straight, level’. Reflexes of
these terms often also include ‘true’ among their meanings, but I assume that the
metaphorical extension was from shape to value (i.e. from visible to abstract), rather than
vice versa.

    The data require that we reconstruct two variants for each of the three terms. Thus we
reconstruct not only *[ma]koto, whose canonic shape suggests that it is the inherited term,
but also *ta-kodos, which is derived from *kodos ‘go straight; straighten’ (see p.196).[21]
I suspect that the verbs *[ma]koto and *kodos were separately inherited into POc (although
no non-Oceanic cognates have been found) and that their formal similarity is attributable to
derivation at an earlier stage, as POc *-t- and *-d- reflect PMP *-t- and *-nt- respectively.
The Polynesian reflexes are attributed to the set with *-t- because of their similarity in
meaning to Bauan koto. Formally, they could at least as well reflect POc *ta-kodos.

[21] The Southeast Solomonic reflexes show unexplained loss of *k.

<
POc *[ma]koto ‘straight’
 MM: Vitu              maɣoto               ‘straight; (ground) flat’
 MM: Tolai             ot                   ‘straight’
 SES: Gela             oto                  ‘go directly, straight; set face to do, stare straight at’ (for expected *ɣoto)
 SES:     W Guad.         ɣoto              ‘straight, correct’
 Fij:     Bauan           koto              (V) ‘lie down’; (ADJ) ‘extended, stretched out’
 Pn:      Tongan          to-koto           (V) ‘lie down’
 Pn:      Samoan          ta-ʔoto           (V) ‘lie down’
 Pn:      Maori           ta-koto           (V) ‘lie down’
>

<
POc *kodos ‘go straight; straighten’
POc *ta-kodos ‘straight’
 MM: Lavongai           koroŋ             ‘straight’
 MM: Lamasong           tokodos           ‘straight’
 MM: Patpatar           takodas           ‘straight’
 MM: Tolai              kodo              ‘straighten’
 MM: Tolai              takodo            ‘straight’
 MM: Nehan              kod-kodoh         ‘straight’
 SES: Lau               odo-odo           ‘go in a direct line, straight’
 SES: Kwaio             odo               ‘straight, correct’
 SES: Sa’a              odo-odo           ‘be straight, go straight forward; be correct and proper’
 SES: Arosi             odo-odo           ‘straight’
>

<
POc *[t,d]onu(p) ‘straight’[22]
 NNG: Malai             dunu(ŋa)            ‘straight’
 NNG: Numbami           tonowa              ‘straight’
 MM: Laghu              to-tonu             ‘straight’
 NCV: Kiai              tu-tunu             ‘good, straight, sweet’
 NCV: Labo              tən                 ‘straighten an arrow in the fire’
 SV:     Kwamera             (a)tuən            (verbal adjunct: implies straightening)
 Fij:    Bauan               donu               ‘(be) straight, true, correct’
 Fij:    Wayan               donu               ‘(be) right, correct, true’
 Pn:     Tongan              tonu               ‘be exact, be correct, be right’
 Pn:     Samoan              tonu               ‘(be) exact, correct, just’
 Pn:     Mele-Fila           tō-tonu            ‘right, correct’
>

[22] The final *-(p) of *[t,d]onu(p) is tentatively reconstructed to account for Numbami tonowa, where
   paragogic -a indicates the presence of a final consonant and -w- reflects *-p.

220     Malcolm Ross


   I have no explanation for the pair *mwane-mwane and *wane-wane. Reflexes of the
former occur in the Admiralties, Southeast Solomonic and New Caledonia, of the latter in
the Schoutens and Micronesia. However, if the Ali reflex were non-cognate, then *wane-
wane would simply be a Nuclear Micronesian innovation.

<
POc *mwane-mwane ‘straight, direct; flat, level’ (ACD)
 Adm: Aua              wane-wane          ‘smooth, level; straight’[23]
 Adm: Pak              mʷane-n             ‘straight’
 Adm: Nyindrou         mone-n              ‘straight’
 Adm: Loniu            mʷɛnɛ-n             ‘straight’
 SES: Gela             mae-mane            ‘straight’
 SES: Lau              ma-mana             ‘true’
 NCal: Cèmuhî          mó-mʷɔn             ‘straight, right, correct’
>

[23] Aua initial w- could reflect either *mw- or *w-, but I have assumed the Aua reflex to reflect *mwane-
   mwane, as this is reflected elsewhere in the Admiralties.

<
POc *wane-wane ‘straight, direct; flat, level’ (ACD)
 NNG: Ali               wane(ŋ)            ‘straight’
 Mic: L. Mortlockese wane-wan              ‘straight, steady, direct’
 Mic: Puluwatese        wene-wen           ‘be directly above; straight, direct, honest, exactly’; ‘greatly’
 Mic: Woleaian          were-were          ‘straight, steady, still’
>

   The only antonym of the terms above is PWOc *kalis ‘crooked’, which is only weakly
attested.

<
PWOc *kalis ‘crooked’
 NNG: Takia                  kael(a-n)          ‘crooked’
 MM: Sursurunga              kalis              ‘crooked’
>


7.5.2 Weight

   Forms for ‘heavy’ are morphologically complex. POc *[pa]pat reflects the base *pat,
POc *ma-pat and *mamat reflect prefixation with *ma- and *maN- respectively (the
function of *maN- in this context is unclear; cf. vol. 1, p.29). The term for ‘light’ (in
weight) is *[ma]Raqan.

<
POc *[pa]pat ‘heavy’
 NNG: Gitua                  pat(aŋa-n)         ‘heavy’
 NNG: Maleu                  -pat(aŋa)          ‘heavy’
 NNG: Yabem                  (ŋa)wapaʔ          ‘heavy’
>

                                                      Properties of inanimate objects    221

<
POc *mapat ‘heavy’ (ACD)
 Adm: Nyindrou        mahaʔ(an)          ‘heavy’
 SJ:   Sobei          mafo               ‘heavy’
 MM: Bulu             mava               ‘heavy’
 MM: Ramoaaina        məvət              ‘heavy’
 SES: Gela            mava               ‘heavy, important’
 NCV: NE Ambae        mava               ‘be/become heavy’
 Fij:  Rotuman        maha               ‘heavy’
 Pn:   Tongan         ma-mafa            ‘heavy’
 Pn:   Tongan         mafas-ia           ‘(be) weighed down, burdened’
 Pn:   Tongan         mafat-aki          ‘(rain) be heavy; (work) be heavy, difficult’
 Pn:   Samoan         ma-mafa            ‘heavy’
 Pn:   Samoan         mafat-ia           ‘exhausted, overcome’
>

<
POc *mamat ‘heavy’
 Adm: Mussau             mamāta(na)      ‘heavy’
 MM: Tolai               mamat           ‘heavy’
 MM: Roviana             mamata          ‘heavy’
>

<
PMP *[ma]Raqan ‘light in weight’ (ACD)
POc *[ma]Raqan ‘light in weight’
 PT:   Motu           haraɣa         ‘easy, light (in weight)’
 NNG: Bariai          malan          ‘light in weight’
 NNG: Sio             malalɒka       ‘light in weight’
 NNG: Tami            malaga-lag     ‘light in weight’
 NNG: Aria            mar̃kan        ‘light in weight’
 MM: Vitu             maraɣa         ‘light in weight’
 MM: Nakanai          mara-mara      ‘lightened, relieved’
 SES: Gela            ma-mala        ‘light in weight’
 NCV: NE Ambae        ma-marae       ‘be/become light’
 NCV: Raga            ma-mara        ‘light in weight’
 NCV: Paamese         melā-la        ‘light in weight’
 Mic: Ponapean        marā-ra        ‘light in weight’
 Fij:  Nadrogaa       mā-mā          ‘light in weight’
 Fij:  Wayan          mā-mā          ‘be light (in weight)’
 Pn:   Tongan         maʔa-maʔa      ‘light in weight’
 Pn:   Samoan         mā-mā          ‘light in weight’
>

7.5.3 Strength, toughness and speed

    Oceanic speakers tend to express the cluster of concepts ‘hard’ (of physical substances),
‘strong’ (of human beings), ‘quickly moving’ and ‘energetic’ with a single lexeme, and
‘soft’, ‘weak’, ‘slow’ and ‘gentle’ also with a single lexeme. Terms for the first, again due
entirely to Blust (ACD), are POc *paka(s) and *laga(s), neither of them particularly stable
(i.e. we find few reflexes of them). Terms for its antonym are *[ma]lumu and *ma-luas,
both quite stable and thus widely reflected. The latter is also used of calm weather in
eastern Oceanic languages (see Ch. 5, §5.1).

222   Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *ba(ŋ)kas ‘swift, strong, energetic, fast’ (ACD)
POc *paka(s) ‘have strength, energy’ (ACD)
 NCV: Mota              vaka              ‘have strength, energy’
>

<
PMP *la(ŋ)kas ‘spirited, energetic’ (ACD)
POc *laga(s) ‘spirited, energetic’ (ACD)
 MM: Sursurunga          lak-lak          ‘hard, stubborn’
 SES: Gela               laga             ‘strong, strength; energetic’
 SES: Arosi              raga             ‘strong, strengthened, invigorated’
>

  Two POc terms, *[ma]lumu and *ma-luas, express ‘soft, gentle’.

<
PMP *[ma]lumu ‘soft, tender, gentle’ (ACD)
POc *[ma]lumu ‘soft, gentle, easy’
 NNG: Bariai           marum            ‘soft’
 NNG: Amara            mulum            ‘soft’
 MM: Nakanai           malumo           ‘be soft (bread or sweet biscuits, or taro left too long in the ground)’
 MM: Lavongai          malum            ‘soft’
 MM: Patpatar          ma-malum         ‘soft’
 MM: Mono              maluŋ            ‘soft’
 SES: Gela             malumu           ‘easy’
 SES: Kwaio            malumu           ‘good-looking’
 SES: Arosi            rumu             ‘oil’
 SES: Arosi            marumu-rumu ‘soft’
 NCV: Mota             malum-lum        ‘soft, gentle’
 NCV: NE Ambae         lu-lumu          ‘be/become sweet, good tasting’
 NCV: Raga             lumu-lumu        ‘soft’
 NCV: Tamambo          ma-lu-lum        ‘soft’
 Fij:  Bauan           malumu           ‘weak, faint, sick, soft’
PPn *malū ‘soft (of a substance), calm (of day, sea)’ (irregular loss of *-m- in all Polynesian reflexes)
 Pn:    Tongan        malū            ‘soft, tender, flexible; (weather) mild, pleasantly calm; (pain) abated’
 Pn:    Niuean        molū            ‘soft, weak, humble’
 Pn:    Samoan        malū            ‘(substance) soft; (sea +) calm; (voice) bass’
 Pn:    E Uvean       malū            ‘calm, peaceful’
 Pn:    E Futunan     malū            ‘soft’
 Pn:    Rennellese    magū            ‘be soft, be slack’
 Pn:    Tahitian      marū            ‘soft, gentle, easy’
>

                                                      Properties of inanimate objects    223

<
POc *ma-luas ‘soft’
 NNG: Sio                  malbe             ‘limp, squishy, soft’
 MM: Notsi                 məlus             ‘soft’
 MM: Konomala              ma-mlas           ‘soft’
 MM: Siar                  ma-maluas         ‘soft’
 MM: Ramoaaina             məl-məluə         ‘soft’
 MM: Nehan                 mal-malua-n       ‘soft’
 SES: Gela                 malua             ‘soft’
 SES: ’Are’are             mārū-rū           ‘soft, gentle, flexible’
 Mic: Ponapean             malu-n            ‘calm, of the sea’
 Mic: Mokilese             molu-n            ‘calm or fine, of weather’
 Mic: L. Mortlockese       maləwa-ləw        ‘peaceful’
 Mic: Puluwatese           maliwa-li         ‘to be easy or slow, to be calm (as the sea), to be gentle’
 Fij:    Bauan             mālua             ‘gently, slowly, quietly’
>

7.5.4 Content

   Three terms meaning ‘full’ are reconstructable. The first, *ponuq, is the general term. It
is not clear to me how *puŋu and *poju differed in meaning from this and from each other.
However, *puŋu may simply be a doublet of *ponuq. The term *poju seems to be a reflex
of PMP *besuR ‘satiated’. The opposite meaning, ‘empty’, seems to have been expressed
by *[ma]maca ‘dry’ (p.226), at least when ‘empty of liquid’ was intended.

<
PMP *ponuq ‘full’
POc *ponuq ‘full’
 NNG: Bariai               -won
 NNG: Lukep                -pon
 NNG: Poeng                ponu
 NNG: Wogeo                -won
 NNG: Kaiep                -wun
 PT:   Motu                honu
 PT:   Mekeo               poŋu
 MM: Bali                  vonuku
 MM: Meramera              vonu              ‘full; swell’
 MM: Nakanai               volu
 MM: Lihir                 on
 MM: Nehan                 won
 MM: Mono                  honu
 SES: Gela                 vonu
 SES: Talise               vonu
 SES: Longgu               vonu
 SES: Kwaio                fonu
 SES: Arosi                honu
 NCal: Nemi                punuk
 Mic:     Kiribati       on
 Pn:      Tongan         fonu
>

224     Malcolm Ross

<
POc *puŋu ‘full’
 NNG: Maleu              -uŋ
 NNG: Silisili           (ri)fuᵑg
 NNG: Sukurum            fuaŋ
 MM: Lamasong            -uŋ
 MM: Patpatar            huŋ
 SES: Lau                fuŋu
 SES: Kwai               fuŋu
>

<
PAn *besuR ‘satisfied from having eaten enough, satiated’ (ACD)
POc *poju ‘full’
 Adm: Mussau             pasu               ‘full’
 MM: Kara (East)         vəs                ‘full’
 MM: Notsi               us                 ‘full’
 MM: Tabar               vosu               ‘full’
 MM: Teop                (ha)pus            ‘full’
 MM: Maringe             fodu               ‘full’
>

7.5.5 Temperature

   Two terms are reconstructable for ‘hot, warm’, *[ma]panas and *maŋini(t). The first
was probably the general term, to judge from its distribution, whilst *maŋini(t) probably
had some specialised sense.

<
PMP *[ma]panas ‘be/become warm, hot (of fire, sun, fever, water)’ (ACD)
POc *[ma]panas ‘warm, hot’
 Adm: Mussau          anasa               ‘(s.o.) hot’
 NNG: Kove            wana-wana           ‘(s.o.) hot’
 NNG: Arove           (ka)wanes           ‘(s.o.) hot’
 NNG: Takia           wanana-n            ‘hot’
 NNG: Numbami         wa-wana             ‘hot’
 NNG: Mapos Buang     vanɛ                ‘hot’
 SJ:   Sobei          mefna               ‘(s.o.) hot’
 MM: Tigak            manas               ‘(s.o.) hot’
 MM: Maringe          brana               ‘hot’
 SES: Longgu          pa-pana             ‘be warm’
 SES: Bauro           mahana-hana         ‘hot’
 SV:   Kwamera        -(a)pwan-(a)pwan ‘hot’
 SV:   Anejom         (a)hen-hen          ‘warm, hot’
 Fij:  Rotuman        mah-mahana          ‘warm’
 Pn:   Tongan         māfana              ‘warm’
 Pn:   Samoan         māfana-fana        ‘warm’
>

                                                     Properties of inanimate objects   225

<
PMP *maN-qinit ‘hot, warm’ (*qinit ‘heat, warmth’) (ACD)
POc *maŋini(t) ‘(?) become hot, warm’
 MM: Roviana            maŋini              ‘warm’
 MM: Hoava              maŋini              ‘warm’
>

   There are several POc forms for ‘cold’ which are derived from PMP *diŋin ‘cold’.
However, the expected POc reflex of PMP *diŋin is **riŋi(n), and we do not find this.
Instead, we find *ridriŋ and *ririŋ, presumably from the reduplications *riŋ-riŋ and
*ri-riŋ, preceded by various prefixes. POc *ma-ri(d)ri(ŋ) needs no further explanation,
whilst *madri(d)riŋ is apparently derived from *maN-ri(d)riŋ. POc *maka-ridri(ŋ) is
transparent enough, but I do not know the function of *maka-. From the glosses of the
reflexes, it seems that these terms probably referred to the temperature experienced by a
person, i.e. ‘I feel cold’, rather than to the temperature of inanimate objects.

    The other cognate set meaning ‘cold’ appears to reflect both *malaso ‘cold (verb)’ and
*malaso-ŋ ‘cold (noun)’ .

<
PMP *diŋin ‘cold’
POc *ma-ri(d)ri(ŋ) ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Mutu                  marir          ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Apalik                miri-n         ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Bebeli                merir          ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Kaulong               ŋlik           ‘cold’
 NNG: Poeng                 ma-mariri      ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Kaiep                 marir          ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Kairiru               -mer̃ir̃       ‘(s.o.) cold’
 SJ:   Kayupulau            mariri-e       ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NCV: Raga                  masisi         ‘cold’
 NCV: Merlav                marir          ‘(s.o.) cold’
 Mic: Kiribati              mariri         ‘feel cold’
 Fij:  Rotuman              matiti         ‘cold’
>

<
POc *madri(d)riŋ ‘(s.o.) become cold’
 Adm: Aua                  maxixi          ‘cold’
 Adm: Mondropolon          madri           ‘cold’
 NNG: Takia                madid           ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Manam                madidi          ‘cold’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain           madid           ‘(s.o.) cold’
 MM: Tolai                 madiriŋ         ‘cold (water, food)’
 MM: Haku                  maririŋ         ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NCV: Paamese              madil           ‘cold’
>

<
POc *makaridriŋ ‘(s.o.) cold’
 MM: Notsi                 makadil         ‘(s.o.) cold’
 SES: Bauro                maɣārisi        ‘cold’
 NCV: Tamambo              maɣariri        ‘cold’
 Pn:   Niuean              makalili        ‘cold, chilly’
 Pn:   Samoan              maʔalili        ‘(be) cold’
>

226   Malcolm Ross

<
POc *malaso ‘be cold’
POc *malaso-ŋ (N) ‘cold’
 NNG: Roinji           malasu(na)       ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NNG: Wab              malsuŋ           ‘cold’
 NNG: Bing             malsoŋ           ‘cold’
 NNG: Mindiri          malas            ‘cold’
 NNG: Megiar           malas            ‘(s.o.) cold’
 MM: Nehan             malahoŋ          ‘(s.o.) cold’
 NCV: Mota             malaso           (N) ‘cold’
 NCV: Uripiv           melas            (N) ‘cold’
 SV:   Lenakel         mhal             ‘have a cold sore’
 SV:   SW Tanna        (ə)mla           ‘be cold’
>


7.5.6 Wet and dry

   The English words ‘dry’ and ‘wet’ are polysemous. The meanings of ‘dry’ include ‘free
from moisture’, ‘having lost natural moisture’ and ‘not in or under water’. POc terms with
such meanings are reconstructed below. POc presumably also had words for various
meanings of ‘wet’, but I have been able to reconstruct only POc *buluk, in the meaning
‘soaked, waterlogged’.

<
POc *buluk ‘be wet, soaked, waterlogged’
 NNG: Bilibil          polo             ‘wet’
 MM: Lavongai          vuluk            ‘wet’
 MM: Ramoaaina         polo             (V) ‘wet, muddy, swampy’; (N) ‘liquid, fluid’
 Fij:   Wayan          bulu-bulu        ‘be sticky, gluey, adhesive, cloggy, e.g. of clay or cloggy soil, too wet and lumpy to dig’
 Pn:    Niuean         (faka)pulu       ‘steep in water, ferment’
 Pn:    Mangareva      puru             ‘soaked’
 Pn:    Tahitian       puru             ‘soaked, waterlogged’
 Pn:    Hawaiian       pulu             ‘soaked’
>

   The most widely reflected POc term with a ‘dry’ meaning is *[ma]maca, which denoted
states in which otherwise present liquid was absent. Thus it was used among other things
of food which had dried up through overcooking and of low tide (Ch. 4, §2.6). POc
*[ma](r,R)aŋo ‘wither, dry up’ referred particularly to the dryness of dying vegetation and
meant ‘withered, dry’ (vol. 1, p.135).

    POc *karaŋo is obviously formally related to *[ma]raŋo, but its reflexes display the
meanings both of this and of *[ma]maca. POc *goRu appears to have been a synonym of
*[ma](r,R)aŋo.

<
PMP *maja ‘be dry’
POc *[ma]maca (V) ‘dry up, evaporate, be empty of liquid’; (N) ‘low tide’
 Adm: Aua            mamaha            ‘dry’
 NNG: Kove           mamasa            ‘dry’
 NNG: Mutu           mamas             ‘(food +) dry up’
 NNG: Mangap         mamāza-ŋana ‘dry’
 NNG: Tami                  mamat               ‘dry’
 NNG: Roinji                mamasa-na           ‘dry’
 NNG: Bing                  mas-mamasa          ‘low tide’
 NNG: Bing                  mamsa-s             ‘dry’
 NNG:     Numbami           mamasa              ‘dry ’
 NNG:     Wogeo             mamasa              ‘dry’
 NNG:     Kairiru           -mamas              ‘dry’
 SJ:      Kayupulau         mamaxe              ‘dry’
 PT:      Gumawana          mamaya              ‘low tide, shore’
 MM:      Meramera          mamasa              ‘low tide’
 MM:      Lihir             mas                 ‘(food +) dry up’
 MM:      Patpatar          mamasa              ‘dry’
 MM:      Tolai             mamā                ‘lowtide’
 MM:      Siar              mas-mas             ‘(food +) dry up; low tide’
 MM:      Roviana           masa                ‘lowtide’
 SES:     Gela              mamaha              ‘dry’
 SES:     Arosi             mamata              ‘dry’
 NCV:     Raga              mamaha              ‘dry’
 NCV:     NE Ambae          mamaha              ‘be/become dry’
 NCV:     Tamambo           mamasa              ‘dry (of ground +)’
 NCV:     Paamese           mes                 ‘dry’
 Fij:     Bauan             maða                ‘be empty, be dry’
 Fij:     Bauan             mamaða              ‘dry, be dry’
 SV:      N Tanna           mas                 ‘lowtide’
 SV:      Kwamera           maha                ‘lowtide, empty of liquid’
 Pn:      Tongan            mamaha              ‘lowtide’
 Pn:      Samoan            masa                ‘be shallow’
>

                                                              Properties of inanimate objects        227


 POc *[ma-](r,R)aŋo displays a phonological problem. Apparent non-Oceanic cognates of
the root *raŋo reflect PMP *Raŋaw, so we would expect the reconstructable POc form to
be **Raŋo. But Oceanic languages which reflect POc *r and *R differently are not in
accord with each other: SES and NCV languages have a reflex of *r whilst Pn languages
have a (zero) reflex of *R. (Mussau and NNG and MM languages reflect *r and *R
identically.) I assume tentatively that POc had *[ma]Raŋo and that forms with *r are
innovative.

<
PMP *[ma]Raŋaw ‘dry’
PMP *[ma]Raŋuʔ ‘dry’ (Blust 1981b, Blust 1986)
POc *[ma]Raŋo ‘become withered (of vegetation)’[24]
 Adm: Mussau         malaŋo          ‘dry’
 NNG: Manam          maraŋo          ‘dry, arid’
 NNG: Kairiru        maraŋ           ‘ripe coconut’
 MM: Nalik           maraŋ           ‘ripe coconut’
 MM:     Susurunga       maraŋ           ‘(be) old, dry; (old) coconut with lots of meat and little milk’
 MM:     Patpatar        maraŋa          ‘dry coconut’
 MM:     Tolai           ma-raŋa         ‘withered, dry (leaves, husk, tree)’
 MM:     Halia (Selau)   raŋo            ‘dry’
 SES:    Bugotu          raŋo            ‘wither (leaves, yam vines)’
 SES:    Sa’a            raŋo            ‘be withered, dry (esp. yams when vine withers)’
 SES:    Arosi           raŋo            ‘withered, dead (of grass, green boughs +)’
 NCV:    Mota            raŋo            ‘become dried up in the course of nature’
 Pn:     Samoan          maŋo            ‘dry up; be dry (of wood, clothes)’
 Pn:     Niuean          maŋo            ‘dry (of wood, trees)’
>

[24] In Ross (1996d) I reconstructed POc *[ma]Raŋ(o,u) ‘dry; coconut growth stage 8: dry and ready to fall’.
   However, its POc status rested on Baelelea (SES) maleŋa ‘coconut’. I no longer think this is cognate
   with the NNG and MM forms which refer to a withered coconut, and take the latter simply to be an
   extension of meaning of reflexes of *[ma-](r,R)aŋo.

228    Malcolm Ross

<
POc *ka-(r,R)aŋo ‘be dry; be low tide’
 NNG: Yabem            (ŋa)kɛlɛŋ         ‘dry (of a cloth etc)’
 MM: Zabana            karaŋo            ‘be dry; be low tide’
 SES: Gela             karaŋo            ‘dry up; reef, low tide, harvest time’
 SES: Lengo            karaŋo            ‘low tide’
>

<
POc *goRu ‘dry, of vegetation; coconut growth stage 8: dry and ready to fall’ (Ross 1996d)
 NNG: Mutu           gor-gori        ‘dry’
 NNG: Malai          gor-gori        ‘dry, ripe coconut’
 NNG: Kakuna         kolu-ŋana       ‘ripe coconut’
 SES: Lengo          golu            ‘coconut flesh’
 NCV: Mota           kor             ‘become dry, with heat or time; coconut in its last condition before it falls from the tree; dry (of other things too)’
 NCV: Tamambo        koru            ‘dry, dying (of tree)’
 NCV: Raga            ᵑgoru           ‘dry’
>



8                 Talking about space: terms of location and direction


8.1 Introduction

   Talking about space is a part of talking about the environment as a whole. We include
talking about space in this volume because some of the terms reconstructed in §2 are also
used to denote parts of the landscape and seascape reconstructed in Chapters 3 and 4.
However, much of the terminology reconstructed in this chapter was also used to talk
about space in relation to manufactured objects (vol. 1), to flora and fauna (vols. 3 and 4)
and to human beings (vol. 5). Many languages have complex terminologies for talking
about space, and the length of this chapter bears witness to the fact that Proto Oceanic was
no exception.

   Following Levinson (1996) and Hyslop (2001), we distinguish four kinds of semantic
system employed in talking about space. These are listed here with some commentary on
their expression in Oceanic languages.


230     Malcolm Ross


<ol><li>A system of geographic directions based on a division of the environment that
     normally has a vertical (‘up’/‘down’) axis and a horizontal axis. On the horizontal axis
     European languages have the cardinal directions ‘north’, ‘south’, ‘east’ and ‘west’. In
     Oceanic languages there are usually two sets of geographic directions, one used on or
     near land, the other used at sea (cf. Hill 1997, François 2003, 2004a). Typically each
     has two subsystems.
     <ol><li>The land-based subsystems are (cf. Ozanne-Rivierre 1997):
         <ol><li>one with an inland/seaward axis, sometimes with a transverse axis
              pointing left and right along the coast (each axis is typically denoted by a
              local noun in a local construction; p.232);</li>
             <li>one based on a river valley with an up/down axis (often using the vertical
               terms) and a transverse axis with one directionally neutral (‘across the
               valley’) term (each axis is typically expressed by a directional verb or
               other directional morpheme).</li></ol>
         <li>The sea-based subsystems both refer to a northwest–southeast axis,
         <ol><li>one using the terms for the northwest storm wind and the southeast trade
               wind (POc *apaRat and *raki respectively; Ch. 5, §4.2);</li>
              <li>the other applying the river valley subsystem with its up/down axis (and
               perhaps its transverse axis) metaphorically to the sea, such that ‘down’ is
               towards the northwest and ‘up’ towards the southeast (François 2003,
               2004a).</li></ol></ol>
      If we wanted to be particular, incidentally, we could label a number of geographic
      expressions ‘deictic-geographic’. To say that something is seawards, for example, is to
      place it in relation to the speaker. If the speaker were closer to the sea, the same
      referent might be ‘inland’.</li>
    <li>An intrinsic system specifies the location of an object in relation to a reference object.
      European languages often use prepositions for this purpose (in, on, under, over,
      beside). A few Oceanic languages also use adpositions, but in the majority a local
      construction is used. This is often an adpositional phrase containing a relational local
      noun, i.e. a noun that refers to a part of the reference object or to a location in relation
      to the reference object (‘inside’, ‘upper surface’, ‘top’, ‘underside’, ‘side’).</li>
    <li>Relative locations entail both the position of a reference person, often the speaker, and
      the position of a reference object. Relative locations look like intrinsic locations, but
      the latter do not entail a reference person (Leech 1969:167–168). For example, ‘in
      front of the house’ is an intrinsic location because a house has a ‘front’. For an
      Oceanic speaker, this is the side with the ladder, balcony and door. But ‘in front of the
      tree’ is a relative location because a tree has no intrinsic front. When an English
      speaker uses this expression, s/he treats the tree as if it were facing her/him, and so the
      part of the tree that ‘faces’ the speaker is treated as its front. Thus the ‘front’ changes
      with a change in the speaker’s position. Similarly, ‘turn left’ entails a reference
      person—the addressee— and a reference object. The reference object is the
      addressee’s body, and the direction of ‘left’ varies according to the addressee’s
      location and which way s/he is facing. Relative locations are not used in Oceanic
      languages, however. Oceanic speakers use terms like ‘front’ and ‘left’ intrinsically.
      One does not talk about the ‘front’ of a tree, and ‘left’ is strictly an intrinsic part of the
      speaker’s body, not a direction (Ozanne-Rivierre 1997). Instead, one uses the
      geographic system: ‘seawards of the tree’, ‘go left-along-the-coast’ (cf. Hill 1997).</li>
    <li>A deictic system is based on location relative to the speaker or to some other person
      and often also relative to the addressee. Deictic expressions are tied to the context of
      the individual speech act; they do not refer to fixed points in space. All languages
      probably have demonstratives of some kind (‘this’/‘that’, ‘here’/‘there’, ‘voici’/‘voilà’
      etc). Many Oceanic languages in addition have deictic directional morphemes in their
      verb phrases (or sometimes in locative phrases) which indicate whether direction
      associated with the event is towards the speaker and/or, in some languages, towards
      the addressee.[1]</li></ol>

[1] I am very grateful to John Lynch for his help and advice in interpreting data from New Caledonian
  languages, to Alexandre François for sharing with me his work on Oceanic marine directions, and to
  Andrew Pawley for his comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

                                    Talking about space: terms of location and direction             231

   Relationships between widespread Oceanic categories that probably existed in POc and
systems of talking about space are summarised below.

   (a) Some local nouns (§2) are used to express the directions of the vertical,
       inland/seaward and coastal axes of the geographic system. Overlapping with
       these semantically are local nouns that express locations and directions in the
       local environment that are part of the shared experience of speaker and addressee
       (‘home’, ‘bush’, ‘garden’ etc). There are also relational local nouns that express
       locations (‘inside’ etc) in the intrinsic system.

   (b) Directional morphemes (§3) in verb phrases and in adjuncts are used in Oceanic
       languages to express geographic (vertical and valley-based) and deictic
       directions. In single-verb predicates and in serial verb constructions these
       morphemes are verbs. Elsewhere they are morphemes grammaticised from
       verbs. Grammaticisation had probably already occurred in some cases in Proto
       Oceanic (Ross 2003).[2]

   (c) Demonstratives are used as static deictics. The reconstruction of demonstratives
       is not treated in this chapter.

[2] Note that two morphosyntactic categories were used to express the vertical dimension in POc: local nouns
  and directional verbs.

   We can illustrate the typical Oceanic system by summarising the system in Longgu
(SES) as described by Hill (1992, 1997, 2002). Local nouns marking the axes of the
geographic system are asi ‘seawards’, loŋa ‘inland’, alaʔa ‘east’, toli ‘west’, vuʔa ‘down’,
laŋi ‘up’. Longgu has terms meaning ‘left’ and ‘right’, but their referents are the arms and
the sides of the body, and they do not form part of the system of spatial orientation and are
not local nouns. Where English would use ‘left’ or ‘right’, a Longgu speaker refers to aʔae
asi ‘the seawards leg’ or aʔae longa-i ‘the inland leg’. ‘Nouns such as komu ‘village’ and
luma ‘house’ function as place [local] nouns when their referent is the village or house
considered to be the “home” location’ (Hill 1997:103) and occur in different constructions
from when they are used as common nouns (p.233). One of these constructions is with the
preposition i or with no preposition. Relational local nouns express intrinsic locations in
relation to objects. For example, ubu- ‘inside’ is treated as possessum in relation to the
possessor pera ‘basket’:

__pre__
     vugi ubu-na           pera-i
     banana inside-P:3SG basket-SG
     ‘The banana is inside the basket.’

Other relational local nouns are buri- ‘behind’, naʔova- ‘front’, gege- ‘side’, orova-
‘underneath’, vavo- ‘top surface, space above’, levua- ‘middle, centre’. Demonstratives are
also a type of local noun, occurring with the preposition i to indicate a location. Unlike
many Oceanic languages, which have a person-oriented deictic system (§3.4), Longgu
deictics distinguish four degrees of deictic distance from the speaker: nene ‘this, here’,
nina ‘that, there’, ninaina ‘that yonder, yonder’ and nihou ‘that/there far away’.

   Like many Oceanic languages, Longgu has postverbal particles that distinguish motion
towards and away from the speaker—mai ‘hither’ and hou ‘thither’—and are hence deictic.
Some languages have a third particle indicating motion towards the addressee (§3.4), and
others also have particles expressing the geographic directions ‘up (valley)’, ‘down
(valley)’ and ‘across (valley)’ (§.3.3).


232     Malcolm Ross

   There is no one-to-one relationship between the geographic, intrinsic, and deictic
systems and the morphosyntactic categories used to express them. For this reason this
chapter is organised on the basis of the morphosyntactic categories as they occurred in
POc, rather than on the basis of the semantic systems outlined above.


8.2 Local nouns

   In POc and indeed throughout the history of many Oceanic subgroups there were three
subclasses of noun: personal, common and local. These subclasses are defined by the
constructions in which they occur. Since some nouns occur in a number of constructions,
they are assigned to more than one subclass.

<ol><li>Personal: personal proper names and kin terms used of known individuals. In POc a
     personal noun phrase construction consisted of the personal article *i or *e plus a
     personal noun,[3] reflected in Taiof (MM) e Maras ‘Maras (proper name)’, e cina-nai
     (ART mother-P:3SG) ‘his/her mother’.[4] In Longgu (SES) personal nouns occur without
     an article, but POc *i is reflected in the ‘pronominal article’ in i gira ‘they’ and other
     free pronouns.</li>
    <li>Common: human nouns and non-human animates when not used of known
      individuals, as well as inanimates and abstract nouns. A common noun with a specific
      referent was in most cases preceded by the common article *a or *na, as in POc *a/na
      Rumaq ‘a/the house’.[5] The construction is reflected in Taiof a numa ‘a/the house’, a
      patu-re (ART head-P:3PL) ‘their heads’; Longgu a komu-i (ART village-SG) ‘the
      village’[6]. If such a noun was used in an adjunct construction it was preceded by the
      sequence *i ta-, as in POc *i ta-ña Rumaq (PREP *ta-P:3SG house) ‘at a/the house’.[7] In
      this construction *ta- was a monovalent semantically empty noun. In most Oceanic
      languages where this latter construction is reflected, however, *i has dropped out,
      leaving *ta- as a preposition.[8] Hence Taiof ta-na patu-na tober (PREP-P:3SG head-
      P:3SG hill) ‘on top of the hill’, Longgu ta-na iola-i (PREP-P:3SG canoe-SG).</li>
     <li>Local: nouns used with reference to a specific location, a time, or an intrinsically
      located part of something. The POc local construction consisted of the preposition *i
      plus a local noun, with no intervening article. Local nouns include:
    <ol><li>proper placenames;</li>
        <li>nouns denoting locations, including
        <ol><li>nouns denoting familiar places like ‘home’, ‘(own) village’, ‘(own) garden’, ‘bush’, ‘beach’ etc.;</li>
            <li>nouns denoting geographic directions, ‘down below’, ‘up above’;</li></ol>
        <li>temporal nouns;</li>
        <li>monovalent relational nouns, e.g. nouns denoting intrinsic parts, like ‘inside’, ‘upper surface or space above’, ‘lower surface’, ‘space beneath’ and so on;</li></ol>
     In Taiof a local noun may form a locative expression without a preposition (i.e. *i has
     been lost), like koma-na matan below.[9] A locative expression with a common noun
     must be formed with a preposition.
     <pre>
         E    Maras to         noŋos no-n koma=na matan.
         ART Maras REAL dwell IMPF-P:3SG inside=ART ditch
         ‘Maras is in the ditch.’
     </pre>
     In Longgu local and common nouns are preceded by different paradigms of relators
     and prepositions (the term ‘relator’ is explained on p.268):
     <pre>
                                         location         extent             direction
                                         ‘at’             ‘as far as’        ‘to, towards’
         with a local noun               i                mi                 vu
         with a common noun              ta-              mi ta-             vu ta-
     </pre>
     Thus we find:
     <pre>
        e       la vu komu (local noun)
        S:3SG go R village
        ‘s/he went towards her/his (home) village’
         e        la vu     ta-na         iola      ŋaia (common noun)
         S:3SG go R         PREP-P:3SG canoe D:3SG
         ‘s/he went to her/his (canoe)’
     </pre>
     When a local noun indicating a geographic direction follows a verb it may occur
     without a preposition or relator, e.g. lae asi ‘go seawards’.</li></ol>

[3] The distribution of these forms is not clear. Perhaps *e was the POc phrase-initial form, *i the phrase-
  internal form. It is also possible that the POc form was simply *i, and that this, like the preposition *i
  (§2.1), has independently become e in a number of languages.

[4] Taiof cina-nai reflects POc *tina- ‘mother’ + *ña ‘3SG possessor’ + Taiof aye ‘3SG free pronoun’.

[5] Crowley (1985) suggests that human common nouns had no article. This was apparently true of kin terms,
  but perhaps not of non-kin human common nouns, as an article is reconstructable in this context in Proto
  Eastern Oceanic (Pawley 1972).

[6] Longgu -i marks a referential noun as singular.

[7] The suffix -ña agrees in person and number with *Rumaq ‘house’.

[8] Evidence for reconstructing the sequence *i ta- is found in Mussau (Adm) e ta-gi ‘to me, for me’, Gela i
  ta-gua ‘with me’ (both reflecting POc *i ta-gu) and in a Longgu (SES) paradigm of prepositions and
  relators shown on p.5 (Hill 1992). Paradigmaticity indicates that the cell now occupied by ta- once
  contained *i ta-. Proto South Vanuatu *ira- (Lynch 2001c) appears from its possessive suffixation and its
  uses as general and possessive preposition also to reflect POc *i ta-, but this entails assuming the form
  underwent an idiosyncratic innovation, as it reflects POc *ira-.

                                    Talking about space: terms of location and direction           233


   A noun like *tama-gu (father-my) used with the personal article served as a name
(‘Dad’, ‘Papa’); used without an article it served as a common human noun (‘my
father(s)’). Similarly, in a local construction a noun like *Rumaq ‘house’ behaved
grammatically and semantically like a placename, so that *i Rumaq meant ‘at home’
(p.241), but in the general adjunct construction *i ta-ña Rumaq ‘at a/the house’ *Rumaq
was a common noun.


[9] Abbreviations used in glosses are as follows: 1, 2, 3 first, second and third persons; ADN adnominal;
  ADV adverb; ART article; AUX auxiliary; COM common; CSTR construction marker; D: disjunctive
  pronoun; DEM demonstrative; DIR direction, directional; E exclusive; ENCL enclitic; HYP hypothetical;
  I inclusive; IMPF imperfective; IRR irrealis; LOC local, locative; N noun; O: object pronoun; PERS
  personal; PL plural; P: possessor pronoun; PLC placename; PREP preposition; PREPV prepositional
  verb; PRO pronoun; R relator; REAL realis; REL relative clause marker; SEQ sequential; SG singular; S:
  subject pronoun; V verb; VF final verb.

234   Malcolm Ross

    Inspection of the grammars of Oceanic languages shows that many have retained the
distinction between local and common constructions, although a majority express it with
morphemes other than reflexes of *i and *ta- (for elaboration, see Ross 2004); see also the
local prepositions listed under POc *la[-] (p.289). This inspection also shows that common
nouns can be readily co-opted into the local construction. Thus it is common to find the
common nouns for ‘house’, ‘garden’, ‘village’, ‘bush’ and ‘beach’ also occurring in the
local construction, but this does not mean that the POc etyma they reflect necessarily
occurred in the POc local construction.

    As the Taiof examples above show, the division into common and local nouns cut
across the division into zero-valency and monovalent nouns (vol. 1, p.32).

    Zero-valency local nouns denoted familiar places like ‘home’, ‘own village’, ‘own
garden’, ‘bush’, ‘beach’, i.e. locations whose reference would be clear to the addressee
without further specification or whose exact reference was irrelevant (like the English
construction with at and no article in at home, at school, at hospital, at work). Also
belonging to the zero-valency local category were nouns denoting regions, either in
relation to, say, the island home of the interlocutors or in relation to the speaker. These
nouns denote geographic directions such as ‘up above’, ‘down below’, ‘inland’, ‘at sea’
and so on. There is no sharp distinction between these and nouns for familiar places:
‘inland’ and ‘bush’, for example, are often synonymous in Oceanic languages. This is not
surprising. Palmer (2001) points out that the terms for a culture’s geographic directions are
commonly grammaticised from perceptually salient phenomena of the landscape. These
nouns have sometimes been labelled ‘absolute’ local nouns in the literature, to distinguish
them from relational local nouns, but I prefer the label ‘geographic’ as some of their uses
are deictic, referring to a location in relation to the speaker and addressee. Familiar-place
and geographic local nouns are reconstructed in §2.2.

    Monovalent local nouns, often labelled ‘relational’ nouns in the literature, referred to
parts of objects. These are reconstructed in §2.3.

    In POc the zero-valency/monovalent distinction was apparently not as sharp as it is in
many modern Oceanic languages (Lynch, Ross & Crowley 2002:78–79), but there were
semantically driven tendencies in the behaviour of nouns. When a noun was viewed as
semantically inalienable, like the inside of an object, it was monovalent (i.e. directly
possessed, with a possessor suffix), but the same noun could also have zero valency if used
in a context where inalienability was irrelevant. For this reason, the relational nouns
reconstructed in §2.3 have both monovalent and zero-valency forms, and we find cases
where some reflexes of a relational noun are monovalent, others zero-valency.

    The major local nouns reconstructed below are listed here with simplified glosses, in
two groups, relational and familiar-place/geographic. Where a noun is also reconstructed
as a common noun, its common-noun gloss is also given, and where a local adverb in *qa-
is reconstructable this is also shown.

                                 Talking about space: terms of location and direction             235

Familiar-place and geographic local nouns:

__pre__
                   as common noun                    as local noun               adverb
 *qutan            ‘bushland, hinterland’            ‘inland’                    *qa-qutan
 *loŋa             …                                 ‘inland’                    —
 *laur             —                                 ‘seawards’                  *qa-laur
 *tasik            ‘sea, salt water’                 ‘at sea’                    —
 *Rumaq            ‘house’                           ‘home’                      *qa-Rumaq
 *tanoq            ‘earth, soil’                     ‘down below’                *qa-tanoq
 *atas             ‘high country, uplands’           ‘up above’                  —
 *laŋit            ‘sky, weather’                    ‘up top, high up’           —
 *laka             …                                 ‘up above’                  *qa-laka
 *liwaŋ            ‘open space’                      ‘middle’                    —

Relational local nouns:

__pre__
                                    as common noun           as local noun       adverb
 *lalo-, *lo-, *lalom               —                        ‘inside’            —
 *papa-,*pa-, *papak, *pak          —                        ‘underside’         —
 *papo-, *po-, *papo, *po           —                        ‘upper surface’     —
 *qulu-, *qulu                      ‘head, (head) hair’      ‘top’               PNCV *qa-qulu
 *[pwa]pwaRa-, *[pwa]pwaRa          ‘cheek’                  ‘side’              —
 *qaro-, *qarop                     ‘face’ ?                 ‘front’             —
 *muqa-, *muqa                      —                        ‘front’             PNCV *qa-muqa
 *mata-, *mata                      ‘eye’                    ‘front’             —
 *nako-, *nako                      ‘face’                   ‘front’             —
 *muri-                             ‘back’                   ‘back’              —

   ‘—’ indicates that the item is not reconstructable, ‘…’ that the evidence is insufficient to
   decide whether it is reconstructable.

   Heine (1989) observes an implicational relationship ‘under’ > ‘on’/‘in’ > ‘front’ >
‘back’ such that if any of these relational meanings is derived historically from a body-part
term, so will be the meanings to the right of it. This is supported by the listing above, as
‘under’ and ‘on’/‘in’ are not derived from body-part nouns, but ‘front’ and ‘back’ are.
Heine argues that this is a scale of increasing deictivity from left to right, but Bowden
(1992:53) argues that ‘front’ and ‘back’ are based on body-part terms simply because
entities in the landscape are not perceived as having intrinsic fronts and backs, i.e. Oceanic
languages do not have a relative spatial system (p.230).


8.2.1 The preposition *i and the prefix *qa-

236   Malcolm Ross

   The preposition *i, which occurred before local nouns, is widely reflected in Oceanic
languages, but there are also many languages in which a local noun occurs without a
preposition.

<
PAn *i (PREP) ‘g:locative’ (ACD)
POc *i (PREP w PLC, N LOC) ‘g:locative’
 Adm: Mussau                 e-       (fossilised prefix on locative nouns)
 Adm: Penchal                i        (PREP) (locative, temporal, allative, instrumental)
 Adm: Lou                    e        (PREP) (locative, allative)
 NNG: Manam                  e-       (locative prefix, e.g. e-lau ‘seawards’)
 PT:     Molima              i-       (locative prefix)
 PT:     Sudest              e        (PREP) (locative)
 MM: Tigak                   e        (PREP w PLC) (locative)
 MM: Kara                    i        (PREP) (locative)
 MM: Nalik                   i-       (prefix on locative demonstratives)
 MM: Tabar                   i        (PREP w PLC, N LOC) (locative)
 MM: Lihir                   i        (PREP w PLC, N LOC) (locative)
 MM: Sursurunga              i        (PREP) (locative, temporal)
 MM: Ramoaaina               i-       (prefix on locative demonstratives)
 MM: Halia                   i        (PREP) (locative)
 MM: Taiof                   i        (PREP w predicate N LOC) (locative)
 SES: Bugotu                 i        (PREP) (locative)
 SES:    Gela                i        (PREP w N LOC) (locative)
 SES: Lengo                  i        (PREP) (locative)
 SES: Longgu                 i        (PREP w N LOC) (locative)
 SES: Lau                    i        (PREP w PLC, N LOC) (locative)
 SES: Kwaio                  i        (PREP) (locative)
 SES: Kwara’ae               i        (PREP) (locative)
 SES: Sa’a                   i        (PREP) (locative)
 SES: Arosi                  i        (PREP) (locative)
 NCV: Mota                   i        (PREP) (locative)
 NCV: Merlav                 i        (PREP) (locative)
 NCV: Nguna                  e-       (PREP) (locative)
 SV:     Kwamera             i-       (prefix on locative nouns)
 SV:     Lenakel             i-       (prefix on locative nouns)
 SV:     Anejom              i-       (prefix on locative nouns)
 NCal: Iaai                  e-       (prefix on locative adverbs)
 Fij:    Wayan               i        (PREP) (locative)
 Fij:    Bauan               e        (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     Tongan              i, ʔi    (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     Niuafo’ou           ʔi       (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     E Futunan           i        (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     E Uvean             ʔi       (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     Samoan              i        (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     Pileni              i        (PREP) (locative)
 Pn:     Marquesan           ʔi       (PREP) (locative)
>

Tongan, Niuafo’ou and East Uvean ʔi are phonologically problematic, as they reflect POc
*qi, the form of the genitive preposition governing a non-specific inalienable possessor
(Pawley 1972, Clark 1976, Hooper 1985, Ross 1998b, 2001b). However, as Clark (1976)
and Blust (ACD) note, the introduction of a historically secondary glottal stop also occurs
in some other Tongan grammatical formatives.

   POc *i occurred with local nouns. Its exact distribution is not clear, but it is likely that
*i was omissible if the phrase it initiated was licensed by the verb.

   There are a number of languages in which the reflex of *i is the general locative
preposition. I take these to be cases where an extension of meaning has occurred, as there
are ample and widely distributed languages where *i is attested only with local nouns.

                                Talking about space: terms of location and direction      237


   As mentioned above, a number of local nouns also formed POc local adverbs with the
prefix *qa-. Jauncey (1997) notes for Tamambo that the prefix a- means ‘location in/at a
place’, and must be prefixed to a noun signifying a place in relation to the speaker, i.e. a
local noun. The cognate set is listed below. This is the *qa- which Pawley (1972:82, 114)
found in Southeast Solomonic and Northern Vanuatu languages as a formative of temporal
adverbs (Ch. 9, p.324).

<
POc *qa- (local adverb formative)
 NNG:     Bariai               ga-           (local adverb formative)
 NNG:     Manam                a-            (local adverb formative; fossil)
 NNG:     Kairiru              qa-           (local adverb formative; fossil)
 MM:      Vitu                 ɣe-           (local adverb formative)
 MM:      Siar                 a-            (local adverb formative)
 MM:      Tolai                a-            (local adverb formative)
 SES:     Gela                 ɣa-           (local adverb formative; fossil)
 NCV:     Mota                 a-            (local adverb formative)
 NCV:     NE Ambae             a-            (local adverb formative)
 NCV:     Raga                 a-            (local adverb formative)
 NCV:     Port Sandwich        a-            (local adverb formative)
 NCV:     Tamambo              a-            (local adverb formative)
 NCV:     Paamese              a-            (local adverb formative; fossil)
>

There also seems to have been an alternant *ŋa-, reflected in Poeng (NNG) ŋa-, Nakanai
(MM) ga-, Longgu (SES) ŋa- and Samoan, Tikopia (Pn) ŋa-, but it is not strongly attested.

8.2.2 Familiar-place and geographic local nouns

   The nouns reconstructed in this section are zero-valency local nouns denoting regions,
either in relation to the island home of the interlocutors or in relation to the speaker. They
have meanings like ‘inland, bush’, ‘seaward, beach’, ‘down below’ and ‘up above’. Some
of these glosses are adverbial in English. This is because a zero-valency local noun
preceded by *i often performed the task of an English adverbial. For example, POc *i
tanoq evidently expressed something like ‘down there’.

   Some POc zero-valency local nouns, at least, were also used as common nouns, and this
difference sometimes also entailed a difference in meaning. Thus *i tanoq meant ‘down
there’ but *tanoq meant ‘earth, soil’ (vol. 1, p.119); *i qutan meant, among other things,
‘inland’, but *qutan meant ‘bushland’ (vol. 1, p.118).

238   Malcolm Ross

   As far as possible, the cognate sets below are limited to reflexes of local-noun uses.
However, the glosses of the reconstructions distinguish between common-noun (N) and
local-noun (N LOC) meanings.

8.2.2.1 ‘Inland, bush’

   As a common noun POc *qutan meant ‘bushland, hinterland’ (vol. 1, p.118; this
volume, Ch. 3, §5.1). As a local noun, however, *qutan denoted the direction of the bush,
namely ‘inland’. By extension, this has come to mean ‘upwards’ in a number of languages,
by virtue of the fact that the inland region is significantly higher than the coast on many
Pacific islands.

<
PAn *quCaN ‘scrubland, bush’ (ACD)
PMP *qutan ‘small wild herbaceous plants; scrubland, bush’ (ACD; Dempwolff 1938)
POc (N) *qutan ‘bushland, hinterland’
POc (N LOC) *qutan
POc (ADV) *qa-qutan ‘in the bush, inland’
 NNG: Manam            -uta       ‘inland’ (root of adverbials)
 NNG: Manam            (a)uta     (N) ‘inland’
 NCV: Mota             uta        ‘bush, forest, unoccupied land; the inland country’
 NCV: NE Ambae         (a)ute     (ADV) ‘up in the bush’
 NCV: Tamambo          (a)uta     (ADV) ‘inland direction’
 NCV: Paamese          ut         (N LOC) ‘ashore’
 NCV: Lewo             ura        (N LOC) ‘ashore’
 NCV: Nguna            uta        ‘inland’
 SV:     Lenakel       -ət, -it   (DIR) ‘upwards’
 SV:     Kwamera       (p)uta     (N LOC) ‘up, upwards, on top of’
 Mic:    Kosraean      wʌt        (N) ‘area inland or towards the mountains’
 Mic:    Marshallese (e)ɒ̄c       (N) ‘interior of an island’
 Mic:    Mokilese      (e)wic     (N) ‘inland’
 Fij:    Rotuman       ufa        ‘land (from the sea); interior (from the coast)’
 Pn:     Tongan        ʔuta       (N LOC) ‘inland (from shore); shore, land (from sea)’
 Pn:     Niuafo’ou     (ŋā)ʔuta   (N LOC) ‘upland’
 Pn:     Samoan        uta        (ADV) ‘on shore, inland’
 Pn:     Samoan        |i uta|    (N LOC) ‘on the side facing the land’ (as opposed to _i tai_ ‘on the side facing the sea’)
 Pn:     Samoan        (ŋā)ʔuta   (ADV) ‘to shore, in an inland direction’
 Pn:     Pileni        (ɣa)uta    (N LOC) ‘shore, village location on shore, inland’
 Pn:     Tikopia       (ŋa)uta    ‘inland, landwards’
 Pn:     Hawaiian      uka        ‘inland (from shore); shore, land (from sea)’
 Pn:     Marquesan     uta        (N LOC) ‘towards the mountain’
>

                                Talking about space: terms of location and direction      239


   The cognate set below has fewer members that the one above, but appears to reflect a
local noun with similar meanings. Polynesian reflexes display a vowel change and a
change in meaning from ‘inland’ to ‘top, space above, up top’, a change presumably
mediated by the fact that on a high island (as opposed to atoll) the inland of the island was
also its ‘top’.

<
POc (N) *loŋa ‘inland’
POc (N LOC) *loŋa ‘inland’
 NNG: Bariai                loŋa                  ‘bush people’
 SES:    Bugotu             loŋa, (i)loŋa         ‘landwards, from sea’
 SES:    Gela               loŋa, (i)loŋa         ‘landwards, inland’
 SES:    Longgu             loŋa                  (N LOC) ‘direction towards bush’
 SES:    Kwaio             | (i ka)loŋa |           ‘in the forest’
 Mic:    Marshallese        -lʌŋ                  (DIR) ‘upward’
 Mic:    Puluwatese         -loŋ                  (DIR) ‘inland’
 Mic:    Woleaian           roŋ                   (DIR) ‘inland’
PPn *luŋa ‘top, space above, up top’ (-u- for expected *-o-)
 Pn:     Niuean             luŋa                 (N LOC) ‘above, upon, top’
 Pn:     Niuafo’ou          (ʔo)luŋa             (N LOC) ‘up’
 Pn:     Samoan             luŋa                 (N LOC) ‘top, space above, up top’
 Pn:     Pileni             luŋa                 (N LOC) ‘top, up, east’
>


8.2.2.2 ‘Seaward, towards the beach, at sea’

   The principal POc local noun meaning ‘seawards’ was *laur, and it was evidently the
antonym of *qutan and *loŋa above. It reflects PMP *lahud ‘downriver, towards the sea’,
and it is likely that it was inherited into POc primarily, perhaps exclusively, as a local noun
denoting a direction (for common-noun reflexes, see p.95). In this regard it differed from
POc *tasik ‘sea, salt water’ and POc *laman ‘deep sea beyond the reef’, reconstructed in
Chapter 4, which were common nouns.

   POc *tasik is quite often reflected as a local noun and presumably functioned as both a
local and a common noun in POc. Occasional reflexes have meanings similar to those of
POc *laur, but most mean ‘at sea’, and this was presumably its POc meaning.

   It is unlikely that POc *laman normally occurred as a local noun, as only two local noun
reflexes have been found (Mussau [Adm] lamana ‘beach’, Tigak [MM] laman ‘down
there, at the beach’).

<
PMP *lahud ‘downriver, towards the sea’ (Dempwolff 1938, Blust 1997)
POc (N LOC) *laur ‘sea, seawards’
POc (ADV) *qa-laur ‘in a seaward direction’
 Yap:   Yapese           lʔāy         ‘seaward’
 NNG: Manam              -lau         ‘seawards’ (root of adverbials)
 NNG: Manam              (i)lau       (N) ‘seawards’
 MM: Nakanai             (go)lau      ‘go toward the sea’
 MM: Meramera            -lau         ‘beach’ (root of adverbials)
 MM: Kokota              rauru        ‘seaward’
 SES:   Bugotu           lau, (i)lau  ‘seawards’ (as opposed to i-loŋa ‘landwards, inland, towards land’)
 SES:   Gela             lau, (i)lau  ‘seawards, shorewards from a speaker inland, (river) bank’ (as opposed to i-loŋa ‘landwards, inland, towards land’)
 SES:   Lau              lau          ‘north; open sea to the north’
 NCV:     Mota            lau             ‘the beach, as approached from the land’
 NCV:     NE Ambae        (a)lau          (ADV) ‘down by the sea’
 NCV:     Tamambo         (a)lau          (ADV) ‘seawards, shore direction’
 NCV:     Paamese         (a)lau          ‘seawards’
>

240    Malcolm Ross


<
PMP *tasik ‘sea’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc (N) *tasik ‘sea, salt water’
POc (N LOC) *tasik ‘at sea’
 MM: Lihir               | (i) tes |        ‘at sea’
 MM: Ramoaaina            (nə)tai         ‘on the sea, out to sea’ (not ‘seawards’)
 MM: Tolai                (na)ta          ‘on the sea, out to sea’ (not ‘seawards’)
 SES:    Longgu           asi             (N LOC) ‘seawards’
 SES:    Kwaio           | (i) asi |        ‘at the coast’
 SV:     Lenakel          (i)rhe          (ADV) ‘at/to sea’
 Fij:    Wayan            taði            (N LOC) ‘coast, seashore, sea, from the perspective of the land’
 Pn:     Niuafo’ou        (ŋā)tai         (N LOC) ‘outer sea’
 Pn:     Samoan           tai             (ADV) ‘at sea’ (i tai ‘on the side facing the sea’, as opposed to i uta ‘on the side facing the land’)
 Pn:     Samoan           (ŋā)tai         (ADV) ‘to sea’
 Pn:     Marquesan        tai             (N LOC) ‘sea’
>


8.2.2.3 Directions along the coastline

   The items reconstructed above for ‘inland’ and ‘seawards’ were orientations at an angle
to the coastline. Also recorded for a few languages are items referring to the two directions
along the coastline. Possible PWOc candidates for these meanings are given below.
Although the data are fragmentary, the fact that both members of the pair are recorded in
widely separated languages supports their reconstruction. The Nalik glosses ‘south-east’
and ‘north-west’ are equivalent respectively to ‘to one’s left when facing the sea’ and ‘to
one’s right when facing the sea’ if one is on the west coast of New Ireland.

<
PWOc (N LOC) *pa
PWOc (ADV) *qa-pa ‘to one’s left when facing the sea’
 NNG: Manam           (a)wa          (N) ‘to one’s left when facing the sea’
 MM:     Vitu         (ɣe)va         (ADV) ‘downwards’
 MM:     Nalik        pa             (N LOC) ‘south-east’
>

<
PWOc (N LOC) *ta
PWOc (ADV) *qa-ta ‘to one’s right when facing the sea’
 NNG: Manam            (a)ta          (N) ‘to one’s right when facing the sea’
 MM:    Vitu           (ɣe)ta         (ADV) ‘upwards’
 MM:    Nalik          ta             (N LOC) ‘north-west’
>

   Nakanai (MM) has the non-cognate pair of roots (used in directional and local verbs)
-ale ‘to one’s left when facing the sea’ and -muli ‘to one’s right when facing the sea’.

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction     241


8.2.2.4 ‘At home’

   The cognate set attesting POc *Rumaq ‘house’ was presented in vol. 1, p.48. It is
reasonably clear that it also functioned as a local noun in the phrase *i Rumaq ‘at home’,
and apparently also in the adverb *qa-Rumaq.

<
PAn *Rumaq ‘dwelling house’ (Blust 1987)
POc (N)*Rumaq ‘house’
POc (N LOC) *Rumaq ‘home’
POc (ADV) *qa-Rumaq ‘at home’
 PT:    Saliba         numa          (N LOC) ‘home’
 MM: Nakanai           (go)luma      ‘go to nearest hamlet, usually one’s home’
 MM: Meramera          -luma         ‘home’ (root of adverbials)
 MM: Ramoaaina         (nə)ruma      ‘at home’
 MM: Taiof             numa          (N LOC) ‘home’
 NCV: Tamambo          (a)imo        (ADV) ‘at home’
 NCV: Paamese          (tela)im      (N LOC) ‘home’
 NCV: Lewo             umʷa         (N LOC) ‘home’
 SV:    Lenakel        īmʷa          ‘at home, homewards’ (cf. nimwa ‘house’)
>


8.2.2.5 ‘Down below’

   POc *tanoq is reconstructed as a common noun meaning ‘earth, soil, ground; land’ in
vol. 1, p.119 and in this volume, p.41. However, there is well distributed evidence that as a
local noun it meant ‘down below’. This is not surprising when one considers that POc
speakers must generally have lived in stilt houses (vol. 1, Ch. 3) for whose inhabitants the
ground was indeed ‘down below’.

<
PMP *taneq ‘earth, land’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc (N)*tanoq ‘earth, soil, ground; land’
POc (N LOC) *tanoq ‘earth, soil, ground; land’
POc (ADV) *qa-tanoq ‘down on the ground, down below’
 Adm: Loniu              tan            (ADV) ‘down’
 NNG: Takia             | tan (na) |      (N + POSTPOSITION) ‘on the ground, down below’
 PT:     Gumawana        tono           ‘down’
 MM: Harua               tano           ‘down there’
 MM: Nakanai             (go)talo       ‘go down’
 MM: Meramera            tano(do)       ‘down there’ (-do DEM)
 NCV: Tamambo            (a)tano        ‘down on the ground, downwards’
 NCV: Paamese            dan            ‘down, below’
 NCV: Lewo               tano           ‘underneath, downwards’
 SV:     Kwamera         təna           ‘earth, ground; land, island, country’
 NCal: Iaai              kono           ‘earth, ground’
 NCal: Nengone           ten            ‘under’
>

   The meanings above overlap with the adverb reflexes of POc *sipo ‘go downward’,
(ADV) ‘down below’, but *tanoq, a noun, and *sipo a verb (and perhaps adverb), belonged
to different word classes (§3.3.1).

242   Malcolm Ross


8.2.2.6 ‘Up above’

   A few of the reflexes of POc *atas ‘top, space above’ are monovalent relational nouns.
However, the vast majority of reflexes are geographic, not relational, nouns, and it seems
that POc *atas was also a geographic noun. It also seems that it was not a common noun
(in this respect it resembles POc *laur, p.239).

   The items listed under ‘cf. also’ below reflect a Proto North Bougainville form *yasa,
which has replaced *yatasa. Possibly *yasa is derived from expected *yatasa by
idiosyncratic deletion of the middle syllable.

<
PAn *aCas ‘high, tall’ (ACD)
POc (N) *atas ‘top; space above’
POc (N LOC) *atas ‘up top’
 NNG: Ali                   yat            ‘on top’
 NNG: Tumleo                yot            ‘on top’
 PT:      Are               yata           ‘on top’
 PT:      Gapapaiwa         yata           ‘on top’
 PT:      Sinaugoro         iata(na-i)     ‘on top of it’ (N-P:3SG-POSTP)
 PT:      Motu              lata-          ‘summit, top’
 PT:      Motu              ata(i)         ‘on top’ (N-POSTP)
 MM:      Bali              ɣata           ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Nakanai           (go)ata        ‘go upwards’
 MM:      Meramera          uata           ‘upwards’
 MM:      Lavongai          (la)kat        ‘top’
 MM:      Nalik             uata           ‘top’
 MM:      Sursurunga        (u-ram)iet     ‘upwards’
 MM:      Sursurunga        ieti           ‘top’
 MM:      Tangga            (l)iat         ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Tangga            (ua)yat        ‘upwards’
 Mic:     Kiribati          (i)eta         ‘up, on high, above, top, upper, heavens’
 Mic:     Marshallese       ec             ‘upper, eastern’
 Mic:     Chuukese          ās             ‘upper part, top, summit, eastern side’
 Mic:     Chuukese          asa-           ‘upper part’
 Mic:     Woleaian          yat            ‘up, top’
 Fij:     Wayan             ata            (N LOC) ‘top, above; interior of a mountainous island, up the hill, inland’
 cf. also
 MM:      Solos             yas            ‘top’
 MM:      Solos             (i)yas         ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Petats            (i)yas         ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Petats            yas            ‘topside; upwards’
 MM:      Halia (Haku)      (i)yasa        ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Halia (Haku)      (pal)yasa      ‘upwards’
 MM:      Halia (Selau)     (i)yasa        ‘up (there)’
 MM:      Taiof             yas            ‘up (there); upwards’
>

                                 Talking about space: terms of location and direction   243


   POc *laŋit ‘sky, weather’ is reconstructed as a common noun in Chapter 5, but the
reflexes below suggest that it was also used as a POc local noun.

<
PAn *laŋiC ‘sky’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc (N) *laŋit ‘sky, weather’
POc (N LOC) *laŋit ‘up top, high up’
 Yap:    Yapese             lǣŋ            ‘up’
 SES: Lau                  | (i) laŋi- |      ‘up, above’
 SES: Kwaio                 laŋi-           ‘space above’
 NCV: Mota                  laŋ             ‘upwards, heavenwards’
 NCV: Nguna                 (e)laŋi         ‘up, high, above, top’
 Mic:    Marshallese        lʌŋ             ‘up, above’
>

   The meanings above overlap with the adverb reflexes of POc *sake ‘go upward’, (ADV)
‘upwards, up top’, but *atas and *laŋit were nouns, *sake a verb (and perhaps adverb,
p.277).

   It is less clear whether POc *laka ‘up above’ was a noun or a verb. In Takia its reflex is
a zero-valency noun, in Mapos Buang and Kiriwina a local adverb. These could be derived
from either a noun or a directional verb. Monovalent noun reflexes occur in the two New
Ireland (MM) languages Lihir and Siar, but in other New Ireland languages (Lavongai,
Tigak and Kara) the reflexes are verbs. However, the Southeast Solomonic reflexes reflect
the derived adverb *qa-laka ‘up there, up above’ (which was then used as a verb in some
SES languages). Since *qa- is far more readily reconstructable as a prefix to nouns than to
verbs, I assume that *laka was a noun.

<
POc (N LOC) *laka ‘up above’
POc (ADV) *qa-laka ‘in an upward direction’
 NNG: Takia              | lak (na) |       ‘high up’ (na local postposition)
 NNG: Mapos Buang         raq             ‘up, above’
 PT:     Kiriwina         lake(va)        ‘top, in sky’
 MM: Lavongai             (saŋ)lak        ‘(sun) rise’
 MM: Tigak                lak             ‘(sun) rise’
 MM: Kara (East)          lak             ‘(sun) rise’
 MM: Lihir                laka-           ‘top surface, space above’
 MM: Siar                 laka-           ‘top surface, space above’
 SES:    Gela             (ɣa)laɣa        ‘up’
 SES:    Talise           (ɣa)laɣa        ‘go up’
 SES:    Birao            (ha)laha        ‘go up’
>

There was also a POc verb *laka, which meant ‘walk’ and apparently had no directional
meaning.

8.2.2.7 ‘In the middle, between’

244       Malcolm Ross

   There is well distributed evidence that POc *liwaŋ, *liwa-/*liwaŋa- was a local noun
meaning ‘open space, space between, middle’, and that it had at least one relational
alternant. The form we would expect to find reflected in most languages with relational
forms is POc *liwa-. However, we also find reflexes of *liwaŋa-. This may be the result of
local developments, and this in turn may suggest that there was no relational form in POc.

   The forms listed below under ‘cf. also’ are similar in form to those listed here.
However, the fact that they share a formal irregularity—they seem to reflect POc *lua—
and a different meaning—‘outside’—suggests that POc *lua ‘outside’ may have been a
separate etymon, and also a local noun.

<
PMP *liwaŋ ‘open space’ (ACD: Proto Western Malayo-Polynesian)
POc (N) *liwaŋ, *liwa-, *liwaŋa- ‘open space, space between, middle’
POc (N LOC) *liwaŋ ‘in the middle’
 Adm: Loniu                (loho)luwa-          ‘middle’
 NNG: Mangap               lwo-                 ‘torso; middle’
 NNG: Manam                luʔaŋa-              ‘space in middle’
 NNG: Hote (Misim)         livuŋ                ‘front’
 PT:       Minaveha        niwani-              ‘midst, among’
 PT:       Sudest          luɣawo-luɣawo-       ‘middle’ (metathesis of **luwaɣo-)
 MM:       Ramoaaina       (nə)liwən            ‘between’
 MM:       Tolai           (na)livuan           ‘in the middle’
 MM:       Tolai           livuan               ‘(be) in the middle’
 SES:      Longgu          levua-               ‘middle, centre’
 NCV: NE Ambae             livuge-              ‘middle’
 NCV: Tamambo              livuɣa-              ‘middle part of s.t.’
 NCV: Paamese              luhi, luhu           ‘middle’
 SV:       Sye             (i)lvuɣ(teve)-       ‘between, in the middle of’
 Mic:      Woleaian        riwan-               ‘between, among’
 Fij:      Bauan           liwa                 (N) ‘ocean far from land’; (ADV) ‘far from habitation’
 Fij:      Bauan           (mā)liwa             (N) ‘space between, interstice’
 cf. also:
 MM:       Minigir         (na)lua              ‘outside’
 MM:       Tolai           (na)lua              ‘outside’
 SV:       Lenakel         (i)lua               ‘outside’
 SV:       Kwamera         (i)rua               ‘outside’
>

8.2.3 Relational local nouns

   The function of a POc monovalent relational local noun preceded by *i was similar to
that of an English preposition, as in these Tabar (MM) examples, where the relational noun
paki- ‘underneath’ performs a function similar to that of the English preposition under.[10]

__pre__
      i      paki-na             mi    vanua
      PREP underneath-P:3SG ART house
      ‘under the house’ (more literally ‘at the house’s underneath’)
      i      paki-gu
      PREP underneath-P:1SG
      ‘under me’


[10] Tabar and Lengo sentences are from my fieldnotes.

                                     Talking about space: terms of location and direction                245

In these Lengo (SES) expressions the relational noun muri- ‘back’ performs a function
similar to that of the English preposition behind.

__pre__
     i     muri-e      na vae
     PREP back-CSTR ART house
     ‘behind the house’ (more literally ‘at the house’s back’)
     i     muri-gu
     PREP back-P:1SG
     ‘behind me’

Hence we can with reasonable confidence make POc reconstructions such as:

__pre__
     *i      lalo-ña          Rumaq
     PREP inside-P:3SG house
     ‘inside the house’ (more literally ‘at the house’s inside’)
     *i    gabwari-ña         Rumaq
     PREP underneath-P:3SG house
     ‘underneath the house’ (more literally ‘at the house’s underneath’)
     (gabwari- ‘the area underneath a raised house’; vol. 1, p.51)
     *i      muri-gu
     PREP back-P:1SG
     ‘behind me’

   Many Oceanic languages have relational nouns with the meanings reconstructed below:
‘inside’ (§2.3.1), ‘underneath, lower surface, space below’ (§2.3.2), ‘top, upper surface,
space above’ (§2.3.3), ‘side’ (§2.3.4), ‘outside’ (§2.3.5), ‘front, time before’ (§2.3.6),
‘back, space behind, time after’ (§2.3.7). Although the nearest semantic equivalents of
Oceanic relational nouns are English prepositions, I have used nouns and noun phrases in
the titles of these subsections in an attempt to replicate the meanings of the reconstructed
Oceanic terms.[11]

   In their monovalent form, relational local nouns are reconstructed below like other
monovalent nouns, i.e. without their final consonant, on the assumption that it was lost
before a possessor suffix: for example, *lalom ‘inside’ became *lalo-, *papak ‘underneath’
became *papa-. However, as I note in Lynch, Ross and Crowley (2002, Ch. 4), there is
some evidence from Tanna languages (SV) that POc retained the final consonant in this
context, so that, e.g., POc *lalo-ña in the reconstructed example above may have been
(optionally?) *lalom-ña.

[11] Some of these titles, like ‘inside’, show categorial ambiguity between noun and preposition because the
   English preposition reflects the grammaticisation of a relational noun.

8.2.3.1 ‘Inside’

246     Malcolm Ross

   The most widely reflected POc term for ‘inside’ is *lalo-/*lalom. This reflects PMP
*Daləm with assimilation of the initial liquid to the intervocalic liquid: the expected POc
form is **ralo-/**ralom. Reconstruction of unsuffixed *lalom is supported by just one
reflex, Mussau e-lom-e.[12]

[12] Initial e- reflects the POc local preposition *i. Final -e is also found on another Mussau relational noun,
   pak-e, reflecting POc *pak ‘underside’. Its origin is not known.

   In Polynesian languages reflexes of *lalo-/*lalom denote the region underneath
something. Blust (1997) suggests that this meaning change comes from the use of *lalom
in relation to a planar surface, the sea, rather than a three-dimensional container.

<
PMP *Daləm ‘inside’
POc (N, N LOC) *lalo-, *lalom ‘inside’
 Adm: Mussau                 (e)lom(e)    (ADV) ‘inside’
 NNG: Gitua                  lolo-        ‘inside’
 NNG: Mangap                 lele-        ‘inside, in’
 NNG: Kakuna                 lolo-        ‘inside’
 NNG: Bam                    liluo        ‘room’
 NNG: Kairiru                lal          ‘inside’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain             lulua-       ‘room’
 NNG: Ali                    lal          ‘room’
 NNG: Numbami                (tae)lalo    ‘intestines ’
 NNG: Numbami                (weni)lalo   ‘forest ’
 NNG: Yabem                  (ŋa)lelom    ‘inside’
 NNG: Kela                   raro         ‘inside’
 PT:     Motu                lalo-        ‘inside, within’
 PT:     Mekeo               alo-         ‘inside’
 MM: Bola                    lilo         ‘inside’
 MM: Meramera                lilo         ‘inside’
 MM: Notsi                   lolo         ‘inside’
 MM: Lihir                   lilie        ‘inside’
 MM: Sursurunga              lali         ‘underside’
 MM: Ramoaaina               lolo         ‘intestines’
 SES:    Gela                lalo         ‘deep, profound’
 SES:    Talise              lalo-na      ‘in’
 SES:    Lau                 (i)lalo      ‘inside, in’
 SES:    Sa’a                lalo         ‘inside’
 SES:    Arosi               raro         ‘in’
 NCV: Mota                   lolo-        ‘the inner part; a hollow; the inward part of man, heart, affections’
 NCV:     Raga               lolo-        ‘inside, middle; body, stomach’
 NCV:     Uripiv             lolo-        ‘inside’
 NCV:     Port Sandwich      nalö-n       ‘inside; seat of feelings’
 SV:      Kwamera            reri-        ‘internal portion, insides, heart, mind, feeling, emotion’
 SV:      Anejom             lele-        ‘inside; heart, seat of feelings’
 NCal:    Tinrin             ñɯwɯ-        ‘inside’
 Mic:     Kiribati           (i)nano-n    ‘inside, in’
 Mic:     Kosraean           lʷal         ‘deep’
 Mic:     Marshallese        i-lɔwa       ‘inside, in’
 Mic:     Marshallese        lalɯ         ‘down, bottom, below, earth, world’
 Mic:     Ponapean           lɔlɛ         ‘inside (it)’
 Mic:     Chuukese            ɾɾɔɾ          ‘inside of’
 Mic:     Puluwatese          llɔn          ‘in it’
 Mic:     Woleaian            raro          ‘inside’
PPn *lalo ‘region underneath’
 Pn:     Tongan              lalo           ‘below, under’
 Pn:     Samoan              lalo           ‘under, down, below’
 Pn:     Pileni              lalo           ‘bottom, down, west’
>

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction    247


   There is evidence that POc *lalo- had two short forms, *lo- and *la-. A number of their
reflexes occur as prepositions and may have been conflated with reflexes of POc *lako/*la
‘go (to); away from speaker’. They are listed together with a discussion of this conflation
in §3.4.5. Listed below are those reflexes of the short forms which are not prepositions;
most are local nouns. Significantly, there is a difference between the distributions of the
two short forms. Reflexes of *lo- occur quite commonly as local nouns, and a number of
them have a fossilised prefix reflecting the POc local preposition *i. Reflexes of *la- have
a stronger tendency to occur as prepositions (p.288), and may reflect the short form of
*lako rather than of *lalo-.

   There is, of course, also a possibility that *lalo- has undergone haplology to form *lo-
more than once in the history of Oceanic languages, but reflexes of *lo- below and in
§3.4.5 are widespread enough to warrant its reconstruction in POc.

<
POc (N LOC) *lo- ‘inside’
 Adm: Titan                 lo(n-um)        ‘floor, inside of a house’ (um ‘house’)
 NNG: Malasanga             lo-             ‘inside’
 NNG: Sio                   (i)lo           ‘inside’
 NNG: Tami                  lo              ‘inside’
 NNG: Poeng                 lo-             ‘inside’
 NNG: Roinji                lo              ‘inside’
 NNG: Manam                 (i)lo-          ‘inside, in’
 NNG: Bing                  lo              ‘inside’
 NNG: Takia                 (i)lo-          ‘inside, in’
 MM:     Nakanai            -(i)lo          ‘inside’
 MM:     Siar               lo              ‘inside’
 SES:    Gela               lo-             ‘inside’
 NCV: Lonwolwol             lo-             ‘inside; heart, feelings’
>

<
POc (N LOC) *la- ‘inside’; (?) (PREP) ‘in’
 Yap:    Yapese              lā-n           ‘inside’
 MM:     Tigak               la-            ‘inside’
 MM:     Kara (East)         la             ‘inside’
 Mic:    Woleaian            ra-n           ‘inside’
>

248    Malcolm Ross

   POc *loto- ‘space within a concave object’ is not well supported. It has become the
default relational noun for ‘inside’ in Polynesian languages (where POc *lalo- is reflected
with the meaning ‘underneath’; see above) and is also reflected in Wayan Fijian, so it can
be reconstructed for Proto Central Pacific. Its reconstruction in POc rests on a single
Admiralties reflex, Loniu lotiyɛ-, with -i- for expected -o-.

<
POc (N, N LOC) *loto ‘space within a concave object’
 Adm: Loniu             lotiyɛ-            ‘inside’
 Fij:    Wayan          loto-              ‘bottom, lowest part (e.g. of kava bowl)’
PPn *loto ‘inside’
 Pn:     Tongan          loto                ‘inside; hole or depression in coral reef or sea bed’
 Pn:      Samoan         loto                ‘deep hole in lagoon; (house) interior’
 Pn:      Tahitian       roto                ‘pool, lake, lagoon; inside’
 Pn:      Hawaiian       loko                ‘pond, lake, pool; inside, interior; internal organs, as tripe’
>

   In many Oceanic languages the word for ‘inside’ is the reflex of a POc body-part term.
Two of these may have had the secondary meaning ‘inside’: POc *bwal(o,a)-, *bwal(o,a)k
seems to have denoted the belly, POc *tinaqe- the intestines.

<
POc (N)*bwal(o,a)-, *bwal(o,a)k ‘belly; hollow space’; (N LOC) ‘inside’
 Adm: Nyindrou         bolo-n               ‘inside, in’
 Adm: Titan            pólo-n               (PREP) ‘among, inside’
 NNG: Kairiru          balai                ‘inside’
 MM: Vitu              polok                ‘inside’
 MM: Sursurunga        polgo                ‘inside’
 MM: Tolai            | (ta ra) bala-na |     ‘inside, in’ (ta PREP, ra ART, bala- ‘belly, interior’)
 NCV: Raga             bʷala                ‘shell’
 NCV: Raga             bʷala(lolo)          ‘middle’
 NCV: Lonwolwol bwele-n                     ‘hollow vessel, empty shell’
 NCV: Paamese          vale(-ŋe-ne)         ‘hollow part of something, cave’
 NCV: Namakir          bwele-n              ‘belly’
 NCV: Nguna            (na-)pwele           ‘stomach, belly, abdomen, waist, genital region’
 NCV: Nguna           | (na)-pwala( u-na) | ‘among, middle, inside’
>

<
PMP *tinaqi ‘small intestine’ (Blust 1981b)
POc (N)*tinaqe- ‘intestines; ?? (N LOC) inside’
 Adm: Drehet             kxine              ‘inner part, inside’
 PT:     Tawala         | (u) hine-na |     ‘inside, in’
 PT:     Iduna           hinage-ne          ‘inside’
 PT:     Gapapaiwa       sine               ‘inside’
 PT:     Sudest          tine               ‘inside’
>


8.2.3.2 ‘Underneath, lower surface, space below’

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction   249

   The most widely reflected POc term for ‘underneath, underside’ is *papa-, *papak. This
reflects PMP *babaq, which Blust reconstructs as referring to the underside or lower
surface of something (the change from PMP *-q to POc *-k is unexplained). In a number
of Oceanic languages, its meaning also includes the space beneath something, e.g. a house
(see the NNG reflexes below), and it is probable that this extension of meaning had already
occurred in POc. Its zero-valency forms are the source of local adverbs meaning ‘below,
down there’ in a number of languages.

    Scattered reflexes also suggest the reconstruction of monosyllabic forms without the
first (reduplicated) syllable. An innovative monovalent form *pwake- is reflected in Meso-
Melanesian languages, apparently by the addition of *-e to the monosyllabic form *pak.

    No reflexes occur in Central Pacific languages. In Fijian, *papa-, *papak has been
ousted by reflexes of POc *ruku- ‘underneath’ (see below), in Polynesian languages by
reflexes of POc *lalom ‘inside’ (p.247).

<
PMP *babaq ‘lower surface, bottom, underside’ (ACD)
POc (N, N LOC) *papa-, *pa-, *papak, *pak ‘underneath, lower surface, bottom, underside’
 Adm: Mussau           pak(e)          ‘underside’
 Adm: Loniu            paʔaha-         ‘underside’ (metathesis of *pahaʔa- < *papaqa- with unexplained final *-a-)
 Adm: Drehet           pehe(kxa-)      ‘underside’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono) pa(rumu)            ‘area under house’ (< POc *pak qi Rumaq ‘underneath of house’)
 NNG: Dami             pa(rume)        ‘under’ (< POc *pak qi Rumaq)
 NNG: Bing             papa(rum)       ‘under (a house)’ (< POc *papak qi Rumaq)
 PT:     Are           baba-           ‘beneath’
 PT:     Gapapaiwa     vava-           ‘beneath’
 PT:     Tawala        baba-           ‘base, underneath, bottom; reason’
 PT:     Mekeo         papu-           ‘under’
 SES:    Talise        vava-           ‘below’
 SES:    Birao         vava-           ‘below’
 NCV: Nokuku           veva-n          ‘underside’
 NCV: Kiai             vova-na         ‘underside’
 NCV: Uripiv           (mel)ve-n       ‘the underneath of it, the shade of it’ (*malu ‘shadow’)
 NCV: Lonwolwol        fa-n            ‘underneath’
 NCV: Paamese          hehe-ne         ‘underneath’
 NCV: Nguna            na-ve(ruku)     ‘underneath’
 Mic:    Kiribati      ā-              ‘underside, underneath, bottom’
 Mic:    Ponapean      pā-             ‘underneath’
 Mic:    Mokilese      pā-             ‘underneath’
 Mic:    Chuukese      fā-             ‘underneath’
 Mic:    Woleaian      fā-             ‘underneath’
 NCal: Cèmuhî          hāhî-n          ‘underneath’
Proto Meso-Melanesian *pake- ‘underneath, underside’
 MM: Bali              va-vake(ni)     ‘down (there)’
 MM: Tigak             pak(a-)         ‘underside’
 MM: Kara (East)       pa-             ‘underside; down there’
 MM:     Notsi           pai-             ‘underside’
 MM:     Tabar           paki-            ‘underside’
 MM:     Lihir           pakie-           ‘underside’
 MM:     Lihir           pek-             ‘down (there)’
 MM:     Tangga          (ua-i)fafi       ‘downwards’
 MM:     Konomala        fəi-             ‘underside’
 MM:     Tolai           (na)vavai        ‘under’
 MM:     Taiof           fai-             ‘underside’
 MM:     Teop            pa-              ‘underside’
 MM:     Roviana         (pana)peka       ‘below’ (vowel metathesis)
 MM:     Vangunu         (pana)peka       ‘below’ (vowel metathesis)
 MM:     Kia             peka             ‘below’ (vowel metathesis)
 MM:     Laghu           peka             ‘below’ (vowel metathesis)
>

250    Malcolm Ross


   Three other POc terms can be reconstructed with a meaning related to ‘underneath’ or
with a denotation which has given rise to it in daughter languages.

   Several reflexes of the first, POc *ruku-, are concatenated with a reflex of *pa-
‘underside’, the short form of *papa-. These seem to be compounds, implying that the
meaning of *ruku- was perhaps more specific than that of *papa-. The latter was evidently
the generic term for ‘underneath’. Perhaps *ruku- denoted the undersurface of something.

   The second term, POc *gabwari- meant ‘the area underneath a raised house’ (vol. 1,
p.51) and has come to mean ‘underneath’ in some languages by extension. POc *puqu-,
puqun had the relational meaning ‘base, foundation’ when used in association with an
object, as well as the more abstract meaning ‘origin, source, reason’.

<
POc (N, N LOC) *ruku- ‘underneath, undersurface (?)’
 MM: Bulu                luku(va)-      ‘underside’ (-va < POc *pa- ‘underside’)
 MM: Meramera            luʔu(va)-      ‘underside’ (-va < POc *pa- ‘underside’)
 MM: Nakanai             (lau)lu(va)-   ‘underside’ (-va < POc *pa- ‘underside’)
 MM: Nalik               ru             ‘down (there)’
 SES:    Gela            (ru)ruɣu       ‘below’
 SES: Lau                rū             ‘inside of roof’
 SES: Kahua              ruɣu(ha)-      ‘below’ (-ha < POc *pa- ‘underside’)
 NCV: Tamambo            ruhu-ruhu      ‘underneath part of s.t.’
 NCV: Nguna              (na-ve)ruku    ‘underneath’ (ve- < POc *pa- ‘underside’)
 Fij:    Wayan           ruku           ‘underneath, under, below, space underneath’
 Fij:    Bauan           ruku-          ‘space underneath’
>

<
POc (N, N LOC) *gabwari- ‘the area underneath a raised house’ (vol. 1, p.51)
 Adm: Titan             kapʷaliŋ         ‘area underneath a house’
 NNG: Mapos Buang       ɣbi(ne)          ‘underneath’
 NNG: Mangga            kabi(ni)         ‘underneath’
 NNG: Patep             ŋbi-             ‘underneath’
 PT:     Gumawana       gabula           ‘underneath’
 PT:     Tawala         gaboli-          ‘area underneath a house’
 PT:       Dobu                gabura              ‘area underneath a house’
 PT:       Duau                gabule-             ‘area underneath a house’
 PT:       Misima              gabúla              ‘area underneath a house; underneath’
 PT:       Sinaugoro           gabule-             ‘underneath’
>

                                     Talking about space: terms of location and direction           251

<
PMP *puqun ‘beginning, cause, origin, source, basis’ (ACD)
POc (N, N LOC) *puqu-, *puqun ‘base, foundation, origin, source, reason’
 Adm: Loniu             puʔu-           ‘bottom, underside’
 NNG: Tami              pu-             ‘base, origin’
 NNG: Mangga            kabi(ni)        ‘underneath’
 NNG: Takia             fu-n            ‘bottoms’
 NNG: Yabem             m̀              ‘origin’[13]
 NNG: Bukawa            (ŋa)pu          ‘underside’
 NNG: Mangga            vu              ‘underside’
 NNG: Wampar            fo(n)           ‘origin’
 NNG: Labu              (a)ho           ‘base; bottom; reason’
 NNG: Silisili          fogo            ‘origin’
 NNG: Wampur            hugu-n          ‘trunk’
 NNG: Adzera            fugu-n          ‘tap-root; base’
 PT:     Bwaidoga       vu-vu-          ‘cause, origin, foundation of anything; (tree) root’
 MM: Tolai              vu-             ‘beginning, cause, origin, source, basis, root, foundations’
 SES: Longgu            vuʔa            ‘below, down; a time before’
 Fij:    Wayan          -vū             ‘base, bottom; origin, source, cause; taproot, tuber’
>

[13] Yabem m (syllabic low-tone bilabial nasal) is the regular reflex of earlier *vu < POc *puqu-.


8.2.3.3 ‘Top, upper surface, space above’

252    Malcolm Ross

   The basic POc term for ‘top, upper surface, space above’ is *papo[-],*po[-]. Blust
(ACD, 1997) writes that PMP *babaw ‘upper surface, top’ is the antonym of PMP *babaq
‘lower surface, bottom’, and the same is true of their POc reflexes: POc *papo[-],*po[-] is
the antonym of POc *papa-, *papak (p.249).

   The unsuffixed forms are a source of local adverbs meaning ‘above, up there’ in a
number of languages, although here POc *qulu[-] below is a close competitor.

   The Kiribati (Mic) reflex of POc *papo[-] also has the meaning ‘outside’, and this is the
sole sense of the Nemi (NCal) and Polynesian reflexes. Blust (ACD) suggests that (as with
*lalom; p.246) this is the result of applying the term to the planar surface of the sea. In
relation to the sea, *papo[-] was its surface and the space above it. This is beyond the land,
hence ‘outside’ it.


<
PMP *babaw ‘upper surface, top; above; highlands’ (ACD)
POc (N, N LOC) *papo[-], *po[-] ‘upper surface, top’
 Adm: Mussau              po(na)           ‘top’
 NNG: Tami                [ka]popo-        ‘top (of s.t.)’
 NNG: Tami                po               ‘above’
 NNG: Takia               fo               (POSTPOSITION) ‘on’
 NNG: Numbami             wao-             ‘above’
 NNG: Yabem               aɔ̀           ‘upwards’
 NNG: Yabem               (ŋ)aɔ̀      ‘upper surface’
 NNG: Kela                baba             ‘topside’
 NNG: Mapos Buang         vavu             ‘up top’
 NNG: Mapos Buang         vavu(ne)         ‘upwards’
 NNG: Wampar              we(ŋ)            ‘topside’
 NNG: Yalu                waʋ(g)           ‘topside’
 NNG: Adzera              wagu(ŋ)          ‘topside’
 MM: Notsi                papa-            ‘topside’
 MM: Tabar                popo-            ‘topside’
 MM: Tangga               fo-              ‘topside’
 SES:    Baegu            fafo(luma)       ‘thatch’ (luma ‘house, building’)
 SES:    Lau              fafo-            ‘top’
 SES:    Longgu           vavo-            ‘top surface, space above’
 SES:    ’Are’are         haho-            ‘topside’
 SES:    Sa’a             haho-            ‘above’
 SES:    Arosi            haho-            ‘topside’
 NCV: Mota                vawo             ‘above, upon’
 NCal: Nemi               pʷap             ‘outside’
 Mic:    Kiribati         āo               ‘upper part of, surface, outside, back’
 Mic:    Kiribati         (i)ao-           ‘on, on top’
 Mic:    Kosraean         fɛ-              ‘above, on’
 Mic:    Marshallese      ɛwɛ-             ‘on; upon; top; surface; over’
 Mic:    Mokilese         pō-              ‘on’
 Mic:    Chuukese         wɔ̄-ɾ            ‘above, on it’
 Mic:    Puluwatese       wɔ̄-n            ‘above, on it’
 Mic:    Woleaian         wɔ̄-             ‘on, topside, upside’
 Pn:     Samoan           fafo             ‘outside, out of doors, a place other than Samoa’
 Pn:     Rennellese       haho             ‘outside’
 Pn:     Maori            waho             ‘outside; open sea; coast, as opposed to inland’
 Pn:     Hawaiian         waho             ‘outside, beyond, out, outer, outward’
>

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction    253

   Given the tendency for body-part terms to be used by metaphorical extension as
relational nouns (cf. p.248), it is unsurprising that the word for ‘head’ and ‘head hair’, POc
*qulu[-], also acquired the meaning ‘top’.

<
PAn *qulu ‘head’ (ACD)
POc (N)*qulu[-] ‘head, (head) hair’; (N LOC) ‘top part’
 Adm: Mussau            | ulu (bo) |         ‘headwaters of a river’
 Adm: Nauna             | kulu(n puli) |     ‘(mountain) peak’
 NNG: Yabem              lo-lo(ʔ)          ‘topside’
 NNG: Bukawa             lu-lu(ʔ)          ‘topside’
 PT:    Molima           ʔunu-ʔunu-        ‘head, forehead; (river) source’
 MM: Tigak               kuli-             ‘top’
 MM: Tigak               kul               ‘up (there)’
 MM: Tiang               kələ              ‘topside’
 MM: Nalik               kula              ‘up (there)’
 MM: Tabar               kulu              ‘topside’
 MM: Lamasong            kun               ‘up (there)’
 MM: Konomala            ulə               ‘topside’
 MM: Tolai               ul                ‘head, hair, top, apex, crown’
 MM: Roviana             ulu               ‘top’
 SES:   Gela             ulu-              ‘head, except of a chief; (in compounds) hair; eastern end, upper end’
 SES:   Bugotu           ulu               ‘head, top end’
 SES:   Lau              ulu(nao)          ‘first-born, elder, senior’
 SES:   Lau              ulu-ulu-          ‘(tree) topmost branch’
 SES:   ’Are’are         uru               ‘cloud, heaven, sky, top’
 NCV: NE Ambae           ulu-              ‘top’
 NCV: Tamambo            ulu-              ‘top part’
 NCV: Raga               ulu-              ‘space above’
 NCV: Paamese            (n)ulu(ŋout)      ‘at the top of the garden’ (< POc *na qulu ni qutan ART top PREP bush)
 NCal: Nemi              hule-n            ‘top’
 Mic:   Kosraean         ulu-              ‘top’
 Fij:   Wayan            -ulu              ‘head or top part of an animal or thing’
 Fij:   Bauan            ulu-              ‘head, top’
 Pn:    Tongan           ʔulu              ‘head, upper end’
 Pn:    Samoan           ulu               ‘head, hair’
 Pn:    Samoan           ulu(matua)        ‘first-born, eldest child’
 Pn:    Maori            uru               ‘head, (head) hair; chief; top, upper end; (weapon +) point’
>

In NCV languages we find reflexes of the adverb *qa-qulu ‘up there, up above’: NE
Ambae a-ulu ‘up high, on top’, Tamambo a-ulu ‘on top, at the gardens’, Kiai aulu ‘above’.

8.2.3.4 ‘Side’

254     Malcolm Ross

   It is tempting to look for a POc relational noun which would correspond in its use to the
English preposition ‘beside’. However, in many of its English uses ‘beside’ denotes a
relative location, and, as I noted in §1, speakers of Oceanic languages do not make use of
relative locations. We would expect POc reconstructions corresponding to meanings of
English ‘side’ to denote an intrinsic, not a relative, location, and consequently perhaps to
denote a part of a particular object.

   This expectation is at least partly fulfilled. We can reconstruct POc *[pwa]pwaRa[-]
‘side; cheek’, a body-part term whose primary meaning was probably ‘side of the face’. Its
uses are analogous to those of POc *mata[-] ‘eye; face; front’ (p.249). However, a good
deal of confusion surrounds reflexes of *[pwa]pwaRa[-]. Reflexes of POc *baban/*bapan
‘plank; canoe plank or strake’ (vol. 1, p.185) are similar in both form and meaning to those
of *[pwa]pwaRa[-]. Listed under ‘cf. also’ below *[pwa]pwaRa[-] are terms whose glosses
include the meaning ‘side’ but whose forms reflect *baban. The Lau and Bauan reflexes
have glosses which are associated with both items, suggesting conflation.

<
PCEMP *papaR ‘cheek, temple, side,’ (ACD)[14]
POc (N) *[pwa]pwaRa[-] ‘cheek, side of head’; (N LOC) ‘side’
 NNG: Kairiru          poreq              ‘side of house’ (-q unexplained)
 MM: Nalik             par, pāran         ‘side’ (dialectal variants)
 MM: Tolai             papar, papara- ‘side’
 MM: Minigir           papara             ‘side’
 MM: Ramoaaina         papar              ‘side’
 MM: Kandas            papori             ‘side’
 MM: Taiof             pana               ‘side’
 MM: Mono-Alu          (pa)pala           ‘side’
 MM: Roviana           papara             ‘side of face, cheek’
 cf. also
 NNG: Rauto            vava-              ‘side’
 NNG: Maeng            vava-              ‘side’
 NNG: Poeng            vava-              ‘side’
 SJ:      Sobei        popa               ‘cheek’
 SES: Kwaio            baba               ‘side, cheek’
 SES: Lau              baba               ‘side; long side board of canoe’
 SES: Arosi            baba               ‘cheek, temples; side (of a stream +)’
 Fij:      Bauan       baba               ‘side of s.t., cheek bone; side of a canoe’
>

[14] Blust also gives ‘plank’ as a gloss. See text.

   POc *pwala(ŋ) ‘side, part’ is reconstructable, but its exact sense is unclear.

<
PMP *balaŋ ‘side, part’ (ACD)
POc *pwala(ŋ) ‘side, part’ (ACD)
 MM: Tigak                pal                       ‘part’
 SES:   Gela              pala                      ‘side, part’
 SES: Lau                 bara-                     ‘side’
 NCV: Mota                para                      ‘sideways, turning aside’
 Pn:    Tongan            pala                      ‘side, edge’
>

                                   Talking about space: terms of location and direction   255

   POc *bali denoted ‘one of two (opposing) sides or parts’.

<
PMP *baliw ‘moiety; answer; oppose; partner, friend, enemy; opposite side or part’ (ACD)[15]
POc (N, N LOC) *bali[-] ‘one of two (opposing) sides or parts’
 SES:      Gela            bali          ‘bring together (opposite planks of a canoe)’
 SES: Kwaio                bali-         ‘part, side, portion, half’
 NCV: Mota                 (ta)vali(u)   ‘one of two sides or parts’
 NCV: Raga                 bal(si)       ‘side’
 NCV: Lonwolwol            wali          ‘one of (a pair); the mate of’
 Mic:      Ponapean        pali          ‘side’
 Mic:      Woleaian        pariy         ‘side’
 Pn:       Tahitian        pari          ‘side’
 Pn:       Tuamotuan       pari(a)       ‘a half’
 cf. also:
 MM:       Motu               badi(nai)        ‘beside’ (-d- for expected **-r-)
>

[15] The PMP etymon is discussed at length by Blust (1980a) and in the ACD.

   There are two other reconstructions from which terms for ‘side’ are derived. One, POc
*siriŋ ‘side, edge’, is derived from a PMP term whose basic meaning was apparently ‘be
close to, be near to’. Only three Oceanic reflexes have been found to date. The other, PEOc
*tapa- ‘side, outside’, is limited to Eastern Oceanic, where the earlier sense seems to have
been ‘side’ in the sense of ‘outer surface other than front or back’.

<
PMP *sidiŋ ‘border on, neighbour; peer, equal’ (ACD)
POc (N, N LOC) *siriŋ ‘side, edge’
 NNG: Dami                 siri-         ‘side’
 NNG: Takia                siriŋe-       ‘side’
 Mic:    Marshallese       tuṛɯu-       ‘beside’
>

<
PEOc (N, N LOC) *tapa- ‘side, outside’
 NCV: NE Ambae            tava(lu)-            ‘side’
 NCV: Tamambo             tava(lu)             ‘side part of s.t.’
 NCV: Paamese             tav                  ‘one side’
 Pn:     Tongan           tafa                 ‘edge, border’
 Pn:     Samoan           tafa                 ‘side’
 Pn:     K’marangi        taha                 ‘outside, shore’
 Pn:     Rennellese       taha                 ‘outside, beside, near, edge, side’
 Pn:     Tuamotuan        taha                 ‘side, margin, edge, border’
>


8.2.3.5 ‘Outside’

   It is reasonably clear that the ‘inside’/‘outside’ opposition found in European languages
did not occur in POc. This is unsurprising, since POc relation terms were nouns denoting
parts of an object. The inside of a house is readily conceived as a part of it (POc *lalo-),
but the English term ‘outside’ only denotes a part insofar as it refers to the external
surfaces of the building. As noted at various points in §2.3, terms which denote (among

256     Malcolm Ross

other things) particular external surfaces are also used metonymically to denote the
external surface or ‘outside’ of an object in general. This is true of some reflexes of POc
*papo[-] ‘upper surface, top’ (p.252), of POc *muri[-] ‘back part, rear’ (p.261) and of
PEOc *tapa- ‘side, outside’ (above).

    The terms in the set below could tempt us to reconstruct POc *luku- ‘side, outside’.[16]
However, their uneven distribution is suspicious, and it seems far more likely that they
reflect PMP *likuD, POc *liku(r) ‘(person’s) back’ (Blust 1981b). The meaning of scattered
reflexes of this word has extended to include the backs and rear parts of inanimate objects
(like POc *muri[-]), and thence the external surfaces of objects in general. The
specification of ‘back’ in the Marshallese and Woleaian reflexes below supports this
interpretation.

__pre__
  Yap:     Yapese           (wu)`uʔ        ‘outside of’
  NNG: Manam                (e)luku        ‘outside ’
  Mic:     Kosraean         liki           ‘outside’
  Mic:     Marshallese      liki-          ‘outside; ocean side of; behind, in back of’
  Mic:     Ponapean         liki-          ‘outside’
  Mic:     Mokilese         liki-          ‘outside’
  Mic:     Chuukese         4iki           ‘exterior, outside, outside surface, outer edge, immediate environs’
  Mic:     Woleaian         rixi           ‘outside, back of s.t.’
  Fij:     Wayan            liku           (N LOC) ‘back side of the island’


[16] This putative item resembles POc *ruku- ‘underneath’, but this is probably fortuitous.


8.2.3.6 ‘Front, time before’

   According to Blust (1997), the PMP relational noun for ‘front’ was *qadəp ‘front’,
which was also used of the human face. Although reflexes of this term have been replaced
by body-part terms (see below) in a majority of Oceanic languages, enough reflexes
survive to make it clear that its reflex POc *qaro-, *qarop ‘front; face’ is reconstructable.

<
PAn *qadəp ‘front, face’
POc (N) *qaro-, *qarop ‘face’; (N LOC) ‘front’
 NNG: Mangap              kere-          ‘front’
 NNG: Manam               aro-           ‘space in front’
 NNG: Kairiru             aro-           ‘in front of (s.t.)’
 PT:     Dawawa           karo           ‘in front’
 SES:    Sa’a             saro           ‘face, turn oneself’
 Fij:    Rotuman          aro            ‘front, side or surface that is usually seen.’
 Pn:     Tongan           ʔao            ‘front’
 Pn:     E Futunan        ʔalo           ‘in front’
 Pn:     Marquesan        aʔo            ‘front’
 Pn:     Hawaiian         alo            ‘front’
 Pn:     Maori            aro            ‘front of body, pubic area of females’
>


    None of the items above reflects final POc *-p, but we can be certain that the form
*qarop occurred, as a reflex is preserved in PPn *ʔarofiwaʔe ‘sole of foot’ (e.g. Tongan
ʔaofi vaʔe, East Futunan ʔalofi-vaʔe, Samoan alofivae), reflecting POc *qarop qi qaqe,
literally ‘front of foot’ (where *qi is the non-specific possessive preposition (Ross 1998b,
2001b)).

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction    257

    Another generic POc term for ‘front’ (but probably not ‘face’) was *muqa[-], which—
its reflexes suggest—occurred more often as a zero-valency than a monovalent noun. As a
zero-valency local noun it occurred in the prepositional phrase *i muqa ‘in front,
formerly’. The reduplicated form *muqa-muqa ‘in front, formerly’ represents a
morphological pattern not found with other local nouns.

    As the glosses indicate, POc *muqa[-] had the temporal sense of ‘time before’ as well
as the local sense of ‘front’. It was thus the antonym of POc *muri[-] ‘back, time after’
(§2.3.7).

<
POc (N LOC) *muqa[-] ‘front’
POc *muqa ‘front; be in front’
POc *|i muqa|, *qa-muqa *muqa-muqa (ADV) ‘in front, formerly’
 Yap:    Yapese             mʔōn         ‘front’
 Adm: Mussau                mua          ‘front’
 Adm: Titan                 mo(ndrol)    ‘bow of canoe’
 NNG: Manam                 mua          ‘go first, precede’
 MM: Vitu                   muɣa-        ‘front’
 MM: Nalik                  (pa)mua      ‘in front’
 MM: Notsi                  (la)mua      ‘front’
 MM: Tabar                  mu-mua       ‘formerly’
 MM: Tabar                  moa          ‘front’
 MM: Lihir                  (i)muo       ‘formerly’
 MM: Lihir                  muo          ‘in front’
 MM: Solos                  ma-mua       ‘in front’
 MM: Halia (Selau)          (to)mua-na   ‘old’
 MM: Taiof                  (i)mua-n     ‘formerly’
 MM: Teop                   (ta)mua-na   ‘old’
 MM: Banoni                 ma-ma        ‘in front’
 NCV: Mota                  mʷoa-i       ‘first, foremost, principal; to be first’
 NCV: Raga                  mua-i        ‘first’
 NCV: NE Ambae              mue-         ‘front of’
 NCV: Lewo                  (va)mo       ‘front’ (va ‘go’)
 Mic:    Nauruan            (ā)mʷō       ‘front’
 Mic:    Kiribati           moa          ‘front, fore part’
 Mic:    Woleaian           mmwa-        ‘front, first, tip, before’
 Mic:    Marshallese        mɯā-         ‘front’
 Mic:    Marshallese        mʷāha-       ‘ahead of, before, in front of’
 Mic:    Mokilese           mʷō-         ‘front’
 Mic:    Ponapean           mwowɛ-       ‘ahead of, in front of, before’
 Mic:    Chuukese           mʷ-mʷa-      ‘in front of, more than’
 Fij:    Wayan              mua          ‘end-point or tip of a long object; head for or set course for a place’
 Fij:     Bauan               mua               ‘the first; tip, point, prow’
 Pn:      Tongan              muʔa              ‘front’
 Pn:      Niuafo’ou           muʔa              ‘front’
 Pn:      Rapanui            | (ʔi) muʔa |        ‘front’
 Pn:      Tahitian          |  (i) mua  |         ‘front’
>

258     Malcolm Ross


In NCV languages we find reflexes of the adverb *qa-muqa ‘in front, formerly’: Mota
(a)mwoa ‘before, first’, Raga (a)mua ‘before, at first, first, in front of’, NE Ambae (a)mue
‘in front, at the front’, Port Sandwich (a)mo (POSTVERBAL ADV) ‘before’.

   There is evidence in Western Oceanic languages for a competing form *muga. This
occurs far more often in verbal reflexes than does *muqa, so it is possible that *muga was
the POc verb, and that *muqa supplanted *muga in PEOc. The possibility of conflating the
two terms is illustrated in Vitu and Bali, dialects of the Bali-Vitu language. In one, Vitu,
the monovalent term for ‘front’ is muɣa-, reflecting *muqa, whilst in the other, Bali, it is
muga-, reflecting *muga. Since reflexes of *muga are otherwise not monovalent, it is
reasonable to infer that this is a conflation whereby the noun muɣa- has been replaced by
the verb-form muga.

   Although *muqa and *muga are formally similar, a historical relationship between them
is problematic: we would expect an alternation between POc *k and *g, but not between *q
and *g.[17]

<
PWOc (?? N LOC, V) *muga ‘front; be in front; formerly’
 NNG: Bariai            muga              ‘front’
 NNG: Bariai            muga(ŋa)          ‘forehead’
 NNG: Bariai            muga(eai)         ‘formerly’ (-eai POSTP)
 NNG: Arop-Lokep        mugu              ‘first of all, formerly’
 NNG: Mangap            muᵑgu             ‘first of all, formerly, long ago’
 NNG: Gitua             muŋga             ‘precede, go ahead, future’
 NNG: Sio               muga              ‘precede; before’
 NNG: Tami              muŋ               ‘front; in front’
 NNG: Bing              mug               ‘formerly’
 NNG: Gedaged           mug               ‘precede’
 NNG: Yabem             muŋ               ‘precede’
 NNG: Adzera            moŋʔ              ‘prior’
 NNG: Adzera            moŋʔ(an)          ‘precede’
 PT:    Suau            -muga(i)          ‘precede’
 MM: Bali               muga-             ‘front’
 MM: Bola               muga              ‘frontside’
 MM: Nakanai            ma-muga           (RELATIONAL N) ‘front’
 MM: Ramoaaina          (nə)mugə          ‘in front; formerly’
 MM: Kandas             mugu              ‘in front’
 MM: Bilur              mugo              ‘frontside’
 MM: Siar               muŋ               ‘in front of’
>

[17] There are non-Oceanic items that look cognate, but they are descended from borrowings of Sanskrit
   mukha ‘face’. The items are Isneg múkāt ‘face’, Ilokano mukat ‘eye mucus’, Tagalog mukhaʔ,
   Indonesian muka ‘face’, Balinese muə ‘face’. Sasak mua ‘face’ (Gonda 1973:104). I am grateful to
   Robert Blust for this information.

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction   259


   The body-part terms whose reflexes are often used for ‘front’ are POc *mata[-] ‘eye,
face, front’ and POc *nako[-] face, front’. The original and basic meanings of *mata[-]
and *nako[-] were ‘eye’ and ‘face’ respectively. Nonetheless, reflexes of these terms occur
with great frequency in the meaning ‘front’. Scattered reflexes below suggest that *i mata
was a POc expression meaning ‘in front’, and other modern uses suggest that it has long
been used for the front of an inanimate object, e.g. Nalik (MM) la maran a fal [PREP eye
PREP house] and Tolai (MM) ta ra mata-na pal [PREP ART eye-P:3SG house], both ‘in front
of the house’.

<
PAn *maCa ‘eye’
POc (N)*mata[-] ‘eye; face’; (N LOC) ‘front’
 NNG: Lusi              mata-            ‘eye; front’
 NNG: Bariai            mata             ‘eye; front’
 NNG: Mangap            mata-            ‘eye; front’
 NNG: Takia             mala-            ‘eye, front’
 NNG: Buang             mala             ‘eye, front’
 NNG: Adzera            mara-            ‘eye, front’
 NNG: Kaulong           (e)mara          ‘in front’
 PT:    Kiriwina        mata-            ‘eye; front’
 MM: Nalik              mara-            ‘eye; front’
 MM: Siar               mata-            ‘eye; front’
 MM: Tolai              mata             ‘eye; front’
 MM: Taiof              mata-            ‘eye; front’
 SES:   Gela            (i)mata          ‘in front of’
 SES: Sa’a              mā               ‘eye; front’
 SES: Sa’a              (i)mā            ‘outside’
 NCal: Tinrin           (ɳā)mʷãɽã        ‘front’
 Mic:   Kosraean        mʌtʌ-            ‘eye; front’
 Fij:   Wayan           mata-            ‘face, front of head, face of object with both front and back side’
 Fij:   Wayan           (i)mata          ‘in front’
 Fij:   Bauan           mata-            ‘eye; face; front’
 Fij:   Bauan           (i)mata          ‘in front’
 Pn:    Tongan          mata             ‘eye, face’
 Pn:    Samoan          mata             ‘eye, face’
 Pn:    Maori           mata             ‘eye, face’
>

<
POc (N, N LOC)*nako[-] ‘face, front’
 Adm: Pak               nogo(gi)          ‘front, before, face’
 NNG: Gitua             nago              ‘face’
 NNG: Tami              nao               ‘front, face’
 NNG: Takia             nao-              ‘face’
 NNG: Takia            | nao(-n na) |       ‘in front of’ (N-P:3SG POSTPOSITION)
 PT:     Ubir           na(-na-i)         ‘in front of it, him’
 PT:      Tawala           nao-             ‘front/forward position’
 PT:      Tawala          | u nao-na |        ‘in front’ (PREP N-P:3SG)
 MM:      Lavongai         (ai)no           ‘formerly’
 MM:      Lavongai         no               ‘forehead; frontside ’
 MM:      Tigak            (ai)no           ‘formerly’
 MM:      Tigak            no               ‘forehead; frontside ’
 MM:      W. Kara          no               ‘forehead’
 MM:      Nalik            no               ‘forehead’
 SES:     Gela             naɣo             ‘front, before, face’
 SES:     Bugotu           naɣo             ‘front’
 SES:     Longgu           naʔo(va-)        ‘front’
 SES:     Lau              nao              ‘front’
 SES:     Kwaio            naʔo-            ‘front’
 SES:     ’Are’are         naʔo             ‘front’
 SES:     Sa’a             naʔo             ‘front, before, face’
 NCV:     Mota             nago-i           ‘face, front, cutting edge’
 NCV:     Merlav           nago-i           ‘front, before, face’
 NCV:     Tamambo          naho-            ‘face’
 NCV:     Paamese          nā-              ‘face, front’
 NCV:     Nguna            nako-            ‘front, before, face’
>

260    Malcolm Ross


8.2.3.7 ‘Back, space behind, time after’

   The generic POc term for the back (of something or someone), the space behind
(something or someone), and the time after (an event) was *muri[-]. However, it has a
more complex history than other POc relational nouns. Blust (ACD) derives it from PMP
*ma-udehi, containing the PMP undergoer-subject verbal prefix *ma- and the root *udehi
which he glosses as ‘last; come after or behind; late, later; future; stern of a boat; youngest
child.’ Blust’s glosses are not intended to be a claim about the morpholexical class of the
item, but it is a reasonable inference from work on the history of PMP and POc *ma-
(Evans and Ross 2001) that PMP *udehi was a noun, perhaps meaning ‘that which is
behind, that which is last, that which is after or in the future’ and that *ma-udehi was a
stative (adjectival) verb derived from it.

   There is evidence in the Gapapaiwa (PT), Ramoaaina (MM), Arosi (SES), Bauan (Fij),
Samoan (Pn), and Rennellese (Pn) definitions below that POc *muri remained a stative
verb, but there is also overwhelming evidence that it was a monovalent relational noun
with spatial meanings like ‘back part, rear, behind, space to the rear of, time after’ as well
as more concrete uses like ‘stern of a canoe’. It is also glossed as an adverb of place and/or
time in a number of languages, but where there is evidence about its morpholexical class,
these uses derive from its nominal use with a preposition, suggesting POc *i muri ‘behind,
later’ (more literally, ‘in the space behind, at a time after’). POc *muri thus also had a
temporal use, referring to time after the time of speaking (p.322). Note that the syntactic
behaviour of POc *muri[-] broadly matches that of its antonym *muqa[-]/*muga (§2.3.6),
which also had both nominal and verbal uses.

                                    Talking about space: terms of location and direction             261


   It appears that the PMP root *udehi was also inherited into POc as the base *uri, but
only two reflexes have been found. They are both in NNG languages: Gedaged uli ‘follow,
pursue; come after, succeed; go to the rear’ and Kaulong e-uli-‘back’ (e- ART).

<
PMP *ma-udehi ‘be last; be after or behind; be late, be later; future’ (ACD)[18]
POc (N, N LOC) *muri[-] ‘be behind, be after; back part, rear, behind, space to the rear of, time after; (canoe) stern; space outside’
POc *|i muri|, *muri-muri ‘at the back, later’
 Adm: Wuvulu               muki               ‘(canoe) stern’
 Adm: Loniu               | muʔu (tun) |        ‘(canoe) stern’
 Adm: Drehet               (o)mu(ŋ)           ‘back’
 NNG: Kove                 muhi-              ‘s.o.’s back’
 NNG: Bariai               mur[-]             ‘s.o.’s back’
 NNG: Gitua                mur                ‘behind, afterwards’
 NNG: Gedaged              muli-              ‘behind, rear, back part, stern, rear, posterior, outside of s.t.’
 NNG: Manam                muri               ‘behind’
 NNG: Yabem                (ŋa)mu(ŋa)         ‘back of s.t.’
 NNG: Bukawa               (ŋa)ᵐbu(ᵑga)       ‘back of s.t.’
 NNG: Kaiwa                mul                ‘back of s.t.’
 PT:      Iduna            muli(ne)           ‘back of s.t., behind’
 PT:      Dobu             muri-              ‘behind, afterwards’
 PT:      Gapapaiwa        muri               ‘follow’
 PT:      Gapapaiwa        muri-              ‘back of s.t.; behind, afterwards’
 PT:      Tawala           muli-              ‘back of s.t.; behind, afterwards’
 PT:      Motu             muri-              ‘back of s.t.; space behind’
 MM: Bali                  muri               ‘back of s.t.’
 MM: Meramera              (ma)muli           ‘back of s.t.’
 MM: Meramera              (muli)muli         ‘later’
 MM: Nakanai               (muli)muli         ‘later’
 MM: Lavongai              muŋ                ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Tigak                 (ai)muk            ‘later’
 MM: Tigak                 mugi-              ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Tabar                 muri-              ‘back of s.t.’
 MM: Ramoaaina             muru               ‘follow; behind, back; last’
 MM: Ramoaaina             (na)mur            ‘later, afterwards’
 MM: Ramoaaina             mur                ‘s.o.’s back’
 SES:     Gela             muri-              ‘behind, afterwards; back; outside of s.t.; afterbirth; posterity’
 SES: Lengo                (i)muri(a)         ‘after’
 SES: Arosi                muri-              ‘follow; behind, back; outside of s.t.; afterwards; left hand when facing an object’
 Mic:     Ponapean         mʷuri              ‘behind’
 Mic:     Woleaian        mʷiẓi-            ‘behind, after, backside, rear’
 Mic:     Mokilese        mweri-            ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 Mic:     Puluwatese      mwir-             ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 Fij:     Bauan           muri              ‘following, after’
 Fij:     Bauan          | (e) muri |         ‘behind, later’
 Fij:     Bauan          | (ki) muri |        ‘to the rear’
 Pn:      Tongan          mui               ‘space behind; rear; end, extremity, tip; back, rear; later; young, immature, only partly developed’
 Pn:      Samoan          muli              ‘come last, be last; young, new’
 Pn:      Rennellese      mugi              ‘follow, be or go behind or after; rear end, esp. lower or western end’
 Pn:      Maori           muri              ‘rear, hind part; sequel, time to come; behind, afterwards, backwards; youngest child’
 Pn:      Hawaiian        muli              ‘behind, afterwards; last, following behind; younger, youngest; (canoe) stern’
>


[18] Blust (ACD) does not provide a gloss for *ma-udehi. The gloss here is based on that for *udehi.

262     Malcolm Ross

   The reflexes below contain a Northwest Solomonic innovation whereby Proto
Northwest Solomonic *mudi[-] is reconstructable (this would reflect POc *mudri) instead
of expected **muri[-].

<
Proto Northwest Solomonic *mudi- ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Nehan             mudi             ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Petats            muru             ‘s.o.’s back’
 MM: Halia (Haku) muru                  ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Halia (Selau) muri-                ‘back of s.t’
 MM: Halia (Selau)     mur              ‘s.o.’s back’
 MM: Banoni            muri             ‘behind’
 MM: Mono-Alu          (muri)muri       ‘later’
 MM: Vangunu           (tara)meji-na    ‘after’
 MM: Varisi            (tara)muzi-na    ‘after’
 MM: Nduke             mudi-            ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Roviana           mudi-            ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
>

  The semantic and formal similarity of the reflexes of POc *burit below to those of POc
*muri[-] above is evidently due to chance. In the 2003 version of this chapter, I attributed
members of the set below to a putative PMP *pa-udehi, paradigmatically related to PMP
*ma-udehi (ancestral to POc *muri[-]), but the presence in this set (listed in the ACD) of
Bugotu buriti indicates that I was wrong.

<
PMP *burit ‘hind part, rear, back’ (ACD)
POc *burit ‘hind part, rear, back’; (N, N LOC) ‘back part, rear, behind, space to the rear of, time after; (canoe) stern’; (ADV) ‘behind, afterwards’
 NNG: Kela                 ᵐburi(ya)        ‘back of s.t.’
 MM: Tinputz               puri              ‘behind’
 MM: Teop                  buri              ‘behind’
 SES: Lau                  buri              ‘back, stern’
 SES: Bugotu               buriti            ‘back’
 SES:    Longgu          buri-             ‘behind; after’
 SES:    Lau             buri              ‘back; behind, after; stern, rear’
 SES:    Lau             buri(wela)        ‘after-birth’
 SES:    Lau            | (i) buri |         ‘afterwards’
 SES:    Kwaio           buli-na           ‘after’
 SES:    Kwaio           buli              ‘after, behind’
 SES:    ’Are’are        puri-na           ‘after’
 SES:    Sa’a           | (i) puri |         ‘back of, behind; stern of a canoe’
 SES:    Sa’a            puri-na           ‘after, back, stern’
>

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction     263


   One body-part term occurs with fair frequency with the sense of ‘back part of, space
behind’. This is POc *takuRu[-] ‘(s.o.’s) back’. The evidence that this was a body-part
term in POc is clear. It may also have been used by extension as a POc relational local
noun, but it is also possible that local-noun uses in modern languages represent
independent parallel developments.

<
POc (N, ? N LOC) *takuRu[-] ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 Adm: Titan             lákulo-             ‘(s.o.’s) back’ (l- for expected t-)
 NNG: Sio               taulo               ‘behind’
 PT:      Gumawana      tolu-               ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 PT:      Dawawa        tauri               ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 PT:      Motu          doru-               ‘back, behind’
 MM: Lavongai           toŋ                 ‘back of s.t.’
 MM: Nalik              toru-               (N LOC) ‘space behind’ (e.g. la toru-gu [PREP N LOC-P:1SG] ‘behind me’)
 MM: Minigir            tauru-              ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 MM: Bilur              taru-               ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 MM: Siar               taru-               ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 MM: Taiof              touno-              ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 MM: Teop               tonu-               ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 MM: Kia                taɣuru-             ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Kokota             tagru-              ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 MM: Maringe            tʰagru-             ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 NCV: Mota               tawur, tawuru- ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 NCV: Mota               (a)tawur            ‘behind’
 NCV: NE Ambae          tagu-               (N LOC) ‘space behind’
 NCV: Raga              (a)taɣu-            (N LOC) ‘behind’
 NCV: Port Sandwich (a)rax                  (N LOC) ‘behind’
 NCV: Lonwolwol         tao-                ‘lower back (region around hips); behind’
 NCV: Lewo              ra-                 ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 NCV: Lewo              (va)rau             ‘behind’ (va ‘go’)
 NCV: Nguna             (na)taku            ‘back; the far side, other side’
 NCV: Nguna             (e)daku             (ADV) ‘at the back, behind; after’
 SV:      Sye           (n)toc(-noki)       ‘back of skull’
 SV:      Sye           (n)tocu(-nta-)      ‘shoulder blade’
 SV:     Kwamera         taku-          ‘back’
 SV:     Anejom          (i)taɣ         (ADV) ‘behind’ (e.g. itaɣ a niomw [ADV PREP N] ‘behind the house’)
 NCal: Nyelâyu           dū-            ‘(s.o.’s) back; behind’
 NCal: Tinrin            ʈɔɔ-           ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 Mic:     Kiribati       akū-           ‘back; behind’
 Mic:     Kosraean       tɔkɔ-          ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 Mic:     Marshallese    æliki-         ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 Mic:     Puluwatese     hækɨr          ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 Mic:     Woleaian       taxɨẓɨ-       ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 Fij:     Wayan          takū           (N LOC) ‘behind’
 Fij:     Bauan          daku-          ‘back of s.t.; s.o.’s back’
 cf. also
 SES:     ’Are’are       kokoru-        ‘(s.o.’s) back’
 SES: Sa’a               kokolu-        ‘(s.o.’s) back’
>

264    Malcolm Ross


8.2.4 The interrogative local noun ‘where?’

   The interrogative local noun ‘where?’ was POc *pai. Micronesian reflexes of *i pai
reflect Proto Micronesian *i-fā rather than expected *i-fai.

<
PMP *pai ‘where?’ (ACD)
POc (N LOC) *pai, *|i pai| ‘where at?’
 NNG: Bebeli             ehae           ‘where?’
 NNG: Numbami            ai(a)          ‘where?’
 MM: Bali                ve(ni)         ‘where?’
 MM: Bola                vai            ‘where?’
 MM: Meramera            (i)va          ‘where?’
 MM: Nakanai             -ve            ‘where?’
 MM: Tigak               ve             ‘where?’
 MM: Kara (East)         fa             ‘where?’
 MM: Nalik               fa             ‘where?’
 MM: Tabar               ve             ‘where?’
 MM: Lihir               he             ‘where?’
 MM: Sursurunga          ai, ai(ə)      ‘where?’
 MM: Patpatar            he             ‘where?’
 MM: Minigir             va             ‘where?’
 MM: Tolai               ve             ‘where?’
 MM: Ramoaaina           (ə)wai         ‘where?’
 MM: Teop                (ha)ve         ‘where?’
 MM: Banoni              vai            ‘where?’
 MM: Uruava              vei(a)         ‘where?’
 MM: Lungga              pai            ‘where?’
 MM: Roviana             (pa)vei        ‘where?’
 MM:     Kia               hae             ‘where?’
 MM:     Gela              (i)vei          ‘where?’
 SES:    Longgu            evei            ‘where?’
 SES:    Lau               (i)fai          ‘where?’
 SES:    Kwaio             (i)fai          ‘where?’
 SES:    Arosi             (naʔi)hei       ‘where?’
 SES:    Bauro             (i)hai          ‘where?’
 NCV:    Raga              (be)he          ‘where?’
 NCV:    Uripiv            (ni)be          ‘where?’
 NCV:    Lonwolwol         be              ‘where?’
 NCV:    Paamese           (e)vē          ‘where?’
 NCV:    Lewo              pe              ‘where?’
 NCV:    Namakir           (-o)be-         ‘where?’
 Mic:    Chuukese          (i)fa           ‘where? how? what?’
 Mic:    Puluwatese        (yi)fa          ‘where? what? which?’
 Mic:    Satawalese        (i)fa           ‘where (is it)? which?’
 Mic:    Carolinian        (i)fa           ‘where?’
 Mic:    Woleaian          (i)fā           ‘where? which? what?’
 Fij:    Bauan             vei             ‘where?’
 Fij:    Wayan             vei             ‘where?’
>

                                 Talking about space: terms of location and direction   265


Also found are forms which appear to reflect *pea, *pia and, in Polynesian, PPn *fe. These
probably reflect POc *pai-a (cf Numbami aia, Sursurunga aiə, Uruava veia above),
together with vowel sequence reductions which have occurred independently but in
parallel. The step from POc *paia to *pea is an obvious one. In a number of languages the
height distance between the vowels of *pea has been maximised, giving *pia. And in
Polynesian, an innovation which is regular in Tongic and sporadic in some other
Polynesian languages apparently produced *fe as an alternant to *fea (< *pea < *paia).
The forms are listed below. Where a reconstruction is preceded by a question mark, the
forms beneath it may be the result of parallel developments.

__pre__
? POc (N LOC) *pea ‘where at?’
 Adm: Mussau             bea               ‘where?’
? PNCV (ADV) *vea, *bea
 NCV: Mota              vea                ‘where?’
 NCV: Kiai              vea                ‘where?’
 NCV: Tamambo           (a)bea             ‘where?’
PPn (ADV) *[i] fea ‘where at?’
 Pn:    Tongan            fe              ‘where?’
 Pn:    Niuean            fe              ‘where?’
 Pn:    Samoan            fea              ‘where?’
 Pn:    Anutan            pea              ‘where?’
 Pn:    E Futunan         fea              ‘where?’
 Pn:    E Uvean           fea              ‘where?’
 Pn:    Tikopia           fea              ‘where? what? when?’
 Pn:       Ifira-Mele            (i)fea       ‘where at?’
 Pn:       Hawaiian              hea          ‘where?’
 Pn:       Maori                 ea          ‘where?’
 Pn:       Tahitian              hea          ‘where?’
 Pn:       K’marangi             he          ‘where’
 Pn:       Mae                   fe          ‘where?’
 Pn:       Nukuria               ihe         ‘where?’
? POc (N LOC)*[i] pia ‘where at?’
 MM:       Nehan                 ia           ‘where?’
 MM:       Solos                 īa           ‘where?’
 MM:       Petats                īa           ‘where?’
 MM:       Taiof                 ifia         ‘where?’
 MM:       Mono-Alu              hi(na)       ‘where?’
 MM:       Nduke                 (o)via       ‘where?’
 SES:      Gela                  via          ‘wherever, of whatever kind, where, what, which’
 NCV:      Port Sandwich         (a)mbi       ‘where?’
 Pn:       Maori (Aupōuri)       hia          ‘where?’
 Pn:       Tahitian              hia          ‘where?’

266     Malcolm Ross



8.3 Directional verbs

   Directional verbs can be conveniently divided into verbs of deictic direction (‘towards
speaker’, ‘towards addressee’, ‘away from speaker and addressee’) and verbs of
geographic direction, and especially vertical direction (‘go up’, ‘go down’).


8.3.1 Some Proto Oceanic serial verb constructions

    Directional verbs play an important role in certain serial verb constructions in Oceanic
languages, and they evidently did so in POc, to judge both from the wide distribution of
such constructions today and from grammaticised versions of these constructions (Ross
2003).

    Verbs of deictic direction occur in serial verb constructions of deictic direction, where
they follow a verb of locomotion (transitive or intransitive) or a verb of geographic
direction. The examples below are from Yabem (NNG). In both the first two examples, the
deictic directional verb is -yà ‘go away from speaker and addressee’.[19] In the first example
it follows the locomotion verb -lob ‘fly’, in the second the geographic directional verb -pi
‘go up’.

[19] Deictic direction verbs are glossed ‘come’ (move to(wards) speaker), ‘go:2’ (move to(wards) hearer)
   and ‘go:3’ (move to(wards) a third person or place).

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction     267


__pre__
      balosi ge-lob     ge-yà       loʔ
      dove S:3SG-fly S:3SG-go:3 mountain
      ‘The doves flew off to the mountain.’

__pre__
    ke-pi        lom            ge-yà.
    S:3SG-go.up men’s.house S:3SG-go:3
    ‘He climbed up to the men’s house.’

   Verbs of geographic direction also occur in serial verb constructions of geographic
direction, where they follow a locomotion verb (transitive or intransitive). In this example,
the locomotion verb is -pwanɛʔ ‘insert’, the geographic directional verb -sep ‘go down’.

__pre__
    ya-pwanɛʔ            mo e-sep           aò-ʔ-sùŋ
    S:1SG-IRR:insert taro S:3SG-IRR:descend mouth-P:1SG-hole
    ‘I’ll put the taro into my mouth.’

   Commonly the two constructions are combined, giving a sequence of locomotion verb,
geographic directional verb and deictic directional verb, e.g. -ne ‘sink’, -sep ‘go down’ and
-yà ‘go away from speaker and addressee’ in this example.

__pre__
    waŋ    ge-ne        ke-sep     gweʔ ge-yà
    canoe S:3SG-sink S:3SG-descend sea  S:3SG-go:3
    ‘The canoe sank into the sea.’

   Directional verbs, both deictic and geographic, also occur in sequential serial verb
constructions, where the first verb is a directional verb expressing ‘go [up/down] and …’
or ‘come and …’, the second a verb expressing the main event of the predication. This
example is from Bali (MM):

__pre__
    Hizi mi=ri         zio       ki vahi-aŋa ihaŋa.
    they IRR=HYP:3 go.down SEQ:3 get-PL      fish
    ‘They will go and catch fish.’


8.3.2 Grammaticisations of serial verb constructions

   Directional verbs are grammaticised in a number of ways in Oceanic languages
(Lichtenberk 1991). Three of these grammaticisation paths give rise to morphemes
expressing location and direction. Reflexes of directional verbs which have undergone
these grammaticisations occur in the cognate sets below, and for that reason are described
here.

   In the first type of grammaticisation, a directional verb in a serial verb construction
loses its subject proclitic/prefix and becomes a directional adverbial enclitic (glossed DIR
in cogate sets). In the two Sisiqa (MM) examples below, the directional enclitics =me and
=la reflect the POc deictic directional verb forms *ma ‘come’ and *la ‘go:2’ (§3.4)
respectively. Each is preceded by a locomotion verb (‘carry’, ‘walk’), reflecting an earlier
serial verb construction of deictic direction.

__pre__
    ra ko-gisu=me                kavia kuda
    I S:1SG:REAL-carry=hither some coconut
    ‘I have brought some coconuts.’
    ɣōi ma-zo=la                   Susuka
    s/he S:3SG:IRR-walk=thither Susuka
    S/he is going to Susuka village.’

268     Malcolm Ross


   In this Manam (NNG) example there is a sequence of locomotion verb (‘take’) and two
directional enclitics, -raʔe ‘up, to one’s right when facing sea’ (< geographical directional
verb POc *sake ‘go up’, p.273) and -laʔo ‘away’ (< deictic directional verb POc *lako
‘go:3’, p.287) reflecting an earlier three-verb sequence (Lichtenberk 1983:576–582).

__pre__
      Ogi i-doʔ-i-raʔe-laʔo.
      axe S:3SG-take-O:3PL-upward-away
      ‘He took the axes away upward.’

   In the second type of grammaticisation, described by Pawley (1973) and Durie (1988), a
directional verb in a serial verb construction is reanalysed as a preposition or a relator (see
below) and comes to form a constituent primarily with the following locative expression.
Prepositional reflexes of POc *mai ‘come’ occur in Polynesian languages. In Samoan, for
example, we find (Mosel & Hovdhaugen 1992:147):

__pre__
      Na    oso    i      lalo le    tama mai    le   solofanua …
      PAST jump PREP down ART boy         PREP ART horse
      ‘The boy jumped down from the horse …’

In Meso-Melanesian languages of New Britain and New Ireland and in Longgu (SES), the
deictic directional verbs *mai ‘come’ and *ua ‘go:2’ have become respectively ablative
and allative relators (Ross 2003). I use the term ‘relator’ for a preposition-like morpheme
which differs in its distribution from a preposition in that it precedes either a prepositional
phrase or a local noun. This distribution reflects its verbal ancestry: a POc deictic
directional verb could be followed by a locative expression consisting of a local noun or a
prepositional phrase. Hence in Longgu, vu is the allative relator reflecting *ua:

__pre__
      … m-ara     la maʔa           vu masuu
        and-S:3PL go PERFECTIVE R bush
      ‘… and they went into the bush’
      amalu ho la vu ta-na             malaba-i ni    umwani-a
      D:1EP IRR go R PREP-P:3SG garden-SG in.order.to weed-O:3SG
      ‘we will go into the garden to weed it’

   In the third, least widespread, grammaticisation type, the deictic directional verb in a
sequential serial verb construction becomes a pre-verbal clitic indicating the location or
direction of the event in relation to the speech act participants. In the best described case,
Sinaugoro (PT) (Tauberschmidt 1999:31–32), the clitics are enclitics to the preverbal
subject/aspect/mood marking complex. In this example =ma reflects POc *ma ‘come’.

__pre__
      Si=ma             ɣani-ɣani.
      S:1IPL=near.me ITR-eat
      ‘Let’s eat here.’


8.3.3 Geographic directional verbs and enclitics

   Geographic direction verbs occurred both independently and in geographic directional
serial verb constructions. From the latter usage, they have often developed into enclitics or
adverbs marking geographic direction.

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction   269

   The main semantic domain of geographic direction verbs is that of vertical direction,
downward and upward. Vertical direction terms have developed two kinds of secondary
meanings in Oceanic languages, and these were probably present in Proto Oceanic. First,
‘downward’ and ‘upward’ often have the secondary horizontal senses ‘to the northwest’
and ‘to the southeast’. Second, because Oceanic speakers often dwell on mountainous
islands, in some languages ‘downward’ also means ‘seaward’, and ‘upward’ also means
‘inland’ or, from the sea, ‘landward’.

   A pair of antonyms occurred in POc. These were the generic verbs of movement down
and up:

__pre__
        *sipo ‘go downward’               *sake ‘go upward’

   As I noted earlier (p.229), POc apparently had a subsystem of geographic direction
which was based on a river valley and had an up/down axis and a transverse axis with one
directionally neutral (‘across the valley’) term. The terms used for ‘down the valley’ and
‘up the valley’ were evidently *sipo and *sake. The transverse term was possibly *pano,
which also served as a verb of deictic direction and is reconstructed on p.289. However,
there are no known Western Oceanic or Southeast Solomonic reflexes of *pano with this
sense, so this may be a later innovation.

   Recent work by François (2003, 2004a) suggests strongly that this subsystem was also
applied metaphorically to directions at sea. The two cardinal directions at sea were
evidently provided by the major winds, POc *apaRat, the northwest storm wind, and *raki,
the southeast trade wind, as the reflexes below (repeated from Chapter 5, §4.2) suggest:

<
PMP *habaRat ‘west monsoon’ (Dempwolff 1938, ACD)
POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind; wet season when northwesterlies blow and sea is rough’
 Adm: Wuvulu           afā             ‘northwest wind’
 Adm: Drehet           yaha            ‘stormy season, generally from November to March; strong wind and rough sea from the northwest’
 NNG: Gitua            yavara          ‘north wind’
 NNG: Tami             yawal           ‘northwest wind’
 NNG: Kairiru          yavar           ‘northwest wind, makes sea rough’
 PT:    Muyuw          yavat           ‘west, west wind’
 PT:    Iduna          yavalata        ‘rains with wind from the northwest in February and March’
 PT:    Motu           lahara          ‘northwest wind, season of northwest wind’
 MM: Bali              vurata          ‘northwest wind’
>

<
POc *raki ‘southeast trades’ (probably also ‘dry season when the southeast trades blow’)
 Adm: Lou                ra               ‘northeast, northeast wind’
 Adm: Titan              ᵑray            ‘wind from the mainland, mountain breeze, blows at night’
 NNG: Kove               hai              ‘southeast trade, year’
 NNG: Gitua              rak              ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Tami               lai              ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Maleu              na-lai           ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Ali                rai              ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Tumleo             riei             ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Vitu                raɣi             ‘southeast trade’
 MM:      Bulu             laɣi             ‘southeast trade’
 NCV:     Lewo             lagi(pesoi)      ‘east wind’
 Mic:     Marshallese      ṛɯak            ‘south, summer’
 Pn:      E Uvean          laki             ‘southeast or southwest wind’
 Pn:      Niuean           laki             ‘west’
 Pn:      Samoan           laʔi             ‘southwest veering to northwest’
>

270    Malcolm Ross


After examining the sea-based directional systems of a sample of Oceanic languages,
François concludes that in POc ‘go down’ apparently had the secondary sense ‘go
northwest’, whilst ‘go up’ had the secondary sense ‘go southeast’. More tentatively, he
suggests that *pano may have been used for movement across the northwest–southeast
axis. He suggests that the basis of this metaphor was that sailing into the wind felt to the
sailors like going uphill.

    In Ross (1995c) I suggested that *sake ‘go up’ and *sipo ‘go down’ were used by POc
speakers to denote ‘east’ and ‘west’, i.e. the locations of sunrise and sunset. This inference
was based on the fact that the glosses for their reflexes in many Oceanic languages are
given as ‘east’ and ‘west’ (this is also true of some of the sources that François 2004a cites).
However, François argues in his detailed account of Mwotlap directional systems that this
is semantically implausible, as reflexes of *sake and *sipo are used for ‘go southeast’ and
‘go northwest’ respectively, and it is hard to see how these meanings—or ‘go east’ and ‘go
west’—could be derived from ‘go to the place where the sun rises/sets’ (François 2003). In
François (2004a) he also presents the systems of a number of languages which display the
‘go up/southeast’ and ‘go down/northwest’ correlations. I find his reconstruction of a
terminological subsystem corresponding to the major wind directions convincing, and I
think it likely that systems which are oriented to the rising and setting of the sun are
probably more recent developments.

    François (2004a) is a reconstruction of a POc terminological subsystem, i.e. a system of
meanings and the relationships among them. The languages in his sample by no means all
use reflexes of *sipo and *sake for ‘go downward’ and ‘go upward’, and he makes no
attempt to reconstruct the POc forms, assuming that the relevant POc etyma were *sipo
and *sake. I return briefly to the reconstruction of *sipo and *sake as directions at sea in
§3.3.3 below.


8.3.3.1 Downward movement

  Three possible verbs of downward movement are reconstructed below. They are:

__pre__
POc *sipo ‘go down, downwards’
POc *sobu ‘go downward, dive down’
POc *surup ‘(?) enter, penetrate; go down’

The most widely reflected of these is *sipo, the generic verb of downward movement. POc
*sobu seems also to have carried the meaning ‘dive down’, as several of its reflexes have
to do with action in the sea. I also include POc *surup ‘enter, penetrate, go down’ here on
account of reflexes with the gloss ‘go down’, but the latter are found only in Meso-
Melanesian and Southeast Solomonic languages, and I question whether it had this sense in
POc.

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction   271

<
POc *sipo ‘go down, downwards’
 Adm: Mussau           sio                 ‘go downward’
 Adm: Mussau           (la-)sio            ‘go down (to)’
 Adm: Mussau           (la-)sio(-kasu)     ‘come down (from)’ (kasu ‘go from’)
 NNG: Kove             (i)ðio              ‘go downward’
 NNG: Bariai           (ga)dio             (DIR) ‘downward’
 NNG: Gitua            zio(vave)           (DIR) ‘downward’
 NNG: Tuam             (i)zi(la)           ‘sink’
 NNG: Yabem            siʔ                 (DIR) ‘downward’
 NNG: Bing             siy                 ‘come’
 NNG: Takia            -s(-la)             ‘go seaward, move downhill; land, arrive (of a boat)’
 NNG:    Manam          -ria               (DIR) ‘downward; to one’s left when facing sea’
 NNG:    Kaiep          (a)si              (DIR) ‘downward’
 SJ:     Sobei          -si                (DIR) ‘downward’
 PT:     Tawala         -hi                (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 PT:     Sinaugoro      (va-)riɣo          ‘go down’ (-riɣo occurs as the second element of verbal compounds)
 MM:     Kia            hi(nae)            ‘go down’
 MM:     Laghu          hi(nae)            ‘go down’
 SES:    Lengo          ðivo               ‘go down’
 SES:    Longgu         sivo               ‘go down’
 SES:    Kwaio          sifo               ‘go down’
 SES:    Sa’a           siho               (DIR) ‘downward’
 NCV:    Merei          sio                ‘move downward/seaward’
 NCV:    Tamambo        jivo               ‘go down’
 SV:     Sye            -sep, -hep         (DIR) ‘downward’
 SV:     Sye            yep                ‘go down’
 NCal:   Xârâcùù        βē                (DEM) ‘coming down’
 Mic:    Kosraean       -yɛ                (DIR) ‘downward’
 Mic:    Mokilese       -ti                (DIR) ‘downward’
 Mic:    Puluwatese     -tiw               (DIR) ‘downward, west’
 Fij:    Wayan          ðivo               (DIR) ‘downward’
 Fij:    Bauan          ðivo-ðivo          ‘wind sweeping down from hills’
 Fij:    Yasawa         ðivo               (DIR) ‘downward’
 Pn:     Tongan         hifo               (DIR) ‘downward’
 Pn:     Samoan         ifo                (DIR) ‘downward’
 Pn:     Pileni         ifo                (DIR) ‘downward’
 Pn:     Rennellese     iho                (V, DIR) ‘downward; seaward; northward, westward’
>

272    Malcolm Ross

<
PEMP *sobu ‘go downward’ (Blust 1978a)
POc *sobu ‘go downward, dive down’
 PT:    Gumawana        -sou         ‘move down’
 PT:     Tawala         -hopu        ‘go down’
 PT:     Saliba         dobi         ‘go down’
 SES:    Gela           sovu-sovu    ‘splash about in sea’
 Fij:    Wayan          sovu         ‘go down’
 Fij:    Bauan          sobu         ‘go down’; (DIR) ‘downward’
 Fij:    Boumaa         sobu         ‘go down’; (DIR) ‘downward’
 Fij:    Rotuman        jopu         ‘dive, swim under water’
 Pn:     Rarotongan     ʔopu         ‘(boat or stone) sink, (sun) set, fade away’
>

<
PMP *surup ‘enter, penetrate’ (ACD)
POc *surup ‘enter, penetrate; go down (?)’
 MM: Barok                su             ‘downwards’
 MM: Konomala             sup            ‘(sun) set’
 SES: Bugotu              horu           ‘go down’ (-o- for expected *-u-)
 SES:   Gela              horu           ‘go down’ (-o- for expected *-u-)
 Fij:   Bauan             ðuru           ‘enter’
 Fij:   Rotuman           suru           ‘enter’
 Pn:    Tongan            hū             ‘enter’
 Pn:    Samoan            ulu            ‘enter’
 Pn:    Marquesan         uʔu            ‘enter’
>

   The forms listed below also seem to constitute a cognate set, but, as the questions
implicit in the reconstruction *[s,j]u[(a,u)] indicate, their history is not fully understood.
The New Caledonian reflexes suggest a contrast between a directional adverbial form in
*j- and a verb in *s-, but this contrast is not reflected elsewhere in the set.

<
POc *[s,j]u[(a,u)] ‘go down vertically, fall’[20]
 NNG: Sio                 due              ‘downwards’
 NNG: Mangap              -su              ‘go down’
 NNG: Mangap              -su(-la)         ‘go down away from speaker’
 NNG: Tami                suʔ              ‘downwards’
 NNG: Lukep               du               ‘go down’
 NNG: Malasanga           (i)rua           ‘(sun) set’
 NNG: Roinji              ru               ‘(sun) set’
 NNG: Mindiri             du(lau)          ‘(sun) set’
 NNG: Gedaged             -du              ‘go down’
 NNG: Megiar              -du              ‘go down’
 NNG: Takia               (i)du(man)       ‘downwards’
 NNG: Takia               -du              ‘go down, fall’
 SJ:       Sobei               -so              (DIR) ‘downward’
 MM:       Tigak               (i)sua           ‘go down’
 MM:       Notsi               (bi-)dū          (adverb) ‘from below’[21]
 MM:       Notsi               (ta-)dū          (adverb) ‘from the west’
 SES:      Longgu              su               ‘dive, (sun) set’
 SES:      Lau                 sū               ‘dive, (sun) set’
 SES:      Arosi               sū               ‘dive, (sun) set’
 NCal:     Nêlêmwa             du               (DIR) ‘downward’
 NCal:     Nêlêmwa             tu               ‘go downward’
 NCal:     Nyelâyu             -du              (DIR) ‘downward’
 NCal:     Nyelâyu             tu               ‘go downward’
>

[20] A possible non-Oceanic cognate is Kéo (CMP) ndua ‘go down’. The fact that some items here are
   simply glossed ‘(sun) set’ may be an artifact of data collection. They may well denote downward
   movement more generally.

[21] The two Notsi ablative adverbs form a paradigm with the locative/allative adverbs bi-lū ‘down below,
   downward’ and ti-lū ‘to the west, westward’. It is unclear to me how to interpret the -dū/-lū contrast
   historically, and this may indicate that -dū does not reflect POc *jua.

                                     Talking about space: terms of location and direction           273


   POc *wau ‘go seawards’ and *bala ‘move downward (?)’ are also tentatively
reconstructed, but they are not well supported.

<
POc *wau ‘go seawards’
 NNG: Bam                      wau(la)           (DIR) ‘downward’
 NNG: Sissano                  eu                (DIR) ‘downward’
 PT:    Gumawana               -iwo              ‘move seaward’
 Mic:   Puluwatese             -wow              (DIR) ‘seaward’ (contrast -waw ‘towards addressee’)
 Mic:      Woleaian            wai               (DIR) ‘seaward’
>

<
POc *bala ‘move downward (?)’
 NNG:      Manam               bala              ‘move down, move to one’s left when facing sea’
 MM:       Tolai               ba                (DIR) ‘downward’
 PT:       Gumawana            -bala             ‘move across’
 Fij:      Nadrogā             bale              (DIR) ‘downward’
>

8.3.3.2 Upward movement

   The generic verb of upward movement was POc *sake ‘go upward, go southeast’, also
used, for example, of boarding a canoe.

<
POc *sake ‘go upward’
 Adm: Mussau                   sae               ‘go upward’
 Adm: Mussau                   sae(-mae)         ‘come up (from)’
 Adm: Mussau                   (la-)sae          ‘go up (to)’ (_la_ ‘go away from speaker’)
 NNG:      Kove                -ðae              ‘go upward’
 NNG:      Gitua               -zage             ‘(sun) rise’
 NNG:      Tami                sai               ‘go up to’
 NNG:   Mangap         -se          ‘go upward’
 NNG:   Mangap         -sa-la       ‘go upward away from speaker’
 NNG:   Yabem          -sa          (DIR clause-final) ‘upward’
 NNG:   Gedaged        -sa          ‘(plant) grow’
 NNG:   Takia          -s(-da)      ‘move up, be high, be full, go up, rise, board (a canoe)’
 NNG:   Takia          -sa(-la)     ‘go inland, move uphill’ (i.e. towards the volcano); ‘depart (by boat)’
 NNG:   Manam          -raʔe        ‘move up, move to one’s right when facing sea’; (DIR) ‘upward’
 NNG:   Ali            -ha          ‘(sun) rise’
 NNG:   Sissano        ha           (DIR) ‘upward’
 SJ:    Sobei          -sa[sa]      (DIR) ‘upward’
 PT:    Tawala         -gae         ‘go upward’
 PT:    Saliba         -sae         ‘go upward, eastward’
 PT:    Sinaugoro      -raɣe         ‘upward’ (second element of verbal compounds)
 PT:    Motu           -dae(roha)   ‘(sun) rise’ (roha ‘to come in sight’)
 MM:    Bali           zaɣe         ‘(sun) rise’; (DIR) ‘upward’
 MM:    Nakanai        sahe         ‘climb’
 MM:    Meramera       saʔe         ‘climb’
 MM:    Tigak          (i)sa        ‘go upward’
 MM:    Halia (Haku)   sei          ‘(sun) rise’
 MM:    Teop           hae          ‘board (canoe)’
 MM:    Banoni         sai          (DIR) ‘upward’
 MM:    Mono-Alu       sae          (DIR) ‘upward’
 MM:    Roviana        saɣe(la)     ‘go up’
 MM:    Hoava          saɣe(la)     ‘go up’
 MM:    Kia            haɣe         ‘board (canoe)’
 MM:    Kokota         hage         ‘go up; go landward; go east’
 SES:   Gela           haɣe         ‘enter’
 SES:   Longgu         taʔe         ‘ascend, go up, stand up, get into canoe’
 SES:   Kwaio          taʔe         ‘embark, rise’
 SES:   Sa’a           taʔe         (DIR) ‘up, inland’
 SES:   Arosi          taʔe         ‘go upward’
 NCV:   Merei          sa           ‘move upward/landward’
 NCV:   Araki          sa[ha]       ‘go up, go inland, go eastward’
 NCV:   Tamambo        sahe         ‘go upward’
 SV:    Lenakel        (a)hak       ‘(sun) already risen’
 SV:    SW Tanna       -hak(ta)     (DIR) ‘upward’
 SV:    Sye            saɣ          ‘go up, go upstream, (tide) rise’
 Mic:   Kosraean       -ɛk          (DIR) ‘upward’
 Mic:   Marshallese    tak          ‘(sun) rise’; (DIR) ‘upward’
 Mic:   Mokilese       -ta          (DIR) ‘upward’
 Mic:   Puluwatese     -tæ          (DIR) ‘upward’
 Mic:    Woleaian         tax            (DIR) ‘upward, eastward’
 Fij:    Bauan            ðake           (DIR) ‘upward, eastward’
 Fij:    Wayan            ðake           ‘climb up, mount’
 Pn:     Tongan           hake           ‘go upward, esp. from the sea to the land’; (DIR) ‘upward’
 Pn:     Samoan           aʔe            (DIR) ‘upward’
 Pn:     Pileni           -ake           (DIR) ‘upward’
 Pn:     Marquesan        aʔe            ‘upwards, distant in time’
>

274   Malcolm Ross

                              Talking about space: terms of location and direction     275


Some or all of the forms below probably also reflect POc *sake ‘go upward’, but they all
reflect unexplained anomalies. The New Caledonian forms reflect the same contrast
between an adverb in *j- and a verb in *s- as was noted above with regard to POc
*[s,j]u[(a,u)] ‘go down vertically, fall’.

__pre__
 NNG:    Takia            (-s)da         ‘move up, be high, be full, go up, rise,
                                           board (a canoe)’
 NCal:   Nêlêmwa          da             (DIR) ‘upward’
                          (o-)da         ‘go upward’ (o ‘go’)
 NCal:   Nyelâyu          -da            (DIR) ‘upward’
                          ta             ‘go upward’
 NCal:   Nemi             -da            (DIR) ‘upward’
                          ta             ‘go upward’
 NCal:   Cèmuhî           da             (DIR) ‘upward’
 NCal:   Tinrin           Éa(-jɯ)        ‘go up’
 Fij:    Wayan            ða(va)         ‘ascend, go up a slope’
                          ða(dra)        (DIR) ‘upward’


8.3.3.3 *sipo and *sake as directions at sea

   Above I noted François’ (2004a) reconstruction of POc speakers’ use of terms for ‘go
downward’ and ‘go upward’ for ‘go northwest’ and ‘go southeast’, i.e. directions
corresponding with those of the major winds. François assumes that the relevant POc terms
were *sipo and *sake, reconstructed in §§3.3.1–3.3.2. As these were the generic terms for
‘go downward’ and ‘go upward’, his assumption is probably correct, but it is not
particularly well supported by the available data, as the sets below show. In fact, all
supporting data for both terms in these meanings come from Eastern Oceanic languages.
The Yabem and Motu reflexes of *sipo have ‘wrong’ directions in their glosses. This may
mean that this use of *sake and *sipo was an Eastern Oceanic innovation, but it may also
mean that insufficient Western Oceanic (and Admiralties) systems have been carefully
recorded. In a number of Western Oceanic languages, ‘east’ and ‘west’ are translated as
‘place where the sun rises’ and ‘place where the sun sets’, but these phrasal expressions
may be modern renderings of English ‘east’ and ‘west’.

<
POc *sipo ‘go downward; go northwest’
 NNG: Yabem              -sep      ‘go down, go east’
 PT:     Motu            diho      ‘south, south wind; down; go down, descend’
 NCV: NE Ambae           hivo      ‘move downward/seaward/northwestward’
 NCV:     Araki            si[vo]      ‘go down, go seaward, go westward’
 SV:      Anejom           -se[h]      (DIR) ‘down, north, west’
 Mic:     Woleaian         tiw         (DIR) ‘downward, westward’
 Pn:      Rennellese       iho         (V, DIR) ‘downward; seaward; northward, westward’
>

276   Malcolm Ross

<
POc *sake ‘go upward, go southeast’ (Dempwolff 1938)
 NCV: Mwotlap            hag         (DIR) ‘(on land) eastward, (at sea) south-eastward’
 NCV: NE Ambae           hage        ‘move upward/landward/southeastward’
 NCV: Araki              sa[ha]      ‘go up, go inland, go eastward’
 SV:    Anejom           -tʃai       (DIR) ‘upward, southward, eastward’
 Mic:   Kiribati         rake        ‘(sun) rise’; (DIR) ‘upward, eastward’
 Mic:   Woleaian         tax         (DIR) ‘upward, eastward’
 Fij:   Bauan            ðake        (DIR) ‘upward, eastward’
 Pn:    Rennellese       ake         (V, DIR) ‘upward; inland; southward, eastward’
>

   François also alludes to members of the Polynesian sets below. However, these are
clearly locative nouns, and may just as well reflect an orientation to sunset and sunrise, as
Biggs (1994:25) implies.

<
PPn *si-sifo ‘(N) west’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:      Tongan            hihifo         ‘west ’
 Pn:      Niuean            hifo           ‘go west ’
 Pn:      Samoan            sisifo         ‘west ’
 Pn:      Tokelauan         sisifo         ‘west’
>

<
PPn *sa-sake ‘(N) east’ (Biggs & Clark 1993)
 Pn:     Tongan            ha-hake        ‘east’
 Pn:     Samoan            sa-saʔe        (ADV) ‘in the east’
 Pn:     Samoan            (ŋā-ŋ)aʔe      (ADV) ‘eastward’
>

   The important point about François’ reconstruction is that the equation of ‘go
downward’ and ‘go upward’ with ‘go northwest’ and ‘go southeast’ occurs widely,
suggesting that the equation itself should be reconstructed for POc, even if the forms
themselves are hard to reconstruct. Except for Wayan, the terms listed below are drawn
from François (2004a).

__pre__
                           ‘downward,                   ‘upward,
                             northwest’                 southeast’
 PT:      Saliba           sae                          dobi
 SES:     Longgu           alaʔa                        toli
 NCV:     Mwotlap          hag                          hōw
 NCV:     NE Ambae         hage                         hivo
 SV:      Anejom           -jai                         -se(h)
 NCal:    Nemi             -da                          -dic
 Mic:     Woleaian         -tiw                         -tax
 Fij:     Wayan            vua i rā                     vua i ata (vua ‘direction’)
 Fij:     Bauan            sobu ‘go down, west’         ðake ‘go up, east’

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction     277


8.3.3.4 Geographic direction adverbs derived from verbs

   In a scattering of Oceanic languages, the verbs POc *sipo ‘go downward’ (p.271) and
POc *sake ‘go upward’ (p.273) are also reflected as (or as the roots of) locative and/or
allative adverbs. These are distinct from directional adverbials in that they often form part
of the locative demonstrative paradigm, with meanings like ‘down below’ and ‘up here’.
These reflexes are sufficiently well distributed to arouse the suspicion, at least, that this
was also one of their POc functions.

   The meanings of the items listed below overlap substantially with reflexes of the POc
local nouns *tanoq ‘down below’ (p.241) and POc *atas ‘top; space above’ (p.243). There
are also a few reflexes below of *sipo and *sake which function as nouns, but it seems
certain that these are the results of locally restricted developments.

<
POc *sipo ‘go downward’; (ADV) ‘downwards, down below’
 NNG: Kove             sio             (ADV) ‘down below’
 NNG: Lusi             sio             (ADV) ‘below, down there’
 NNG: Bariai           (ga)dio         (ADV) ‘downward’
 SES: Kwaio            (ʔai)sifo       (ADV) ‘downwards, northwesterly’
 NCV: Merei            (ai)sio         (ADV) ‘down here’
 NCV: Araki            sivo(su)        (ADV) ‘down there’ (-su DEM)
 SV:     Sye           (ye)hep         (ADV) ‘down here’
 Pn:     Samoan        si-sifo         (ADV) ‘in the west’
 Pn:     Samoan        (ŋā-ŋa)ifo      (ADV) ‘westward’
>

<
POc *sake ‘go upward’; (ADV) ‘upwards, up top’
 Adm: Mussau            sae-sae(na)      ‘upwards’
 NNG: Lusi              sai              (ADV) ‘on top, above’
 NNG: Bariai            (ga)dae          (ADV) ‘above’
 NNG: Tuam              (i)za            (ADV) ‘upwards’
 NNG: Gitua             sage             (ADV) ‘up above’
 PT:    Motu            dae-             (N) ‘above’
 MM: Siar               sai(gali)        (ADV) ‘up there, over there’
 MM: Label              sa               (ADV) ‘up there’
 MM: Label              (u)sa            (ADV) ‘upwards’
 MM: Minigir            (ke-na)sa        (ADV) ‘up there’
 NCV: Merei             (ai)sa           (ADV) ‘up here’
 NCV: Araki             saha(su)         (ADV) ‘up there’
 NCV: Paamese           (ne)sa           (N LOC) ‘up, above, on top’
 SV:    Sye             (ya)haɣ          (ADV) ‘up here’
 NCal: Iaai             (e)ðə̄           (ADV) ‘upward, inland’
 Mic:   Kiribati        rake             ‘up, above’
 Fij:   Wayan           ðake             (DIR) ‘upwards’
 Fij:   Bauan           ðake             (N LOC) ‘up, above’
 Pn:    Tongan          ha-hake          (N) ‘east’; (ADJ) ‘eastern’
 Pn:    Samoan          sa-saʔe          (N LOC) ‘east’
 Pn:    Samoan          (ŋā-ŋ)aʔe        (ADV) ‘eastward’
>

278   Malcolm Ross


8.3.4 Deictic directional verbs and enclitics

8.3.4.1 A note on deixis in Oceanic

   Proto Oceanic deixis was person-oriented. That is, there were forms with the meanings
‘near speaker’, ‘near addressee’ and ‘distant from both speaker and addressee’. This
pattern is well represented in Oceanic demonstrative forms right across the Pacific.
Individual languages may lose a member of the paradigm, finishing up with a
proximal/distal system. Some languages have reinterpreted the three-way system in terms
of orientation to the speaker alone (‘near speaker’ vs ‘an intermediate distance from
speaker’ vs ‘far from speaker’), but such languages are by no means as widespread as the
person-oriented system. A good many languages have added members to the system,
distinguishing, for example, between referents that can and cannot be seen by the speech
act participants, or adding a member for referents the speaker points at, but none of these
additions can be reconstructed as a POc category.

   A reconstruction of POc demonstrative forms is beyond the scope of this chapter, but a
sample of person-oriented systems is given below. The forms given are those used
adnominally, except where shown (they may also have other language-specific uses).

__pre__
                               near speaker near addressee           distal
 Adm:    Mussau                toko              o[ia]               teke
 NNG:    Lukep (Pono)          i                 in                  ni
 NNG:    Yabem                 tonɛʔ             tonaŋ               tone
 NNG:    Kairiru               an                at                  nai
 PT:     Gapapaiwa             we-ni             na-ni               noko-ni
 PT:     Gumawana              ame               moe                 amo
 PT:     Sinaugoro             mai               mani                mo[a]
 MM:     Bali                  -ani              -ina                -ini
 MM:     Tigak                 gura              gara                tara
 MM:     Roviana SG            hie               isa                 hoi
 SES:    Bugotu                ani, eni          ŋeni, ari           ŋgeri
 NCV:    Araki                 ne, kesi          ho-ni, vBaha-ni     vBa[ha]-su
 NCV:    Lewo                  nini              namwā               nena
                               (also nene ‘near speaker and hearer’)
 SV:     Anejom PRO SG         niñ[ki], nī       nā[nai]             nai[kou]
 NCal:   Tinrin                =ha               =mwã                =ṛa
 NCal:   Iaai                  āŋ                e                  e-le
 Mic:    Kosraean              ʌ                 an                  o
 Mic:    Ulithian              -e               -lā                 -lāy
 Fij:    Boumaa                yai, ī            yā                  mayā
 Fij:    Wailevu               ɣā                ɣāri                ɣaðei
 Pn:     Tongan                ni                na                  ia (also e ‘pointing’)
 Pn:     Pileni                ne[i]             na                  la
 Pn:     Marquesan             nei               nā                  ʔā, aʔa

                                   Talking about space: terms of location and direction            279

   The person-oriented system of deixis was manifested not only in demonstratives, but
also in the system of deictic directional verbs. POc had a system with at least three
members: ‘come to[wards] speaker’, ‘go/come to[wards] addressee’ and ‘go to a point
away from both speaker and addressee’, glossed here as ‘come’, ‘go:2’ and ‘go:3’
respectively. There were possibly two ‘go:3’ verbs, however. One licensed a location
expression, i.e. its basic meaning was ‘go to’. The other simply meant ‘go away (from
speaker)’ and did not license a location expression. Thus in Kele (Adm) there is a contrast
between la ‘go to’ and aw ‘go away’ (Ross 2002f). This suggests that POc had a four-
member system, and I will assume this here. Against this is the fact that I have found no
language in which a four-member system is preserved.

   Three-member deictic directional verb systems are found right across Oceania,[22] and a
sample is given below. Some are reflected as directional enclitics, rather than as verbs. It is
sometimes difficult to tell from a source whether the third member should be assigned to
‘go:3’ or ‘go away’. However, in languages where deictic directional verbs have become
directional enclitics, the ‘go:3’ form has lost its capacity to license a location expression
and inevitably means ‘go away’. Note that the two systems from the Admiralties make the
contrast between ‘go:3’ and ‘go away’ which supports the reconstruction of a four-member
system.

[22] There are also a fair number of languages that have reduced the three-member system to a two-member
   system of ‘come to[wards] speaker’ and ‘go away (from speaker)’. The latter is usually descended from
   one of ‘go:2’, ‘go:3’ or ‘go away (from speaker)’.

__pre__
                               come          go:2          go:3      go away
 Adm: Loniu                    mɛ            —             la        yaw
 Adm: Kele                     sa            —             la        aw (also doh ‘come from’)
 NNG: Yabem                    -mèŋ          -wàʔ          -yà       —
 PT:  Gumawana                 -ma           -wo           -na       —
 MM: Hoava                     -mae          -atu          -la       —
 NCV: NE Ambae                 vanai         vanatu        —         vano
 Mic: Kosraean DIR             -ma           -ot           —         -l4
 Mic: Mokilese DIR             -to, -to      -wɛ           —         -la
 Fij: Bauan DIR                mai           yani          —         tani
 Fij: Wayan DIR                mai           ati           —         dei
 Pn:  Tongan DIR               mai           atu           —         aŋe
 Pn:  Samoan DIR               mai           atu           —         ʔese
 Pn:  Pileni DIR               mai           atu           —         aŋe


8.3.4.2 Reconstructing Proto Oceanic deictic directional forms

    The main deictic directional forms of POc, which account for the majority of the forms
listed above, were as follows:

__pre__
                                   verb                            directional adverb
    come          *mai, *ma        ‘come’                          ‘towards speaker’ (p.281)
    go:2          *ua              ‘go towards addressee’          ‘towards addressee’ (p.283)
                  *watu            ‘go towards addressee’          ‘towards addressee’ (p.286)
    go:3          *lako, *la       ‘go (to)’                       ‘away from speaker’ (p.287)
    go away       *pano, *pa       ‘go away’                       ‘away from speaker’ (p.290)


280     Malcolm Ross


   Note that I reconstruct these POc forms as both verbs and directional adverbs. In §3.2 I
briefly discussed the grammaticisation of deictic directional verbs as directional adverbs.
This process raises the question, Were there already directional adverbs in POc, or are
modern Oceanic directional adverbs the outcomes of independent parallel developments?
The answer appears to be: both. Directional adverbs are so widespread in Oceanic
languages that one may infer that they were already present in POc, otherwise we would
not find such a plethora of reflexes of verbs as enclitics in modern Oceanic languages. On
the other hand, there are cases where it is clear that the development of the directional
adverb is more recent because it reflects not just the verb root but also accretions to it that
have occurred in the history of the particular language.[23] The Sobei (SJ) directional
enclitics -ema ‘towards speaker’ and -ewo ‘away from speaker’ transparently reflect the
verbs -ma ‘come’ and -wo ‘go’ with a fossilised third person singular subject marker e-.
The Sye (SV) directional adverb mpelom ‘towards speaker’ is transparently derived from
the verb velom ‘come’. This must be a late development, since ve-lo-m seems itself to
reflect the concatenation of three roots, *pano/*pa ‘go away’, *lako/*la ‘go’, and *ma
‘come; towards speaker’.

[23] For a more detailed examination of this issue, see Pawley (2003b).

   Three of the verbs listed above, *mai/*ma, *lako/*la and *pano/*pa, have long and
short forms. It is difficult to reconstruct the distribution of the long and short forms with
any certainty, as they do not correspond with the division between verb and enclitic.
However, there seem to be two contexts in which the short forms may have emerged, both
of them in serial verb constructions. One was as the final verb of a deictic directional serial
verb construction. The other was as the first verb of a sequential serial verb construction
(the gloss V AUX is used to label these below). POc *watu and *ua look superficially like a
long/short pair, but they are regionally distributed, unlike the other three pairs (p.286).

   Two other verbs seem to have been used as deictic directional verbs, but probably not as
directional enclitics, in POc. They are less well attested than the verbs reconstructed above.

__pre__
    come                     *pwati            ‘come’ (p.283)
    go:3/go away             *[y]aku           ‘go (to)’ or ‘go away’ (p.293)

It is unclear whether *[y]aku meant ‘go (to)’ or ‘go away’.

    I also reconstruct the prepositional verb *tani ‘(go) away from’ below (p.293). It was
not deictic, but it overlaps semantically with the verbs reconstructed in this section.


8.3.4.3 ‘Come towards speaker’

   Blust (ACD) reconstructs PAn *aRi, which in its root form was used imperatively as
‘come on’, ‘let’s go’ (Paiwan [Formosan] ari ‘let’s go!’) and apparently survives in the
Takia interjection aria with the same meanings.[24] The indicative form was PAn *maRi
‘come’ (from *um-aRi, where *um is the actor focus infix; vol. 1, p.29), and this form is
well reflected in Formosan and WMP languages. However, it seems likely that the variant
*mai existed from the earliest times, as Blust notes Favorlang (Formosan) mai and Yami
(WMP) mai, and that *mai ousted reflexes of *maRi throughout the Central/Eastern
Malayo-Polynesian grouping (e.g. Manggarai, Sikka, Rotinese mai) to which POc
belonged.


[24] The interjection aria is widespread in Melanesia, and it is impossible to track its history accurately.

                                     Talking about space: terms of location and direction                281


    There is just one Oceanic reflex, Mangap (NNG) -mar ‘come towards speaker’, which
appears to reflect *maRi rather than *mai. However, the fact that Mangap has a distinction
between -mar ‘come towards speaker’ and -ma ‘come towards addressee’ suggests that a
pre-Mangap reflex of *ma expanded its use from ‘towards speaker’ to ‘towards us, speaker
and addressee’, and that a further morpheme, perhaps a demonstrative, was then suffixed
to it to disambiguate ‘towards speaker’, giving -ma-r.

    Also reconstructable is the POc form *ma, reflected in WOc and CEOc languages.
There is no reconstructable functional distinction between *-mai and *-ma, as reflexes of
both occur as verbs and as directional enclitics, and both should probably be glossed in
POc as (V) ‘come’ and (DIR) ‘towards speaker’. In many languages, a reflex of *mai or
*ma occurs as the second element of one or more compounds, and these are taken to be
reflexes of an earlier final verb of a serial construction or reflexes of a directional enclitic
(it is impossible to tell which). A number of these are listed below.

<
PAn *maRi, *mai ‘come’ (ACD)
PCEMP *mai ‘come’
POc *mai, *ma ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Adm: Mussau           mae               ‘come’
 Adm: Mussau           (sio)mae          ‘come down (from)’
 Adm: Loniu            -mɛ               ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Adm: Aua              -mai              (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NNG: Mangap           -ma               ‘come towards addressee’
 NNG: Mangap           -ma(r)            ‘come towards speaker’
 NNG: Mangap           (-le)-ma          ‘come inside’ (-le ‘enter’)
 NNG: Yabem            -mè(ŋ)            ‘come’ (-ŋ is a suffix of unknown origin)
 NNG: Sio              mo                ‘come’
 NNG: Tuam-Mutu        (ka)miai          ‘come’
 NNG: Gitua            (la)m             ‘come’
 NNG: Manam            mai               ‘move towards speaker from neither up nor down’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NNG: Kairiru          -myai             ‘come’
 SJ:    Sobei          -(e)ma            (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SJ:    Sobei          -ma               ‘come’
 PT:    Tawala         mai               (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 PT:    Gumawana       -ma               ‘come’
 PT:    Saliba         ma                (DIR) ‘hither’
 PT:    Sudest         ma                (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 PT:    Sinaugoro      (iaɣo)ma          ‘come’ (iaɣo ‘go’ < POc *lako)
 PT:    Sinaugoro      -ma               (preverbal clitic) ‘near speaker’[25]
 PT:    Sinaugoro      -ma(riɣo)         ‘come down’ (-riɣo ‘downward’ < POc *sipo occurs in verbal compounds)
 PT:    Motu           -mai              ‘come’
 MM:        Vitu               mai                   ‘come’
 MM:        Bali               mai                   ‘come’
 MM:        Bulu               mai                   (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 MM:        Harua              mai                   ‘come from’
 MM:        Tigak              (i)ma                 ‘come’
 MM:        Notsi              (kala)me              ‘come’
 MM:        Selau              (la)ma                ‘come’
 MM:        Taiof              (o)m                  ‘come’
 MM:        Taiof              -ma                   ‘first/second person object enclitic’[26]
 MM:        Banoni             ma                    (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 MM:        Banoni             (tai)ma               ‘come’ (tai ‘go’)
 MM:        Mono               (lao)ma               ‘come’
 MM:        Babatana           me                    (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 MM:        Hoava              mae                   ‘come’
 MM:        Kokota             mai                   ‘come’
 SES:       Bugotu             mai                   ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SES:       Gela               mai                   ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SES:       Longgu             mai                   (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SES:       Kwaio              mai                   (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SES:       Kwaio              (leka)mai             ‘come’ (leka ‘go’)
 NCV:       Mwotlap            mɛ                    (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NCV:       NE Ambae          | -mai, -mei, -ai |      (DIR) ‘towards speaker’[27]
 NCV:       Merei              ma                    (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 NCV:       Araki              ma                    (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NCV:       Tamambo            mai                   ‘come’
 NCV:       Sakao              (la)m                 ‘come’
 SV:        Sye                (ve-lo-)m             ‘come’ (ve ‘go’)
 SV:        Sye                (-mpe-lo-)m           (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 SV:        Anejom             -(pa)m                (DIR) ‘towards speaker’ (pan ‘away from speaker’)
 SV:        Anejom             (ha)m, (apa)m         ‘come’ (han, apan ‘go’)
 NCal:      Nêlêmwa            me                    (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NCal:      Nêlêmwa            ō-me                  ‘come’ (o ‘go’)
 NCal:      Nyelâyu            -me                   (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NCal:      Xârâcùù            mɛ̃                   (DEM) ‘near speaker’
 NCal:      Iaai               (jē)m                (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Mic:       Kosraean           -ma                   (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Mic:       Kiribati           mai                   ‘come’
 Fij:       Nadrogaa           mā, mei               (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Fij:     Wayan             mai             (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Fij:     Bauan             mai             (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Fij:     Boumaa            mai             (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Pn:      Tongan            mai             ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Pn:      Samoan            mai             (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 Pn:      Marquesan         mai             (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
>

[25] This is an enclitic to the preverbal tense/aspect/mood marker. It marks the location of the action relative
   to the speaker and addressee. To judge from its preverbal position, it reflects the use of a deictic
   direction verb with the sense ‘come and …’ in the initial slot of a sequential serial verb construction.

[26] In Taiof the first/second person object marker, except for first person inclusive plural, is -ma. I suspect
   this was originally the ‘towards speaker’ directional. (The third person/first person inclusive plural form
   is -i[ñ].)

[27] These forms occurs as a fossil in van-ai ‘move across towards deictic centre’ (cf vano ‘move across’),
   ha-mai ‘move upwards towards deictic centre’ (hage ‘move upwards’) and hi-mei ‘move downwards
   towards deictic centre’ (hivo ‘move upwards’).

282     Malcolm Ross

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction    283

In a number of languages POc *mai/*ma is reflected as a preposition or a relator.
However, the reflexes listed below are probably the result of parallel innovations in
different groups of languages, and it is unnecessary to reconstruct a preposition or relator
usage for POc *mai/*ma (cf. §3.2).

<
POc *mai, *ma ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 PT:    Tawala            mei             (PREP) ‘like, resembling’
 MM: Meramera             maʔ-            (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Lamasong             ma-             (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Madak                me-             (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Barok                mu-             (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Konomala             mə              (R) (ablative)
 MM: Patpatar             ma-             (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Patpatar             ma              (PREP w PLC) (ablative)
 MM: Label                mi-             (R-) (ablative)
 MM: Tolai                ma-, ma-ma- (R-) (ablative)
 SES:   Longgu            mi              (R with placename or local noun) (ablative)
 Fij:   Bauan             mai             (PREP) (ablative)
>

  One other POc morpheme with the same meanings as *mai may be reconstructable.
This is *pwati. Note, however, that most reflexes are in the South New Ireland grouping of
MM, and that the POc status of this reconstruction is dependent on the Arosi reflex alone.

<
POc *pwati ‘come’; (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
 NNG: Wogeo                 (e)wot         ‘come’
 MM: Minigir                (vana)uti      ‘come’
 MM: Tolai                  pot            ‘come’
 MM: Tolai–Nodup            (le)poti       ‘come’
 MM: Label                  (la-m)ut       ‘come’
 MM: Label                  hot            ‘towards speaker’
 MM: Bilur                  vot            ‘come’
 MM: Kandas                 (uan)pat       ‘come back’
 SES:   Arosi               boi            ‘come’
>

8.3.4.4 ‘Go towards addressee’

  Two alternant forms, POc *ua and *watu, mean ‘go towards addressee’, (DIR) ‘towards
addressee’.

284    Malcolm Ross


   It is just possible that POc *ua reflects PAn *kuSa ‘go’. However, no reflexes of PAn
*kuSa have been found in non-Oceanic languages outside Taiwan,[28] and it is more likely
that the Taiwan and Oceanic sets reflect different etyma, the more so as no member of the
Oceanic set reflects PAn *k-.

[28] Supporting data given by Tsuchida (1976:235) are Kanakanavu m-u-á-kusa ‘go’, Tsou uso ‘go forward’,
   Saaroa m-aɬu-kua ‘go where?’, Puyuma mu-kuwaʔ ‘go’, Thao m-ú6aʔ ‘go’, Pazeh mu-husaʔ ‘go’,
   Atayal, Seediq (m)usaʔ ‘go’, Rukai (m)wa ‘go’.

   Some of the reflexes of *ua can be confused with those of POc *pa and *ba. That there
is a contrast between *pa and *ua is attested by the pairs Adzera fa ‘go’ (p.291) and waʔ-
‘go out’ (p.286) and Kiriwina va (PREP, p.292) and wa (VF, below).

<
POc *ua ‘go towards addressee’; (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Adm: Seimat              -wa            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SJ:   Sobei              -(e)wo         (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SJ:   Sobei              -wo            ‘go’
 PT:   Gumawana           -wo            (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 PT:   Saliba             -wa            (DIR) ‘thither’
 PT:   Kiriwina           -wa            ‘go (to addressee)’
 PT:   Sudest             -wo            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 PT:   Sudest             wa             ‘go’
 PT:   ’Ala’ala           -ovo           (DIR) ‘away’
 MM: Bali                 ua             ‘go’
 MM: Tolai                vue            (DIR) ‘away’
 MM: Halia                wa             (DIR) ‘towards (a specified destination)’ (Ross 1982:44–45)
 Fij:  Nadrogaa           wā             (DIR) ‘thither’
 Fij:  Wayan              ā              (DIR) ‘thither’
>

In a number of languages POc *ua is reflected as a preposition or a relator (cf. §3.2).

<
POc *ua ‘go towards addressee’; (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Adm: Yapese              u             (PREP) (locative, ablative)
 PT:   Tawala             u             (PREP w N LOC) (locative, allative)
 PT:   Kiriwina           o             (PREP w N LOC) (locative ‘in, into’)
 PT:   Muyuw              u, wa         (PREP) (locative, allative)
 MM: Bulu                 o             (PREP w PLC) (locative)
 MM: Nakanai              o-            (VF formative) (locative)
 MM: Meramera             u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Lamasong             u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Madak                u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Barok                u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Sursurunga           u(r)          (R) (allative)
 MM: Tangga               ua, u         (R) (allative; _ua w_ DEM, _u_ elsewhere)
 MM: Konomala             uə            (R) (allative)
 MM: Patpatar             u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Patpatar             u             (PREP w PLC) (allative)
 MM: Label                       u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Kandas                      u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Kandas                      u             (PREP w N LOC) (locative, allative)
 MM: Ramoaaina                   u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM: Ramoaaina                   u             (PREP) (locative, allative)
 MM:      Minigir                u-            (R-) (allative)
 MM:      Tolai                  u-            (R-) (allative)
 SES:     Longgu                 vu            (R) (allative, towards)
 Fij:     Bauan                  vuā, vei      (PREP) (locative, allative, dative, cause)
>

Proto South Vanuatu *un-, which forms locative nouns from common nouns (Lynch
2001c:132), may also belong here.

                                    Talking about space: terms of location and direction       285


   Longgu vu appears to be cognate with forms in the Malaita/Makira subgroup (SES) that
reflect Proto Malaita/Makira *vua or *vuni. Lichtenberk (1985b) attributes all these forms to
POc *pani (V) ‘give’, (PREPV) ‘beneficiary case-marker’. The Malaita/Makira forms
certainly have benefactive meanings, but Longgu vu is clearly allative, and the best
account of both its form and meaning is given by attributing it to *ua—although this
means assuming that initial *v- has arisen by epenthesis. But what are we to do with the
Malaita/Makira forms? The best explanation seems to be that there was a conflation of pre-
Proto Malaita/Makira *vua ‘allative relator’ (cognate with Longgu vu and reflecting POc
*ua) and *vani ‘beneficiary prepositional verb’ (reflecting POc *pani), resulting in *vua
with a benefactive function and *vuni with a form cobbled together from both items but in
benefactive function.

   This interpretation is supported by the Longgu dative verbal preposition wini-, which
takes an object pronoun suffix when it governs a first or second person referent, e.g. wini-o
DATIVE-O:2SG ‘to you’, but assumes the allomorph wa- with a possessor pronoun suffix
when it governs a third person, e.g. wa-na DATIVE-P:3SG ‘to it/him/her’.[29] As Hill
(1992:245) points out, wa- overlaps semantically with vu (< POc *ua). It appears that wini
reflects POc *pani and wa- POc *ua, but the two form a single paradigm in Longgu. This
inference would also explain the non-etymological initial *v- of vu: it is inherited from pre-
Proto Malaita/Makira *vua, where it resulted from ‘infection’ by *vani.

[29] The possessor pronoun suffix was apparently acquired by analogy with the preposition ta-.

   The Bauan Fijian forms are tentatively included in the set above. The form vuā again
has epenthetic v-, but its meaning and the parallel with the prepositional use of mai suggest
that it reflects *ua. More specifically, vuā apparently reflects pre-Fijian *vua-i-a
(go.towards-TR-O:3SG) and means ‘to/for/from/with him/her’. The form vei is more
problematic. It may reflect either *vua-i (go.towards-ART) or *pa-i (go.away-ART). Either
way, *i is the personal article. Semantically, it is also possibe that *pani ‘give’ has played
a role in the history of these forms, as they have a dative function.

   Other reflexes of *ua apparently occur as demonstratives in a number of languages.

<
POc *ua ‘go towards addressee’; (DIR) ‘towards addressee’; (DEM) ‘away from speaker’ (anaphoric)
 NNG: Lusi             (ɣe-ra)wa         (LOC) ‘away from speaker’
 NNG: Lusi             (ne-dua)wa        (PRO) ‘that one remote from speaker’ (cf. _ne-dua_ (PRO) ‘away from speaker’)
 NNG: Bariai           oa                (ADN) (away from speaker, anaphoric)
 NNG:     Manam           (ena)wa           (ADN) (3)
 PT:      Saliba          -wa               (ADN ENCL) (anaphoric)
 PT:      Kiriwina        -we               (ADN AFFIX) ‘away from speaker’
 PT:      ’Ala’ala        uʔa               (PRO) (3)
 Mic:     Kosraean        æ                 (ADN, POST) (anaphoric)
 Mic:     Mokilese        -wa               (ADN ENCL) (anaphoric SG)
 Mic:     Puluwatese      (ye)we            (ADN, POST) (anaphoric)
 Mic:     Woleaian        we                (ADN, POST) (anaphoric SG)
 Mic:     Ulithian        -wē              (ADN ENCL) (anaphoric SG)
>

286   Malcolm Ross

   Forms reflecting POc *watu are listed below. It is tempting to reconstruct this as *uatu
in view of its probable relationship to *ua, discussed below. However, the reflexes listed
below point to POc *watu, even if this perhaps reflects pre-POc *uatu.

   Irregular loss of initial *w- is reflected in New Caledonian and Central Pacific (Fij and
Pn) languages, which reflect *atu for expected **watu. POc *w is lost regularly in all
positions in Hoava and Roviana, word-initially in Gela and Bugotu, and sporadically in
Mota and NE Ambae and other NCV languages.

<
POc *watu ‘go towards addressee’; (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Adm: Aua               -wau               (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 NNG: Yabem             -wàʔ               ‘go (to addressee)’
 NNG: Adzera            waʔ-               ‘go out’
 PT:     Motu           vasi               ‘go:2/3’
 MM:     Hoava          atu                ‘go (to addressee)’
 MM:     Roviana        atu-atu            (INTERJECTION) (implying movement away, of speaker or addressee)
 SES:    Gela           (g)atu             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SES:    Bugotu         atu                (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SES:    Kwaio          ka[ʔ]u             (DIR) ‘thither’
 SES:    Lau            kou                (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SES:    Longgu         hou                (DIR) ‘thither’
 SES:    Arosi          wou                (DIR) ‘thither’
 SES:    Sa’a           wau                ‘there’
 NCV: Mota              at                 ‘outwards or away from speaker’s point of reference’
 NCV: NE Ambae          -atu               ‘towards addressee, towards past/future deictic centre’ (lexicalised in some compounds)
 NCal: Nemi             -ec                (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:    Kiribati       wati               (DIR) ‘away, hence’
 Mic:    Kosraean       -ot                (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Mic:    Marshallese    wac                (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Mic:    Mokilese       -wɛ                (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Mic:    Puluwatese     -waw               (DIR) ‘towards addressee’
 Fij:    Wayan          ati                (DIR) ‘away from speaker towards addressee or elsewhere’
 Fij:      Nabukelevu     atu            (DIR) ‘outwards or away from speaker’s point of reference’
 Pn:       Tongan         atu            (DIR) ‘away from speaker towards addressee or elsewhere; onward in time’
 Pn:       Niuean         atu            (DIR) ‘away from speaker towards addressee’
 Pn:       Samoan         atu            (DIR) ‘away from speaker towards addressee’
>

                                Talking about space: terms of location and direction    287


   Reflexes of *ua and *watu have a distribution which roughly matches major subgroups:
*ua is found throughout Western Oceanic, *watu elsewhere. But the distribution is
imperfect. Possible reflexes of *ua occur in Southeast Solomonic and Fijian (and
apparently as demonstratives in Micronesian). Reflexes of *watu occur in a few Western
Oceanic languages. And reflexes of both forms appear in the Admiralties. Despite these
imperfections, however, the distribution of the two forms is quite different from that of the
other deictic directional verbs, where geography plays no significant role. It seems
legitimate to suggest that both forms occurred in POc, and that as POc broke up and
diversified, one form or the other tended to win out on an areal basis.

   Why did POc have the two forms *ua and *watu? Evidently, as hinted by Blust (ACD,
under the entry for PAn *-Cu ‘near addressee’), *watu represents an innovation whereby
the POc demonstrative morpheme *-tu ‘near addressee’ was added to *ua, stretching it to
the canonic CVCV shape of POc morphemes. An obvious alternative suggestion is that
*ua represents the short form of *watu in the same way as *ma and *la represent the short
forms of *mai (p.281) and *lako (see below). This is unlikely, however, as the external
evidence indicates that the inherited POc form was *ua, and the fairly neat geographic
distribution of *ua and *watu is very different from the scattered, interlaced distributions
of *mai and *ma and of *lako and *la.


8.3.4.5 ‘Go away to’

   Just as POc *mai ‘come’ had a short form *ma, so POc lako ‘go’ had the short form *la.
Again, reflexes of both occur as verbs and as directional enclitics, and each probably had
both functions in POc, viz. *mai, *ma glossed as (V) ‘come’ and (DIR) ‘towards speaker’
and *lako, *la glossed as (V) ‘go (to)’ and (DIR) ‘away from speaker’. In some languages,
a reflex of *lako or *la occurs as the second element of one or more compounds, and these
are again taken to be reflexes of an earlier final verb or directional enclitic.

<
PMP *lako ‘go’
POc *lako, *la (V)‘go (to)’; (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Adm: Mussau              la             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Adm: Mussau              lao            ‘go to’ (la in compounds)
 Adm:    Loniu            -la            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Adm:    Loniu            -lɛ            ‘go to’
 Adm:    Kele             la             ‘go to’
 NNG: Gitua               lago           ‘go’
 NNG: Mangap              -la            ‘go’
 NNG: Mangap              -sa-la         (VF) ‘ascend away from speaker’
 NNG: Sio                 lo             ‘go’
 NNG: Takia               la             ‘move away from speaker’; ‘go round the island’
 NNG:        Manam               laʔo            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 NNG:        Manam               -la[ʔo]         ‘move away’
 PT:         Kiriwina            -la             ‘go (to some place away from here)’
 PT:         Tawala              -nae            ‘go away’
 PT:         Gumawana            -na             (DIR) ‘away from speaker and addressee’
 PT:         Saliba              lao             ‘go across’
 PT:         Sinaugoro           iaɣo            ‘go’
 PT:         Sinaugoro           -a              (preverbal clitic) ‘away from speaker and addressee’[30]
 PT:         Motu                la              ‘go away’
 MM:         Tigak               inaŋ            ‘go away’
 MM:         Notsi               la              ‘go’
 MM:         Banoni              nau             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 MM:         Torau               lao             ‘go’
 MM:         Babatana            ka              (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 MM:         Hoava               la              ‘go away from speaker and addressee’
 MM:         Zabana              lao             ‘go’
 MM:         Kokota              lao             ‘go’
 SES:        Bauro               raɣo            ‘go’
 NCV:        Mota                lago            ‘step, stretch the legs’
 NCV:        Raga                lago            ‘walk, travel’
 NCV:        Sakao               la(m)           ‘come’ (from POc *lako + *mai)
 SV:         Sye                 (ve)laɣ         ‘go ahead’ (ve ‘go’)
 NCal:       Cèmuhî              -lɛ             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:        Kiribati            nako            ‘go’
 Mic:        Kosraean            -læ             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:        Marshallese         lɯbk            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:        Mokilese            -la             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:        Puluwatese          -lo             (DIR) ‘away, south’
 Mic:        Woleaian            rax             (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Mic:        Ulithian            loxo            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Fij:        Bauan               lako            ‘go’
 Fij:        Bauan               la(i)           ‘go and …’
 Fij:        Wayan               la(i)           ‘go and …’
>

[30] This is an enclitic to the preverbal tense/aspect/mood marker. It marks the location of the action relative
   to the speaker and addressee. To reflects the use of *la with the sense ‘go and …’ in the initial slot of a
   sequential serial verb construction.

288     Malcolm Ross


   It is reasonable to expect that the processes that have created prepositions and relators
from the deictic direction verbs *mai/*ma ‘[come] towards speaker’and *ua ‘[go] towards
addressee’ may also have created them from *lako/*la‘go (to)’, (DIR) ‘away from speaker’.
Although there are a good many prepositional reflexes, many of them are problematic
because they have more than one possible source. In the set below, it is probable that some
items reflect POc *lalo-, *lo-, *la- (N LOC) ‘inside’ rather than POc *lako, *la ‘go (to)’,
(DIR) ‘away from speaker’.

                                 Talking about space: terms of location and direction      289

__pre__
 1. POc *lako, *la ‘go (to)’; (DIR) ‘away from speaker’ (p.287)
 2. POc *lalo-, *lo-, *la- (N LOC) ‘inside’ (p.246)
 Adm: Loniu                 lo               (PREP) ‘in’
 NNG: Arawe                 lu-O:, li-O:     (PREP w N PERS, PRO PERS) locative, allative
 NNG: Mamusi                la               (PREP) general
 PT:     Motu               lalo             ‘the inside, the mind’
 MM: Tigak                  lo               (PREP w N COM, N LOC) locative, temporal
 MM: Tiang                  lə               (PREP) locative, temporal
 MM: Kara                   la               (PREP) locative
 MM: Nalik                  la               (PREP w N LOC) locative, temporal
 MM: Notsi                  la(n)            (PREP) locative
 MM: Tangga                 lo               (PREP w N PERS, PRO PERS) locative
 MM: Konomala               lə               (PREP w PLC, N LOC) locative, temporal
 MM: Label                  la               (PREP w N LOC) locative, temporal
 MM: Bilur                  la               (PREP w N LOC) locative
 NCV: Mota                  lo               (PREP) ‘in, inside’
 NCV: Tasiko                lo               (PREP) ‘in, inside’
 NCV: Mwotlap               lV-              (PREP prefixed to N LOC) locative, allative
 NCV: NE Ambae              lo               (PREP w N LOC) locative
 NCV: Maewo                 le               (PREP) ‘in, inside’
 SV:     Lenakel            le               (PREP) locative, allative
 Mic:    Marshallese        (i)lo            (PREP) locative
 Mic:    Puluwat            le-              (PREP) ‘in, because of’

    Formally, items reflecting *lo presumably reflect *lo-, one of the short forms of *lalo-.
It is tempting to attribute all forms reflecting *la to the short form of *lako, but there is
evidence against this. In Lihir (MM), la is a short form of lilie- ‘inside’ (reflecting *lalo-),
as we find phrases like the one below where la must be a (relational) noun:

__pre__
    i       la     liom
    PREP    inside house
    ‘in the house’

Semantically, all the reflexes listed above are locative, which sits better with a derivation
from *lalo- ‘inside’ than one from *lako ‘go (to)’, from which one would expect an
allative. But it is possible that some reflexes represent a conflation of the two etyma.


8.3.4.6 ‘Go away’

   POc *pano, reconstructed below, perhaps had two uses. Firstly, it was a deictic
directional verb meaning ‘go away (from speaker), depart’. Evidence for this meaning is
also widespread in non-Oceanic languages (Blust, ACD). Reflexes of both *lako/*la and
*pano occur as directional enclitics with the meaning ‘away from speaker’. However, there
is evidence that as verbs they had different meanings. Most verbal reflexes of *lako ‘go
(to)’ have a valency which implies or requires a destination (expressed, for example, as a
prepositional phrase), whilst those of *pano are intransitive.

290    Malcolm Ross


   As noted in §3.3, some reflexes of POc *pano indicate that it was also a geographic
directional verb meaning ‘move in a transverse direction’, contrasting with ‘go up, go
inland’ and ‘go down, go seawards’. However, it is not entirely clear whether this usage
occurred in POc. On one hand, there is a non-Oceanic reflex with this meaning, namely
Aralle-Tabulahan (South Sulawesi) pano (DIR) ‘along the level’ (McKenzie 1997). On the
other hand, within Oceanic the meaning ‘move in a transverse direction’ is reflected only
in North–Central Vanuatu and New Caledonian languages. There are two interpretations of
these data: either there were independent parallel innovations in South Sulawesi and
Remote Oceanic, or this usage was inherited into POc but happens to have been lost in
Western Oceanic and Southeast Solomonic.

<
PMP *panaw ‘go away, depart, leave on a journey’ (ACD)
POc *pano ‘go away’; (DIR) ‘away from speaker’; ? ‘move in a transverse direction’
 MM:    Vitu             vano            ‘go (away)’
 MM:     Harua           mano            ‘go away’ (see text below)
 SES:    Bugotu          vano            ‘go, come’; (DIR) ‘thither’; ‘beyond, more’ (used in comparisons)
 SES:    Gela            vano            ‘away, further off; to go’
 SES:    Arosi           hano            ‘make a journey, set out; go’
 NCV: Mota               van(o)          ‘go, come’
 NCV: Mwotlap            van             (DIR) ‘thither’
 NCV: NE Ambae           vano            ‘move in transverse direction’
 NCV: Merei              va, van(a)      ‘move in transverse direction’
 NCV: Tamambo            vano            ‘go away from speaker’
 NCV: Lonwolwol          van             ‘go, pass (and so also of time); continue (to do s.t.)’; (DIR) ‘away’
 NCV: SE Ambrym          haen            (N) ‘going, departure’
 SV:     Lenakel         -pən            (DIR) ‘distant’
 SV:     Lenakel         vən, (a)vən     ‘go, walk’
 SV:     Anejom          -pan            (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SV:     Anejom          han, (a)pan     ‘go’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa           ve              (DIR) ‘in a transverse direction’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa           o               ‘go’
 NCal: Nyelâyu           -van            (DIR) ‘in a transverse direction’
 NCal: Nyelâyu           van             ‘go’
 NCal: Nemi              en              (DIR) ‘in a transverse direction’
 NCal: Nemi              hen             ‘go’
 NCal: Tinrin            (ã)va           ‘there, the other side of stream’
 NCal: Xârâcùù           fɛ              (DEM) ‘away from speaker’
 NCal: Iaai              hããŋ            (DIR) ‘away from speaker crosswise’[31]
 Pn:     Niuean          fano            ‘go’
 Pn:     Samoan          fano            ‘(of time) be gone, past; perish’
 Pn:        Nanumean          fano               ‘go’
 Pn:        Rennellese        hano               ‘go; depending on, according to; on and on; little by little; one by one’
 Pn:        Maori             ɸano               ‘go, proceed; lead, of a road; verge towards; be on the point of; act, behave’
>

   The Harua form mano appears to reflect the application of the PMP Actor focus
morpheme *‹um› to the root *panaw (vol. 1, p.29), suggesting that an alternation between
*pano and *mano may have survived in POc.

[31] It is possible that Iaai hããŋ does not belong here but is cognate with PPn *aŋe ‘along; away from
   speaker and addressee’

                                   Talking about space: terms of location and direction          291


   POc *pano evidently had a short form *pa, giving a pair analogous to *mai/*ma and
*lako/*la (pp.281, 287).

<
POc *pa ‘go away; move in a transverse direction’; (V AUX) ‘go and …’
 NNG:     Lukep (Pono)     pa             ‘go’
 NNG:     Adzera           fa             ‘go’
 PT:      Sinaugoro        va(riɣo)       ‘go down’
 PT:      Motu             ha             (V AUX) ‘go and …’
 SES:     Gela             va             (V AUX) ‘be going to …’
 NCV:     Mota             va             ‘go, come’; (V AUX) ‘go on …-ing’
 NCV:     Araki            v̈a            ‘go; go in a direction other than north or south’
 NCV:     Lonwolwol        va             ‘go’
 NCV:     SE Ambrym        ha             ‘go, leave, depart’
 NCV:     Paamese          vā             ‘go’
 NCV:     Nguna            vā             ‘go’ (short form of vano, Clark 1996)
 SV:      Sye              -mpe           (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 SV:      Sye              -ve            ‘go’
>

   The meanings of reflexes of *pa agree with those of *pano, and the function of the
Motu, Sinaugoro,[32] Gela, and Mota reflexes of *pa (in three different subgroups) as a
preverbal auxiliary is similar to that of the Sinaugoro reflexes of *ma and *la above. Clark
(1996) notes that Nguna vā ‘go’ is also described as a short form of vano. Paton (1973)
describes Lonwolwol va as a short form of van ‘go, pass’, and therefore as a reflex of POc
*pano, but Blust (ACD) argues that his inference is unjustified since original medial nasals
are otherwise retained in Lonwolwol. If, however, va reflects POc *pa, the objection
disappears.

[32] Unlike Sinaugoro -ma ‘towards speaker’ and -a ‘away from speaker’, which still survive as preverbal
   auxiliaries, Sinaugoro va occurs only in lexicalised compounds.

   This leaves a loose end. Blust (ACD) takes the cognate set above to reflect PCEMP *ba
‘go, go away, walk’. Clark (1996), on the other hand, infers that the set above and PCEMP
*ba are etymologically separate. It is true that the forms attributed to POc *pa above could
reflect PCEMP *ba: there is no phonological objection to this. But there are just a few
Oceanic forms which reflect a POc locomotion verb *ba ‘go’ (Tolai [MM] ba ‘tread, go’,
Talise [SES] ba ‘go’), and it seems likely that this *ba reflects PCEMP *ba, whilst POc
*pa is the short form of *pano.

   There are a number of apparent prepositional reflexes of *pano/*pa ‘go away’, but
most are very problematic, as there are two other possible sources of the items listed.


292    Malcolm Ross

These are POc *pani ‘give’, (PREPV) ‘benefactive’ and PWOc *pwa (PREP) ‘instrumental,
comitative’.[33] There is also evidence of conflation.

[33] As well as the data given here, the reconstruction of *pwa is supported by three Meso-Melanesian
   reflexes from New Ireland which only have instrumental and comitative uses: Tigak pe, pa-P:, Kara pa-
   P: (both instrumental, comitative), and Label pa (comitative). The PWOc instrumental preposition *pwa
   was reconstructed for some interstage later than POc as *pa by Ross (1988:106).

   The clearest piece of evidence that *pano/*pa played a role in the history of some of the
items in the set below is that Hoava pa behaves as a relator, i.e. it occurs before a
preposition.

__pre__
      ria    pu tata mae pa tani        sa   gato
      D:3PL REL close come R PREP:3SG ART:SG tree
      ‘they who come close to the tree’

Relators reflect erstwhile deictic directional verbs (Ross 2003), and so *pano/*pa is the
most likely candidate for the ancestor of Hoava pa. Other probable straightforward reflexes
of *pano/*pa are the Kiriwina, Roviana and Nguna forms, and perhaps the Label locative
preposition ha, as it contrasts with instrumental pa (from PWOc *pwa).

   The NNG items below, all from the Vitiaz Strait area, probably reflect conflation of the
POc benefactive prepositional verb *pani and a PWOc instrumental preposition *pwa
(Ross 1988:106–108, 112–115).

   Bound items below are shown with the suffix paradigm that they take, one of object
(O:), disjunctive (D:) or possessor (P:). The gloss of each item is formulated as carefully as
the data allow, but should not be treated too seriously, as there are likely to be gaps in the
glosses.

__pre__
 1. POc *pano, *pa ‘go away; move in a transverse direction’ (p.289)
 2. POc *pani ‘give’, (PREPV) benefactive (Pawley 1973, Lichtenberk 1985b)
 3. PWOc *pwa (PREP) instrumental, comitative
 NNG: Kove                 pa, pa-O:       (PREP) locative, temporal, allative, ablative
 NNG: Bariai               pa-O:           (PREP) locative, allative, ablative, benefactive
 NNG: Malai                pa-D:           (PREP) allative, instrumental
 NNG: Gitua                pa-O:           (PREP) temporal, allative, benefactive, ablative,
                                             instrument
 NNG: Malalamai            pa-O:           (PREP) allative, benefactive
 NNG: Lukep                pa-O:           (PREP) allative, benefactive
 NNG: Malasanga            pa-O:           (PREP) benefactive, comitative
 NNG: Roinji               pa-P:/O:        (PREP) allative, benefactive
 NNG: Sio                  pa-O:           (PREP) allative, benefactive
 NNG: Tami                 pa, pa-D:       (PREP) temporal, benefactive
 NNG: Mangap               pa, pa-O:       (PREP) locative, benefactive, ablative,
                                             instrumental
 NNG: Rauto                pa              (PREP w N PERS) locative, allative
                           pe              (PREP w N COM, PRO PERS) locative,
                                             allative, instrumental
 PT:     Kiriwina          va              (PREP) ‘in the direction of’
 MM:     Tiang             pa-P:           (PREP) locative, instrumental, comitative

                               Talking about space: terms of location and direction     293

 MM:      Nalik             pana            (PREP) locative, instrumental, comitative
 MM:      Label             ha              (PREP) locative
 MM:      Roviana           pa              (PREP) locative, allative
 MM:      Hoava             pa              (R, PREP w PLC, non-human N) locative, allative
 NCV:     Nguna             pa(ki)          (PREP w PLC) allative

   Functionally and semantically the members of the small cognate set below resemble
reflexes of POc *lako, but phonologically they do not reflect it. The medial consonant is
reconstructed on the basis of Yabem low tone, which reflects the loss of a Proto Huon Gulf
voiced obstruent, probably either *v or *ɣ, lenis reflexes of POc *p or *k. Of these, both
are lost intervocalically in Takia, but only *k is lost in the Admiralties languages.

<
POc *[y]aku ‘go (to)’; (DIR) ‘away from speaker’
 Adm: Loniu                  yaw           (DIR) ‘away’
 Adm:    Kele                aw            ‘go away’
 Adm:    Titan               aw            ‘go away, leave’
 NNG: Yabem                  -yà           ‘go (to her/him/them)’
 NNG: Takia                  -au           ‘go (from the speaker)’
>

8.3.4.7 ‘Away from a specified point’

    POc *tani was a prepositional verb, reconstructed by Pawley (1973). It was not deictic,
i.e. not oriented with regard to speaker or hearer, and so strictly does not belong here. It
was transitive, and the object of the verb was the point of orientation from which
movement takes place. I include it because its reflexes have become deictic directional
adverbs in a few languages.

<
POc *tani (PREPV) ‘(go) away from’
 PT:      Motu             tani             (PREPV) ‘away from’
 PT:      Mekeo (East)     -ani             ‘away from’ (in compounds: fossilised DIR)
 NCV: Merlav               dani-            (PREPV) ‘away from’
 NCV: NE Ambae             dene             (PREPV) ‘away from’
 NCV: Sesake               deni-            (PREPV) ‘away from’
 Fij:     Bauan            tani             (DIR) ‘away, elsewhere’
 Fij:     Boumaa           tani             (DIR) ‘away’
>

A note on sources

294   Malcolm Ross

   In addition to the sources of lexical items listed in Appendix 1, a number of grammars
and other grammatical sources were consulted during the research on which this chapter is
based. Other than my fieldnotes, these are: NE Ambae (Hyslop 2001), Anejom (Lynch 2000b),
Araki (François 2002), Arosi (Lynch & Horoi 2002), Awad Bing (Bennett & Bennett 1998),
Bali-Vitu (Ross 2002a), Banoni (Lynch & Ross 2002), Bariai (Gallagher 1998),
Bauan Fijian (Churchward 1973, Schütz 1985), Boumaa Fijian (Dixon 1988),
Bugotu (Ivens 1933, author’s fieldnotes), Cèmuhî (Lynch 2002a), Drehu (Moyse-Faurie 1993),
Erromangan (Sye) (Crowley 1998), Gapapaiwa (McGuckin 2002), Gela (Crowley 2002a),
Gumawana (Olson 1992), Halia (Allen 1987), Hoava (Davis 1997), Iaai (Ozanne-Rivierre 2004),
Ifira-Mele (Clark 2002), Kairiru (Wivell 1981b, Ross 2002e), Kele (Ross 2002f),
Kiriwina (Senft 1986), Kiribati (Groves, Groves & Jacobs 1985), Kokota (Palmer 1999),
Kosraean (Lee 1975), Kwaio (Keesing 1985), Kwamera (Lindstrom 1986), Label (Peekel 1930),
Lenakel (Lynch 1978c), Lewo (Early 1994a), Longgu (Hill 1992, 1997), Loniu (Hamel 1994),
Lukep (Pono) (D’Jernes & D’Jernes n.d.), Lusi (Counts 1969),
Manam (Lichtenberk 1983), Mangap-Mbula (Bugenhagen 1995), Marquesan (Lynch 2002b),
Mekeo (Jones 1998), Merei (Chung 1998), Minaveha (Lovell 1994), Mokilese
(Harrison 1976), Motu (Lister-Turner & Clark 1954b), Mussau (Ross 2002b), Mwotlap
(Crowley 2002b), Nadrogaa Fijian (Geraghty 2002), Nakanai (Johnston 1980), Nalik
(Volker 1998), Nêlêmwa (Bril 1994), Nguna (Schütz 1969), Niuafo’ou (Early 2002), Notsi
(Erickson & Erickson 1992), Nyelâyu (Ozanne-Rivierre 1998), Paamese (Crowley 1982),
Pileni (Næss, forthcoming), Puluwatese (Lynch 2002c), Ramoaaina (Davies & Fritzell 1992),
Roviana (Corston-Oliver 2002), Saliba (Margetts, forthcoming), Samoan (Mosel & Hovdaugen 1992),
Siar (Ross 2002c), Sinaugoro (Tauberschmidt 1999), Sio (Clark & Clark 1987),
Sobei (Sterner & Ross 2002), Sudest (Anderson & Ross 2002), Tamambo
(Jauncey 1997), Tawala (Ezard 1997), Tigak (Beaumont 1979), Tinrin (Osumi 1995),
Tobati (Donohue 2002), Tolai (Mosel 1982, 1984, Rinderknecht 1987), Tongan
(Churchward 1953), Ulithian (Lynch 2002d), Wailevu Fijian (Ritsuko Kikusawa pers. comm.),
Wayan (Pawley & Sayaba, 2003), Woleaian (Sohn 1975), Xârâcùù
(Moyse-Faurie 1995), Yabem (Dempwolff 1939, Zahn 1940, Ross 2002d), Zabana
(Fitzsimons 1989).



9               Time

9.1 Introduction

   The kinds of time and duration expressions that we might expect to find in a language
are listed below. This categorisation could probably be applied to any language, Oceanic or
otherwise, as it appears to have its basis in human cognition and universal experience
rather than in the vagaries of English. Part 1 also indicates the structure of this chapter.
Why part 2 is not part of that structure is explained below.

 <ol>
  <li>Times
   <ol>
    <li>Undirected:
     <ol>
      <li>times within cycles: ‘at midnight’, ‘at dawn’, ‘at midday’, ‘at full moon’,
            ‘at yam harvest’, ‘in daylight’, ‘in the morning’/‘in the afternoon’/‘in the
            evening’/‘in the night’;</li>
      <li>labelled sets of times within cycles: names of seasons or lunar months in a
            year, names of periods or days in a lunar month.</li>
     </ol>
    </li>
    <li>Directed:
     <ol start="3">
      <li>purely deictic: ‘now’, ‘today’;</li>
      <li>vague distance: ‘in the past’/‘in the future’, ‘earlier’/‘later’, ‘long ago’;</li>
      <li>specified distance within a cycle or measured by cycles: ‘last night’/
              ‘tonight’, ‘today’/‘yesterday’/‘tomorrow’, ‘two days ago’/‘two days
              hence’.</li>
     </ol>
    </li>
   </ol>
  </li>
  <li>Durations
   <ol start="3">
    <li>from one time to another:
     <ol start="6">
      <li>one time specified: ‘since yesterday’, ‘until tomorrow’;</li>
      <li>both times specified: ‘from yam harvest to taro harvest’;</li>
     </ol>
    </li>
    <li>length of time: ‘for a long time’.</li>
   </ol>
  </li>
 </ol>

296     Malcolm Ross


    The rest of this introduction explains this categorisation. The reader is asked to forgive
the immediate introduction of two pieces of syntactic jargon, as they are indispensable to
this explanation. Times and durations can be expressed in most (if not all) languages as
syntactic time adjuncts, e.g. He came last week and stayed for two days or He was sick
yesterday. In many languages these adjuncts interact with the semantics of the predicate,
e.g. came, stayed or was sick to produce the temporal meaning of the sentence.

    One such interaction is illustrated in English sentences with the time adjunct yesterday.
In He worked yesterday or He was sick yesterday, the event lasts for a period of time—for
all or part of yesterday. But in He came yesterday, the event is to all intents and purposes
punctiliar and yesterday is construed as a point in time.[1] Because many time expressions
can be construed as denoting either a point of time or a period of time, no attempt is made
under 1 to distinguish between points and periods: both are treated simply as ‘times’.

    There is a clear distinction, however, between the time expressions in 1 and the duration
expressions in 2. A duration expression denotes a period which begins at one point in time
and ends at another. Thus I can say He worked from midday until midnight or He was sick
from midday until midnight but not *He arrived from midday until midnight. Some
predicates of punctiliar meaning do co-occur with a duration expression, but the duration
enforces a durative or an iterative construal of the predicate. Thus if I say He came from
midday until midnight, this is nonsensical as a punctiliar event, but may mean He came
and stayed from midday until midnight. If I say The light flashed at midnight or The light
flashed until dawn, it is the adjunct which determines how the predicate is construed.
Flash is semantically punctiliar and at midnight is a time which can be read as punctiliar,
so the light flashed only once. But until dawn denotes a duration, so The light flashed is
construed as being iterative: the light flashed repeatedly (Jackendoff 1991:40–42).

    The duration expressions in the previous paragraph all entail, explicitly or implicitly
(for until dawn, see below), a beginning point and an end point, but other duration
expressions, are specified as a length of time: for six nights or for a long time.

    In English, times—and the beginnings and ends of durations—may be absolute or they
may be deictic. Absolute expressions are, for example, in 1999 or on 3rd May 2001. In
terms of token frequency, however, the vast majority of English time expressions are
deictic, i.e., relative to the time of speaking or to some other point of time internal to the
discourse which is readily recognised by the addressee.[2] Thus recently, this morning,
tomorrow, two days ago and last year are construed relative to the time of speaking, whilst
earlier, that morning, the next day, two days before and the previous year are construed
relative to some point of time internal to the discourse. Now can be construed either way.
Either the beginning or the end point of a duration may be deictically specified: since
Monday and until tomorrow mean that ‘now’ is respectively the end point and the
beginning point of the time period.

[1] The meaning of yesterday as a period of time can be preserved by a semantic analysis which interprets it
  in this context as at some point of time during yesterday, but I have not come across a language where the
  period-of-time and point-of-time uses of ‘yesterday’ are distinguished in the form of the adjunct, and so
  the assumption here, that the difference between them is one of contextually determined construal, not of
  polysemousness, appears legitimate.

[2] If we think of time as analogous with space, then deictic temporal expressions like ‘recently’ (= ‘a short
  distance in the direction of the past’) are analogous with deictic-geographic expressions like ‘seawards’ (=
  ‘in the direction of the coast’), not with ‘pure’ deictics like ‘there’ or ‘yonder’.

                                                                                   Time    297


   English also has generic time expressions like in the mornings and on weekdays. Many
undirected expressions (1a) which at first sight appear to be absolute are in fact either
deictic or generic, according to context. Expressions like at midnight, on Tuesday or at six
o’clock may specify a point of time, but, as I noted above, their temporal direction—past
or future—is specified by the predicate tense. And such expressions may also be used
generically: The bell rings at midnight.

    Implicit in the previous two paragraphs is the fact that some lexical items used in time
expressions denote parts of cycles. In English, at least, midnight, morning and six o’clock
are parts of the cycle represented by a day, day or Tuesday a part of the cycle represented
by a week, Autumn or September a part of the cycle represented by a year. Such cycles are
the basis of calendars. However, it is important to distinguish between arbitrary and natural
calendrical units. Although the western (Gregorian) calendar grew out of a nature-based
calendar, its units today are arbitrary in that they have boundaries which bear, at best, a
quite indirect relationship to natural cycles. Thus midnight, six o’clock, day (as a unit
stretching from midnight to midnight), Tuesday and September are all arbitrary points or
units. Thus a calendrical year begins (arbitrarily) on 1st January and ends on 31st
December and is made up of arbitarily named calendrical months that occur in a fixed
order. A calendrical month is made up (in the Gregorian calendar) of a predetermined
number of sequentially numbered calendrical days.

    The only natural units observed on a day-to-day basis by western English-speaking
societies in the temperate zones are the seasons. Autumn is a natural unit (for most English-
speakers it does not even have clear natural boundaries, but this is a different matter: a
natural unit may have a defined boundary, as we will see below). The natural calendrical
units that concern us in connection with Oceanic languages are essentially based on four
kinds of cycle: horticultural, floral/faunal, meteorological and astronomical. A cyclic unit,
incidentally, does not necessarily have defined boundaries. There is a distinction in English
between last year, where year is a calendrical unit, and a year ago, where year is a length
of time (Leech 1969:113–114). The same can be true of months and days.

    Absolute time expressions in European languages involve a calendrical unit: in 1999 or
on 3rd May 2001. Traditional Oceanic systems offered no equivalent to these, firstly
because there was no labelling of years like 1999 and secondly because there appears to
have been no use of units within units like on 3rd May 2001, a day of a month within a
month of a labelled year. Traditional labels for months and days were used deictically as
described above like in May or on Tuesday. This means that pre-contact Oceanic systems
had no absolute time expressions.

    Some Oceanic speaking communities, especially in Melanesia, apparently had nothing
resembling a calendrical system. Others, in Micronesia and Polynesia, had naming systems
based on lunar months, with names for the months of the year and sometimes names for
every day of a lunar month. These systems, however, had not proceeded far along the path
towards the arbitrariness of the Gregorian calendar. In some systems all or most of the
month names have a recognisable meaning; in others the origins of the names seem to have
been lost.[3]

[3] A discussion of Oceanic month names will appear in a future volume.

298     Malcolm Ross

    The implications of this discussion can be a little difficult for a western-trained mind to
grasp: the fact that, e.g., a month was a cycle, not a unit, means that months were
conceptualised as the passing of cycles, not as collections of countable units. Whorf
(1956:139) says that ten days in English is ‘an “imaginary”, mentally constructed group’—
“imaginary” because it ‘cannot be objectively experienced’ like ‘ten men on a street
corner’. Foley (1997:205) comments on Whorf’s formulation that the use of a plural
category to express the repetition of temporal cycles is a metaphorical extension from
plural groupings of physical objects. Whorf says that the Hopi do not make this extension:
if they count cycles at all, they do it with ordinal numbers: “first day”, “second day”, and
so on.[4] The situation in traditional Oceanic societies seems to have been similar. This
extract from an oral account of Takia (Karkar Island, NNG) marriage practices as they
were explained by an elderly man in 1987 contains similar insights:[5]

|      All right, and so they waited—in the old times they didn’t know about years. They
|      always kept time by the moon. Thus when they wanted to set a time—when they
|      wanted to set a time, they mentioned the month. But they also didn’t know the names
|      of the months. The moon waned and waxed, that’s all. They would say the months in
|      this way: they would count the months with their hands, they would count them with
|      their fingers. And then they would say, the month of the little finger will come and
|      will die, the next finger will die, and the next and in the fourth month the man and
|      woman will get married. They said this—well—with regard to their saying that they
|      would marry in four months …

   An English time adjunct may interact with the the tense of the predicate. In the
sentences He came last night and He will come tonight the temporal direction (1b)—past
or future—of the adjunct ‘agrees’ with the tense of the predicate. In He came at midnight
and He will come at midnight, however, temporal direction is expressed only by the
predicate tense: at midnight says nothing about temporal direction. If a language expresses
the difference between past and future through the predicate, it will not necessarily be
expressed in the adjunct. Conversely, if there is no tense difference in the predicate, then
the adjunct may well express temporal direction.

    Aspect and mood categories are more widely distributed across major Oceanic
subgroups than tense categories, and it is therefore probable that POc lacked tense but
made extensive use of aspect and mood. Aspect included continuative/habitual, probably
marked by reduplication of the verb stem, and completive (perhaps expressed by a serial
verb construction ending in the verb ‘finish’). Mood distinguished realis and irrealis.
Realis was used for past and present events considered to have occurred or to be occurring,
irrealis for future events and all events considered not to have actually occurred (e.g.
conditionals). From the lack of tense, we might expect temporal direction to be marked
more often on time expressions than it is in English, and this is true in that the temporal
prefix *na- marks an expression as past (p.324).

    Much play has been made in the linguistic literature of the idea that by metaphorical
extension spatial relations form the model for other grammatical patterns (Gruber 1965,
Anderson 1971, Jackendoff 1976, 1983, 1991, 1992). This has often been emphasised with
regard to time (H. Clark 1973, Jackendoff 1983:189–193, Jackendoff 1992). However,
when we examine the parallels between space and time in English (at the corner/at six
o’clock, in Canberra/in 1999, from Sydney to Canberra/from Tuesday to Thursday), then
look for them in Oceanic languages, we find that they do not loom nearly as large in
Oceania because so many English parallels depend on the use of calendrical units. Even so,
there are some parallels between space and time in Oceanic languages.

[4] Foley (1997:207) is careful to point out that Whorf is not talking about thought per se but about the kinds
  of conceptual systems that people use to construe experience.

[5] The text was recorded, transcribed and translated by Mait Kilil and myself.

                                                                                                  Time        299


    Semantically, there is an analogy between the spatial domain and the temporal domain,
if we take it that time is a line running from past to future through a deictic point, usually
the time of speaking. However, the analogy is limited: space is three-dimensional, but time
is only a single dimension. In this analogy, there are parallels between a specific location
and a specific time, between generic location (‘at home’) and generic time (‘at night’), and
between a path (‘from Sydney to Canberra’) and a duration (‘from midday until
midnight’). These parallels are realised in Oceanic languages by the use of similar
grammar for both domains (pp.320–321). More specifically, there is a deictic parallel
between ‘here’ and ‘now’, but other deictic parallels are less obvious, especially in
Oceania, where spatial deixis tends to be person-oriented (Ch. 8, §3.4.1).[6] There is also a
parallel between temporal directionality (past vs future) and geographic (e.g. ‘seawards’ vs
‘inland’, ‘up’ vs ‘down’) or intrinsic directionality (e.g. ‘to the back’ vs ‘to the front’), as
well as between temporal distance (‘long ago’) and spatial distance (‘far away’). However,
the distance parallels are limited, as expressions of spatial distance do not also involve
direction, whereas expressions of temporal distance typically include past or future
denotation (‘earlier’/‘later’). The spatial domain typically lacks anything analogous to the
lexicalisation of temporal distances or times within natural cycles (‘today’ vs ‘yesterday’
vs ‘tomorrow’, ‘midnight’ vs ‘morning’ vs ’midday’).

[6] Note that the parallel between ‘then’ and ‘there’ is anaphoric, not deictic, and so does not belong here.

    The remainder of this chapter is devoted to reconstructing temporal expressions. It is
organised on the basis of the listing under ‘Time’, part A, of the list above. Part B of that
list deals with duration. One would expect most duration expressions to be expressed
grammatically, and at most a few like ‘for a little while’ and ‘for a long time’ to be
lexicalised. However, I have been unable to reconstruct any lexicalised POc duration
expressions. I have attempted to find a term for ‘time’ in the sense of duration (as in ‘for a
long time’). Oceanic languages clearly have terms with this meanings, but they do not
form a cognate set. A number of languages, however, use the reflex of POc *boŋi (p.305)
in this sense, and it is possible that this was a POc usage too.

9.2 Undirected times: times within cycles

   Cyclic times recognised in Oceanic languages are all natural, as noted above. They
include times of day, phases of the moon and seasons of the year marked by a variety of
natural events. Some languages also have more detailed naming systems for lunar months
and for the days within a lunar month.


9.2.1 The day and times of day: synchronic overview

   In most Oceanic languages, the times of the day form a rough taxonomy, with the
primary and secondary taxa as follows:


300    Malcolm Ross

<ol><li>night</li>
    <li>daytime
    <ol><li>early morning, from dawn to 9 or 10 a.m.</li>
        <li>middle of the day, from 9 or 10 a.m. to about 3 p.m.</li>
        <li>late afternoon and evening, from 3 p.m. to sunset</li>
    </ol></li>
</ol>

   The first-order division is, as we might expect, into night and daytime. I have opted to
put ‘night’ first, as POc *boŋi ‘night’ also served as the word for the twenty-four hour
period. In Fijian, for example, certain feasts have names like boŋi-lima, literally ‘five
nights’, denoting the fact that they last five days. In Hawaiian (Pn), the day began at
sunset, and this is perhaps the case elsewhere in Oceania. The Motu (PT) expression
varani hanuaboi (‘yesterday’ + ‘night’) is interesting in this regard, as it means ‘two nights
ago’. That is, the night belonging to yesterday is the one that precedes it rather than the one
that follows it.

    The second-order division only affects daytime, which has three parts. The periods 2(a)
and 2(c) are roughly the first and the last three hours of daylight respectively and are
usually denoted by single-word terms. Curiously, there is often no word for the middle six
hours of daylight, and it could be argued that 2(b) should be omitted from the taxonomy
above. However, there is often a term glossed ‘midday’ in the sources, and this seems to
refer to a period of time rather than to noon as a point of time.

    The clock times given above are of course vague. The salient feature of 2(a) and 2(c) is
that the sun is not high in the sky during these periods (sunrise is shortly before 6 a.m.,
sunset shortly after 6 p.m. in areas close to the equator). One of the difficulties in setting
up the illustrative taxonomies below, however, is that most sources are even vaguer. In fact
I have found no source which sets out a taxonomy of times of night and day, and those
below are culled from dictionaries, most of which use the terms ‘morning’, ‘afternoon’ and
‘evening’ without much further specification. The term for 2(a) is often glossed ‘morning’,
but so, often, are terms for the period immediately before dawn, which is part of ‘night’.
‘Afternoon’ and ‘evening’ are both used for 2(b) and 2(c), and, as I mentioned above,
‘midday’ sometimes seems to denote 2(b).

    The sources give a plethora of third-order terms for parts of the day, and a few
corresponding terms for parts of the night (which I also treat as third-order terms, despite
the lack of second-order terms here). Generally, these terms denote periods of time
clustered around the boundaries between the first-order terms. Thus commonly occurring
terms for parts of the night denote ‘cockcrow’ and the period between cockcrow and dawn
(sometimes divided into two, the second denoting the time of pre-dawn light). There are
sometimes terms for the immediate post-dawn period, and at the other end of the day for
twilight and dusk. Typically, third-order terms are phrasal.

    Below I give taxonomies drawn from Drehet (Adm), Takia (NNG), Gapapaiwa (PT),
Kiriwina (PT), Motu (PT), Gela (SES), Marshallese (Mic), Wayan (Fij) and Niuean (Pn).
Their distribution is a little skewed, a fact determined by the available sources. They
probably vary considerably in terms of completeness and accuracy. The grammatical
category of each term is given where it is available, and where I can identify the meanings
of the parts of a compound, I have done so. Sources are given in Appendix 1.

                                                                                         Time    301

__pre__
Drehet (Adm)
 night                        [kom]piŋ N
    midnight                  kxikilie-piŋ ADV (kxikilie ‘middle’, piŋ ‘night’)
    pre-dawn                  hepwehe-laŋ ADV (laŋ ‘daytime’)
 daytime                      laŋ N
 morning                      kxepiŋ N (piŋ ‘night’)
    dawn                      koŋ-tupurip ADV (koŋ ‘place’)
    early morning             kxekxepiŋ N (kxepiŋ ‘morning’)
    (at) sunrise              aŋ imi liki ADVP (aŋ ‘sun’, imi ‘come’, liki ‘up top’)
                              aŋ yaʔaŋ ADVP (aŋ ‘sun’, yaʔaŋ ‘go through’)
 middle of day                —
   (at) mid-morning           aŋ tikimiŋ mwalaŋ ADVP (aŋ ‘sun’, tikimiŋ ‘be present’, mwalaŋ ‘hill’)
   (at) noon                  aŋ imi kxikilie koŋ ADVP (aŋ ‘sun’, imi ‘come’, kxikilie ‘middle’, koŋ
                              ‘place’)
 afternoon/evening            piyih N
    (at) sunset               aŋ ilie pwiniek ADV (aŋ ‘sun’, ilie ‘go’, pwiniek ‘down below’)
                              upayah V

__pre__
Takia (NNG)
 night                        tidom N
 daylight/daytime             ad, adad N (ad ‘sun’)
 sunrise to sunset            nal N
 morning[7]                     tidomlom ADV (tidom ‘night’, lo ‘in’, mi ‘only’)
    dawn                      salso, sasulo
 midday                       ad uyan, adian NP (ad ‘sun’, uyan ‘good’)
   noon                       ad biben NP (ad ‘sun’, biben ‘its heart’)
 afternoon/evening[8]           gurai, guraian (? < gurai uyan ‘evening’ + ‘good’) N, NP

__pre__
Gapapaiwa (PT)
 night                        didibara N
    midnight                  pom baso NP (pom apparently archaic ‘night’)
    just before sunrise       mara didibarai ADVP (mara ‘time’, didibara ‘night’, -i POSTP)
 daylight                 gabudara (archaic: ‘sun, day, time’) N, madeɣa N
 morning, sunrise to 10 a.m.
                          boiboi N
    sunrise, dawn             mara tomtom (mara ‘time’, tomtom ‘k.o. seaweed’)
    just after sunrise        mara boiboi (mara ‘time’, boiboi ‘morning’)
 midday                       madeɣa pu NP (madeɣa ‘daylight’, pu ‘middle’)
 afternoon/evening, about 3 to 7 p.m.
                        ravi ADV
      about 3 to 5 p.m.       ravi madeɣinai ADVP (ravi ‘evening’, madeɣina ‘its light’, -i POSTP)
      about 5 to 7 p.m.       ravi didibarai ADVP (ravi ‘evening’, didibara ‘night’, -i POSTP)
      sundown                 ravi pikana NP (ravi ‘evening’)
      sunset                  madeɣa ivokutuvi (madeɣa ‘daylight’)

[7] From sunrise until about 10 a.m. when the sun is high.

[8] From about 2 p.m. when the sun is no longer directly overhead until sunset.

302      Malcolm Ross

__pre__
Kiriwina (PT)
 night                        bogi/[b]ibog N/ADV
      midnight                lubulotoula/elubulotoula N/ADV
      first streak of dawn    bulubuvisiga ADV
      halflight               dudubali
      about 5 a.m.            kikivisiga
 daytime                      yam/iyam N/ADV
 morning, 6–9am               kaukwau, gabogi (bogi ‘night’)
      early morning           o-lile-yam ADV
      dawn                    isiga ADV
      sunrise                 iyuwola kalasia VP (-yuwola ‘rise’, kalasia ‘sun’)
      about 9 a.m.            ipokala valu (-pokala ‘present, give’, valu ‘land’)
 midday                       lalavi/ilalavi N/ADV
      noon                    itowota kalasia VP (kalasia ‘sun’)
 afternoon/evening            kwayavi/ikwayavi N/ADV
      about 3 p.m.            itobalia kalasia VP (kalasia ‘sun’)
      sunset                  isalili kalasia VP (-salilia ‘drown’, kalasia ‘sun’)

__pre__
Motu (PT)
 night                        hanuaboi N, boi N
      middle of the night     malo N
      midnight                malokihi, malo hevani
      morning twilight        daba vaburana NP (vabura ‘twilight’)
 daylight                     rani N, V
 morning                      daba N
      peep of dawn            daba e kinia VP (kinia ‘nip’)
      first shafts of light   daba e rotoa VP (rotoa ‘cut in strips’)
      light in the east       daba e daria VP (daria ‘husk, tear’)
      light before sunrise    daba mamana NP (mama ‘light from lamp’)
      dawn                    daba e mamaia VP (mamaia ‘chew’)
      daybreak                daba matana NP (mata ‘eye’)
      early morning           galuna
      dawn ‘spreads’          daba e tataia VP (tataia ‘strike, hit’)
      daylight                daba e rere VP, daba rere NP (rere ‘(go) from place to place’)
 daytime, sun                 dina N
      about 9 a.m.            dina e taolara VP
      9 a.m.–noon             dina e tubua VP (tubua ‘grow’)
   midday                   adoata N (ado ‘sun’ [not used independently], ata ‘up above’)
   about 3 p.m.             dina gelona NP
 afternoon/evening          adorahi N (ado ‘sun’ [not used independently])
   (just before) sunset     dina kerekere VP, dina kerekerena NP (kerena ‘light reflected in
                            the sea’)
   evening twilight         mairu
   7–8 p.m.                 adorahi gamagamana NP

                                                                                       Time     303

__pre__
Gela (SES)
 night                      boŋi N
   all night, until morning dai-dani-hagi
   midnight                 kutu ni boŋi NP (kutu ‘stomach, womb’, boŋi ‘night), boŋi hau
                            (hau ‘raise, lift’)
   cockcrow, 4 a.m.         danimarao
   after cockcrow           labota
   morning twilight         labota mulemule (mulemule ‘be nauseated’)
   just before dawn         marao
 daytime                    dani N, daidani
 morning                    puipuŋi N
   sunrise                  soga ni aho NP (soga ‘jump’)
   dawn                     na dani te vavala VP
   break, of dawn           lavahi V
 middle of the day          kutu ni dani NP (kutu ‘stomach, womb’, dani ‘daytime),
                            danikama (kama ‘big’)
   noon                     hinagota (hina ‘sunlight’), turinunu (turi ‘walk’, nunu ‘shadow’)
   latter part of the day   levu ni dani (levu ‘side’)
 afternoon/evening          nulavi
 dusk                       lioliohahi

__pre__
Marshallese (Mic)
 night                      pɯoŋw V
   midnight                 lukwən pɯoŋw N (lukwə- ‘middle’, pɯoŋw ‘night’)
 day                        ṛɯān N
 morning                    cippɯoŋw V (cip ‘rise’, pɯoŋw ‘night’)
   sunrise                  takinalɯ (alɯ ‘sun’)
   daybreak, dawn           okṛɯān V (okaṛɯ ‘root’, ṛɯān ‘day’), ṛɯāntak V (ṛɯān ‘day’, tak
                            ‘upward’), ciṛɯān (ṛɯān ‘day’), corɯāntak V (co ‘appear’, ṛɯāntak
                            ‘daybreak’), mɯəcawʌnene N, V
 noon                       raɛlɛp V
   hottest time of day      pwiltəŋtəŋ N (pwil ‘hot’, təŋtəŋ ‘most’)
 evening                    cota V
   sunset                   tulbkun alɯ (tulbk ‘go down’, alɯ ‘sun’)

304      Malcolm Ross

__pre__
Wayan (Fij)
 night                       boŋi N, V
      just after dark        aviavi boŋi N (aviavi ‘evening’, boŋi ‘night’)
      midnight               boŋilevu V (boŋi ‘night’, levu ‘big’)
      before sunrise         gwatagwata boŋiboŋi N, V (gwatagwata ‘morning’, boŋi ‘night’)
 daytime                     siŋa V
 morning                     gwatagwata V (gwata ‘go out before dawn’)
      be nearly morning       mata gwatagwata
      just before and around dawn gwatagwata ðakaðā
      dawn                    gwatagwata tūtū V (gwatagwata ‘morning’, tūtū ‘exactly’)
      dawn, daylight          ðeðe N, V (= ‘be light’)
 midday                  siŋa-levu V (siŋa ‘day’, levu ‘big’)
 late afternoon, evening aviavi V
      mid-afternoon          aviavi tūtū N (aviavi ‘afternoon’, tūtū ‘exactly’)
      almost twilight        sī-aviavi ðeðe V (sī-aviavi ‘twilight’, ðeðe ‘be light’)
      afternoon twilight     sī-aviavi V
      just before dusk       karati-avi V
      be almost dusk         mata boŋi
      dusk                   sī-aviavi karawa V (sī-aviavi ‘twilight’, karawa ‘blue-green’)

__pre__
Niuean (Pn)
Note: maŋa-aho, moŋo ‘part of day’
 night                 pō N/V
      midnight               maŋa-aho tulotopō NP (pō ‘night’)
 daylight                    aho N
 morning                     poŋi-poŋi N
      dawn                   maŋa-aho maheŋiheŋi NP (maheŋiheŋi ‘be twilight’)
      sunrise                moŋo hake laā NP (hake ‘rise’, laā ‘sun’)
      early morning          maŋa-aho kō moa NP (kō ‘crow’, moa ‘chicken’)
 middle of the day           —
      broad daylight         aho-teka NP (aho ‘daylight’, -teka ‘very’), aho-tea
      midday                 moŋo/maŋa-aho tūpou laā NP (tūpou ‘be directly above’, laā ‘sun’)
      afternoon              moŋo/maŋa-aho pale laā NP (pale ‘turn’, laā ‘sun’)
 late afternoon, evening afi-afi N
      sunset                 moŋo/maŋa-aho tō laā NP (tō ‘fall’, laā ‘sun’)


9.2.2 The day and times of day: reconstructions

                                                                                Time    305

   A reconstructable taxonomy for POc is given below (the word-class labels are none too
certain). The primary terms for ‘night’ and ‘daylight’ were evidently *boŋi and *raqani.
No third-order terms are reconstructable.

__pre__
 night                       *boŋi N, V ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
                             *rodrom V ‘be dark, be night’
                             *marom V ‘be dark’
  daylight               *raqani N, V ‘daytime, daylight’
                         *qaco N ‘sun, daylight’
                         *sinaR N, V ‘shine, sun’
 morning                 *boŋi-boŋi N, ADV ‘early morning from dawn to perhaps
                           about 10 a.m.’
 middle of the day       —
 late afternoon, evening *Rapi N, *Rapi-Rapi ADV ‘late afternoon and evening,
                           from about 3 p.m. to sunset’

    Pawley (n.d.) notes an idiomatic construction in which at least some of these terms co-
occurred with POc *panua which, among other things, meant ‘the visible world, land and
sky’ (vol. 1, p.62). The combination of *panua and *boŋi, probably as a verb, is reflected
in:

__pre__
  Motu (PT)                hanua-boi ‘night’
  Wayan, Bauan (Fij)       boŋi na vanua ‘be night’
  Rotuman (Fij)            hanua he poŋ ‘it is getting late, night is coming on’
  Rennellese (Pn)          henua pō ‘night time’

Presumably the combination meant something like ‘the world is becoming dark’. The
expressions below reflect the same construction, with ‘night’ replaced by ‘daylight’:

__pre__
  Lau (SES)               fanua sato ‘sunny weather’ (< POc *qaco)
  Wayan (Fij)             siŋa na vanua ‘be daylight’ (< POc *sinaR)
                          siŋa-levu na vanua ‘be midday’ (levu ‘big’)
  Rotuman (Fij)           hanua ran ‘daylight, dawn’ (< POc *raqani)


9.2.2.1 Night

   POc *boŋi ‘night’ also meant ‘day of twenty-four hours’, to judge from the widely
scattered reflexes with this meaning (see below NNG: Manam, Poeng; MM: Tolai; SES:
Gela, Lau; NCV: Tamambo, Nokuku, Uripiv, Port Sandwich, Lonwolwol; Mic: Kiribatese;
Pn: Samoan, Tuvalu, Nanumean, Rennellese, Hawaiian, Marquesan). Blust (ACD) notes
that PMP *beRŋi is also reconstructable with both senses. The dual sense is not surprising:
in European languages ‘day’ serves in the same way.

   All Polynesian reflexes point back to PPn *pō (for expected *poŋi, which survived in
*poŋi-poŋi ‘be or become morning’ (p.16 and certain other expressions, e.g. Samoan poŋi-
sā ‘be dark’ V., ADJ., ‘darkness’ N., po-poŋi ‘(night) be full’ V., ADJ.). Ross Clark (pers.
comm.) attributes the replacement of *poŋi by *pō to back-formation from *poŋi-a ‘be
overcome by night’, via reanalysis as *po-ŋia, with automatic lengthening of the new
monosyllabic content word *po- to bimoraic *pō.

<
PMP *beRŋi ‘night’ (ACD)
POc *boŋi ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 Adm: Mussau            bo              ‘night’
 Adm: Mussau            bo-boŋi(ena)    ‘black’
 Adm: Loniu             peŋ             ‘night’
 Adm:     Drehet         piŋ          ‘night’
 NNG:     Manam          boŋ          ‘day, time’
 NNG:     Gedaged        boŋ(anip)    ‘at the end of night, tomorrow’
 NNG:     Gitua          boŋ          ‘last night’
 NNG:     Yabem          -beʔ         ‘be night’
 NNG:     Mangga         bus(in)      ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 NNG:     Mapos Buang    buk          ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 NNG:     Poeng          voŋ(a-lua)   ‘day after tomorrow’
 SJ:      Sobei          pani         ‘night’
 SJ:      Kayupulau      boni         ‘night’
 PT:      Motu           (hanua)boi   ‘night; till night’
 PT:      Molima         boi-boi      ‘night’
 PT:      Dobu           boi-boi      ‘night’
 PT:      Bwaidoga       boŋi         ‘night’
 PT:      Kiriwina       bogi         ‘night; darkness’
 MM:      Tigak          vuŋ          ‘night’
 MM:      Notsi          biŋ          ‘night’
 MM:      Patpatar       buŋ          ‘night’
 MM:      Tolai          buŋ          ‘a day, either of twelve or twenty-four hours’
 MM:      Halia (Haku)   buŋ          ‘night’
 MM:      Mono-Alu       boi          ‘night, day’
 MM:      Simbo          boŋi         ‘night’
 SES:     Bugotu         boŋi         ‘night’ (ke boŋi ‘by night, at night’)
 SES:     Gela           boŋi         ‘night’ (_te mboŋi_ ‘by night’); ‘a day, as a measure of time’ (_e rua na boŋi_ ‘two days’); ‘yesterday’; ‘the weather’
 SES:     Lau           boŋi          ‘night; a day, in reckoning time’
 SES:     Sa’a          poŋi          ‘a time, a season’
 SES:     Sa’a          poŋi-ku       ‘my appointed time’ (-ku ‘my’)
 SES:     ’Are’are      poni          ‘evening, after sunset, night; an appointed day’
 SES:     Arosi         boŋi          ‘a night, last night’
 NCV:     Mota          pwoŋ          ‘night, darkness, to be dark’
 NCV:     Raga          boŋi          ‘night, darkness’
 NCV:     Tamambo       boŋi          ‘day of twenty-four hours’
 NCV:     Nokuku        pon           ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 NCV:     Uripiv        (na)boŋ       ‘day of twenty-four hours’
 NCV:     Port Sandwich (na)boŋ       ‘day of twenty-four hours’
 NCV:     Lonwolwol     buŋ           ‘darkness, blackness; night; dark, black’
 NCV:     Lonwolwol     (wo)buŋ       ‘day of twenty-four hours’
 NCV:     Paamese       voŋi(ene)     ‘night’
 NCV:     Lewo          (yo)poŋi      ‘night’
 NCV:     Lewo          poŋi          ‘time, period’
 NCV:     Namakir       (e)boŋ        ‘night’
 NCV:     Nguna         pwōŋi         ‘night’
    SV:     Lenakel           (la)pən          ‘night, at night’
    SV:     Kwamera           (nə)pən          ‘night; a day of twenty-four hours’
    SV:     Anejom            (ne)peñ          ‘night’
    Mic:    Kiribati          boŋ              ‘night; a day of twenty-four hours, period, season’[9]
    Mic:    Marshallese       pɯoŋw            ‘night, last night’
    Mic:    Ponapean          pwōŋ             ‘night’
    Mic:    Ponapean          pwoŋ             ‘numeral classifier used in counting nights’ (pwoŋ sili-pwoŋ ‘three nights’)
    Mic:    Kosraean          foŋ              ‘night’
    Mic:    Chuukese          pwōŋ             ‘night’ (mostly in compounds)
    Mic:    Puluwatese        -pwoŋ            ‘counting classifier for nights’
    Mic:    Puluwatese        pwōŋ             ‘night; day of the month; be night’
    Fij:    Rotuman           poŋi             ‘night, night-time; be night or evening or late in the day’
    Fij:    Wayan             boŋi             ‘night’
PPn *pō ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 Pn:    Tongan           pō               ‘night’
 Pn:    Samoan           pō               ‘night, day of twenty-four hours (especially in certain expressions), dark, blind’
 Pn:    Tuvalu           pō               ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 Pn:    Nanumean         pō               ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’
 Pn:    Rennellese       pō               ‘night, become night, day of twenty-four hours’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         pō               ‘night, formerly the period of twenty-four hours beginning at nightfall’ (the Hawaiian day began at nightfall)
 Pn:    Maori            pō               ‘night’
 Pn:    Marquesan        pō               ‘night; day of twenty-four hours’
 Pn:    Rapanui          pō               ‘night’
>

   The reflexes from Huon Gulf languages (NNG: Yabem, Mangga, Mapos Buang) all
reflect a verb Proto Huon Gulf *bok(-) ‘be night’ (Mangga bus(in) is a nominalisation): I
am assuming that this is an irregular reflex of *boŋi. There are other fragments of evidence
above (Puluwatese, Rotuman, Rennellese) that POc *boŋi also served as a verb ‘be/become
night’.

[9]     Each of the two seasons which make up the Gilbertese year, Nei Auti (Pleiades) and Rimwimāta
      (Antares) is divided into eight shorter periods called boŋ, each separately named (see Grimble
      1931:201).

306     Malcolm Ross

                                                                                        Time     307


308    Malcolm Ross

    The word for ‘night’ in a number of Oceanic languages reflects POc *rodrom. It is
reasonably evident, however, that this term meant ‘be dark’, and did not in POc refer to a
period of time.

<
PMP *dem-dem ‘be dark’[10]
POc *rodrom ‘be dark, be night’ (Blust 1984)
 NNG: Kis               doma            ‘night’
 NNG: Terebu            (bu)lom         ‘night’
 MM: Bola               rodo            ‘night’
 MM: Nakanai            logo            ‘night’ (regular reflex)
 MM: Meramera           na-lodo         ‘night’
 MM: Barok              dom(on)         ‘night’
 SES: Talise            rodo            ‘night’
 SES: Lau               rodo            ‘night’
 SES: Lau               ro-rodo(a)      ‘dark, dark in color’
 SES: ’Are’are          roto            ‘be dark, night; night darkness’
 SES: Sa’a              roto            ‘night’
 SES: Arosi             rodo            ‘dark, black, night’
 NCV: Raga              dodo            ‘rain cloud’
 NCV: NE Ambae          dodo            ‘be dark; dark cloud’
 NCV: Tamambo           dodo            ‘night’
 Mic: Kiribati          roro            ‘black, dark color’
 Mic: Kosraean          lɔṣ            ‘dark’
 Mic: Mokilese          ros             ‘dark’
 Mic: Ponapean          roc̣             ‘dark’
 Mic: Puluwatese        rōṛ            ‘dark’
 Mic: Carolinian        roṣ            ‘dark’
 Pn:    Tongan          lōlō            ‘absolutely dark, pitch dark’
 Pn:    Samoan          lōlō            ‘absolutely dark, pitch dark’
 Pn:    Marquesan       lōlō            ‘absolutely dark, pitch dark’
>

[10] Reconstructed on the basis of Proto Minahasan *dm̅dm̅ ‘dark’ (Sneddon 1978) and the Oceanic reflexes
   shown here.

The two sets below probably do not reflect POc *rodrom. Rather, *rodrom and the sets
below all reflect a PAn monosyllabic root *-dem (see vol. 1, pp.24–25, 27–28). That is,
several items reflecting this root were separately inherited into POc.

<
PMP *ma-edem ‘be dark’ (ACD: ‘Proto Western Malayo-Polynesian’ *ma-edem ‘overcast, dull lustre’)
POc *marom ‘be dark’
 NNG: Wampur          maroʔ          ‘night ’
 MM: Minigir          marumu         ‘night’
 MM: Tolai            marum          ‘night’
 MM: Ramoaaina        marum          ‘night’
 MM: Kandas           mirun          ‘night’
 MM: Bilur            morom          ‘night’
>

                                                                                             Time   309


9.2.2.2 Daytime

  The POc term which specifically denoted daylight was *raqani, reconstructed in
Chapter 6 (p.161), to which the reader is referred for further detail.

<
PAn *daqaNi ‘day’ (ACD)
POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’
 Adm: Nauna                lin                      ‘day’
 Adm: Ponam                ran                      ‘day’
 NNG: Yabem                -lɛŋ                     ‘be daytime’
 PT:    Kiriwina           yam                      ‘daytime’
 PT:    Sinaugoro          laɣani                   ‘daytime’
 PT:    Motu               rani                     ‘daytime’
 MM: Nalik                 ran                      ‘daytime’
 MM: Haku                  lan                      ‘daytime’
 MM: Uruava                rani                     ‘daytime’
 MM: Roviana               rane                     ‘day’
 MM: Maringe               na-rane                  ‘day’
 SES: Bugotu               dani                     ‘morning, daylight’
 SES: Kwaio                dani                     ‘day’
 SES: ‘Are’are             tani                     ‘daylight’
 NCV: Mota                 (ma)ran                  ‘light, daylight, morning, day; be light; tomorrow’s light; the morrow’
 NCV:     Tamambo                rani               ‘daylight’
 NCV:     Paamese                lani               ‘daybreak’
 SV:      Lenakel                n-ian              ‘day’
 SV:      Kwamera                ia-ran             ‘day’
 Mic:     Marshallese            ṛɯān              ‘day, date’
 Mic:     Ponapean               rān                ‘day’
>

   The primary meaning of POc *qaco was ‘sun’, but it was also used for ‘daylight,
daytime’. Indeed, in Polynesia reflexes of POC *qaco are restricted to the sense of ‘period
of a day, daylight’ and do not refer directly to the sun. This item, along with *sinaR ‘shine,
sun’, is also reconstructed in Chapter 6 (p.160), where more detail is provided.

<
PAn *qajaw, *qalejaw ‘sun, daylight’ (ACD) [11]
POc *qaco ‘sun, daytime’
 Adm: Ponam                al             ‘sun’
 Adm: Mondropolon          al             ‘sun’
 NNG: Bariai               ado            ‘day, sun’
 NNG: Takia                ad             ‘sun’
 NNG: Takia                ad-ad          ‘daytime’
 NNG: Kaiwa                as             ‘daytime’
 PT:      Molima         ʔasu            ‘sun’
 MM:      Nakanai        haro            ‘sun; day’
 MM:      Tigak          ias             ‘sun’
 MM:      Nalik          ias             ‘sun’
 SES:     Bugotu         aho             ‘sun’
 SES:     Gela           aho             ‘sun; good weather; put in the sun; experience good weather’
 SES:     Sa’a           sato            ‘sun, sunshine, fine weather’
 NCV:     Mota           loa             ‘sun’
 NCV:     Namakura       ʔal             ‘sun’
 Mic:     Marshallese    alɯ             ‘sun’
 Mic:     Woleaian       yaro            ‘sun’
 Mic:     Puluwatese     yælet           ‘sun’
 Pn:      Tongan         ʔaho            ‘day’
 Pn:      Samoan         aso             ‘day’
 Pn:      Tuvalu         aho             ‘day (as time span)’
 Pn:      Tikopia        aso             ‘day (as time span)’
>

[11] Blust (ACD) glosses this ‘day’, but the gloss given here appears more consonant with the data.

310     Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *sinaR ‘ray of light’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *sinaR ‘shine, sun’
 Adm: Mussau             sinaka         ‘sun’
 Adm: Lou                sinsin        ‘sun’
 PT:    Motu             dina          ‘sun; day’
 MM: Lavongai            sinaŋ         ‘sun; (sun) shine’
 MM: Tigak               siŋan         ‘(sun) shine’ (metathesis)
 SES: Lau                sina          ‘shine, give light’
 SES: ’Are’are           sina          ‘shine, brighten; light, brightness’
 SES: Sa’a               sineli        ‘shine’
 NCV: Mota               siŋa          ‘shine’
 Mic: Chuukese           ttiɾa         ‘shine, ray, brightness, beam’
 Mic: Puluwatese         tin           ‘shine, as the sun’
 Fij:   Rotuman          sina          ‘light, lamp, star’
 Fij:   Wayan            siŋa          ‘day, daylight, sun’
 Fij:   Bauan            ðina          ‘lamp, torch’
>

9.2.2.3 Early morning: from dawn to 9 or 10 a.m.

   The POc term for the first few hours of daylight was *boŋi-boŋi, self-evidently a
reduplicated form of POc *boŋi ‘night’.

<
POc *boŋi-boŋi ‘early morning from dawn to 9 or 10 a.m.’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa        boi-boi        ‘morning; from sunrise to about 10 a.m.’
 PT:    Dawawa          boi-boi        ‘morning, tomorrow’
 PT:    Sinaugoro       boɣi-boɣi      ‘morning’
 MM: Sursurunga         (kə)buŋ-buŋ    ‘morning’
 MM: Mono-Alu           boi-boi(uana) ‘in the morning (early?)’
 SES:    Talise         boŋi-boŋi              ‘morning’
 SES:    Birao          (bo)boŋi(hana)         ‘morning’
 SES:    Lau            bo-boŋi                ‘tomorrow’
 SV:     SW Tanna       (ie)n-pəŋe-n-pəŋ       ‘morning’
 SV:     Kwamera        nə-pnə-pən             ‘morning’
 Mic:    Kiribati       boŋi-boŋ               ‘twilight’
PPn *poŋi-poŋi ‘(N, V) morning’
 Pn:    Tongan          poŋi-poŋi              ‘be or become morning; by morning, early in the day’
 Pn:     Niuean         poŋi-poŋi              ‘tomorrow, this morning’
 Pn:     E Uvean        poŋi-poŋi              ‘morning’
 Pn:     Samoan         poŋi-poŋi              ‘be dusky, twilight’
 Pn:     Tikopia        poŋi-poŋi              ‘morning’
 Pn:     Nanumean       poŋi-poŋi              ‘morning (6–8 a.m.)’
 Pn:     Tuvalu         poŋi-poŋi              ‘morning (6–8 a.m.)’
 Pn:     Anutan         poŋi-poŋi              ‘morning (5–11 a.m.)’
>

                                                                               Time      311


  Interestingly, terms for ‘early morning’ in some Oceanic languages that do not reflect
*boŋi-boŋi nonetheless include that language’s root for ‘night’:

__pre__
                               night                    early morning
  Drehet (Adm)                 piŋ                      kxe-piŋ
  Lou (Adm)                    keli-peŋ                 pati-peŋ
  Loniu (Adm)                  peŋ                      ma-peŋ
  Bing (NNG)                   boŋan ‘last night’       boŋ-sag (sag ‘only’)
  Takia (NNG)                  tidom                    tidom-lom (lo ‘in’, mi ‘only’)
  Mapos Buang (NNG)            buk                      mon-buk
  Kiriwina (PT)                bogi                     ga-bogi
  Marshallese (Mic)            pwoŋ                     cip-pwoŋ (cip ‘rise’)

   POc *puko ‘morning’ is only distributed over a certain area of Oceania—from New
Britain to central Vanuatu—but this is enough to meet our criteria for POc reconstruction.
To judge from the verbal morphology that occurs on a number of reflexes, *puko often
occurred as a verb. Unfortunately none of the reflexes occurs with a gloss which would
confirm that this referred to the same time period as POc *boŋi-boŋi ‘early morning’.

<
POc *puko ‘(N, V) morning’
 MM: Bilur             (la)puko            ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Lungga            vuka                ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Lungga            vu-vuɣe(i)          ‘morning’
 MM: Nduke             vuɣe                ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Roviana           vuɣo                ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Vangunu           (pana)vuho          ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Kia               (fu)fuɣo            ‘morning’
 MM: Kia               fuɣo                ‘tomorrow’
 MM:      Kokota            (fu)fu              ‘tomorrow’
 MM:      Kokota            fugo(nare)          ‘morning’
 SES:     Bugotu            vuo-vuɣo(i)         ‘morning’
 SES:     Oroha             hoʔo(a)             ‘morning’
 SES:     Sa’a              (ma-hu)huʔo         ‘morning’
 SES:     Arosi             (hā)hoʔo(a)         ‘morning’
 SES:     Fagani            (tei)hoɣo(a)        ‘morning’
 SES:     Bauro             (ma)hoɣo            ‘morning’
 SES:     Kahua             (haɣa)hoɣo          ‘morning’
 NCV:     Raga              (vai)go-ugo         ‘tomorrow ’
 NCV:     Tamambo           (a)vuho             ‘tomorrow ’
 NCV:     Tangoa            vuho                ‘tomorrow’
 NCV:     Uripiv            (me)vi              ‘tomorrow ’
 NCV:     Burmbar           (ma)vuk             ‘morning’
 NCV:     Labo              (mitu)mbuko         ‘morning’
>

312    Malcolm Ross


9.2.2.4 Middle of the day: from 9 or 10 a.m. to about 3 p.m.

  Outside Polynesia, very few languages have a dedicated word for this part of the day,
and those that do show no sign of cognation. Most languages have a phrasal expression,
sometimes meaning ‘the middle of the day’:
 Loniu (Adm)               tiko aŋ (tiko ‘middle’, aŋ ‘day, sun’)
 Gapapaiwa (PT)            madeɣa pu (madeɣa ‘daylight’, pu ‘middle’)
 Roviana (MM)              korapa rane (korapa ‘middle’, rane ‘daylight’)
 Gela (SES)                kutu ni dani (kutu ‘stomach, womb’, dani ‘daytime)
Others have a noun phrase whose head is ‘sun, daylight’, modified by ‘big’ or ‘good’:
 Takia (NNG)               ad uyan, adian (ad ‘sun’, uyan ‘good’)
 Gela (SES)                dani-kama (dani ‘daylight’, kama ‘big’)
 Wayan (Fij)               siŋa-levu (siŋa ‘day’, levu ‘big’)

   Biggs and Clark (1993) reconstruct PPn *qaho-atea ‘late morning and early afternoon’,
from PPn *qaho ‘daylight’ and *qātea ‘clear, unobstructed’. The addition of Anejom
reflexes raises the reconstruction to Proto Remote Oceanic *qaso-qatea (Lynch pers. comm.).

<
Proto Remote Oceanic *qaso-qatea ‘late morning and early afternoon’[12]
 SV:   Anejom          afiat           ‘become day’
 SV:   Anejom          n-afiat         ‘day, daytime’
 SV:   Anejom          n-afiat-iat     ‘midday’
 Pn:   Niuean          ahotea          ‘broad daylight’
 Pn:   Samoan          aoatea          ‘midday’
 Pn:     Anutan         avatea           ‘midday’
 Pn:     Tikopia        avatea           ‘midday’
 Pn:     Rennellese     ʔaoʔatea         (N, V) ‘(be) early afternoon’
 Pn:     Hawaiian       awakea           ‘noon’
 Pn:     Maori          awatea           ‘broad daylight’
 Pn:     Rarotongan     avatea           ‘forenoon nine to twelve’
 Pn:     Tahitian       avatea           ‘late morning to early afternoon’
>

[12] Tongan ʔahoʔataa ‘at noon today’ seems at first sight to belong here, but, as Churchward (1959) shows,
   it reflects a probably unrelated base -hoʔatā.

                                                                              Time   313


9.2.2.5 Late afternoon and evening, from about 3 p.m. to sunset

  Just one term is reconstructable for this period of the day, POc *Rapi.

<
PAn *Rabi ‘evening’ (Dempwolff 1938, ACD)
POc *Rapi, *Rapi-Rapi ‘(N, V) late afternoon and evening, from about 3 p.m. to sunset’
 Adm: Mussau            (eloa)lai      ‘evening’
 Adm: Nyindrou          (be)yeh        ‘afternoon’
 NNG: Tuam              rav-rav        ‘evening’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono) rai                 (N) ‘afternoon from about 2 p.m. to darkness’
 NNG: Sio               la-la          ‘afternoon’
 NNG: Tami              la-la          ‘evening’
 NNG: Takia             (g)rai(an)     ‘evening’
 NNG: Kela              (guru)rap      ‘evening’
 NNG: Sukurum           (fi)raf        ‘evening’
 NNG: Manam             rai-rai        ‘evening’
 PT:   Kiriwina         kwayavi        ‘evening’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa        ravi           (ADV) ‘afternoon; evening, from about 3 to 7 p.m.’
 PT:   Gumawana         lavi-lavi      (ADV) ‘evening/late afternoon’
 PT:   Iduna            lavi-lavi      ‘afternoon’
 PT:   Sinaugoro        lavi-lavi      (N) ‘afternoon’
 PT:   Motu             (ado)rahi      (N) ‘late afternoon/evening’ (ado ‘sun’ [not used independently])
 MM: Bali               (ga)ravi       ‘evening’
 MM: Meramera           lavi-lavi      ‘evening’
 MM: Kara (East)        (la)iaf        ‘evening’
 MM: Lihir              (le)leh        ‘evening’
 MM: Sursurunga         rah-rah        (N) ‘afternoon’
 MM: Label              rah            ‘evening’
 MM: Ramoaaina          (malu)rap (V) ‘evening’
 MM: Tolai              ravi(an)       ‘afternoon, evening’
 MM: Siar               raf            ‘evening’
 MM: Taiof              (tou)raf       ‘evening’
 MM: Banoni             (nē)navi       ‘evening’
 MM: Torau              rai            ‘evening’
 MM: Maringe            grafi          ‘evening’
 SES:    Gela           (nu)lavi         ‘evening’
 SES:    Longgu         (zao)lavi        (N) ‘evening’
 SES:    Lau            (sau)lafi        ‘evening’
 SES:    Kwaio          (lau)lafi        ‘late afternoon’
 SES:    Sa’a           (sau)lehi        ‘evening, dusk, from 4 p.m. to dark’
 NCV:    Mota           rav-rav          ‘evening, the dusk of evening’
 NCV:    Raga           rav-ravi         ‘late’
 NCV:    Raga           (ute)rav-ravi    ‘evening’
 NCV:    Tamambo        ravi-ravi        ‘late afternoon/evening’
 NCV:    Uripiv         riv-riv          ‘afternoon’
 NCV:    Paamese        (medī)lahi       ‘afternoon, evening’
 NCV:    Namakir        d(a)ravi(h)      ‘evening’
 SV:     Sye            (pʷa)rap         ‘evening’
 SV:     Sye            (a)rap           ‘begin to get dark in late afternoon’
 SV:     Anejom         (injup-u)ra      ‘evening’
 NCal:   Nemi           (bate)ap         ‘evening’
 Fij:    Wayan          avi-avi          ‘late afternoon/evening’
 Pn:     Tongan         afi-afi          ‘evening’
 Pn:     Samoan         afi-afi          ‘evening’
 Pn:     Niuean         afi-afi          ‘late afternoon/evening’
 Pn:     Hawaiian       ahi-ahi          ‘late afternoon, evening’
>

  There are also Micronesian reflexes. These are not listed above because they show hefty
phonological reduction. The Proto Micronesian term was *faka-afi, reflecting a
combination of the POc prefix *paka- (which among other things derived adverbs) and
POc *Rapi, reconstructed above.

<
PMic *fakāfi ‘evening, in the evening’
 Mic: Mortlockese (lɛ)fǣf                ‘evening’
 Mic: Chuukese         fǣf               ‘evening meal, main meal’
 Mic: Puluwatese       (lē)fæf           ‘evening meal’
 Mic: Carolinian       (lē)fǣf          ‘evening, dusk’
 Mic: Woleaian         fexāfi             ‘last night’
>

314   Malcolm Ross



9.2.2.6 Third-order terms for parts of the day

   I have not been able to reconstruct any third-order terms for parts of the day. As the
taxonomies above (pp.301–304) show, in modern Oceanic languages parts of the day
smaller than ‘night’, ‘early morning’ and ‘late afternoon/evening’ are usually described by
phrasal expressions. The only generalisation to be made is an obvious one—that ‘sunrise’
and ‘sunset’ are denoted by expressions meaning ‘the sun rises’ and ‘the sun sets’. Among
the verbs for ‘rise’ and ‘set’ here were almost certainly *sake and *sipo respectively (see
Ch. 6, pp.181–182 and Ch. 8, pp.271, 273).

                                                                               Time    315


9.2.3 The moon and its phases

  POc *pulan ‘moon’ also meant ‘month’. The reconstruction here is repeated from
Chapter 6 (p.164).

<
PAn *bulaN ‘moon, month, menstruation’ (ACD)
PMP *bulan ‘moon, month; menstruation’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *pulan ‘moon, month’ (ACD)
 Adm: Lou            pulan            ‘moon’
 Adm: Mussau         ulana            ‘moon’
 PT:    Motu         hua              ‘moon, month’
 MM: Tigak           ulan             ‘moon’
 SES: Bugotu         vula             ‘moon, month’
 SES: Lau            fula             ‘the moon (but only in naming a month)’
 SES: Kwaio          fula             ‘moon (mainly in compounds)’
 SES: Sa’a           hule             ‘phases of the moon; full moon’
 SES: Sa’a          | hule i lade |     ‘name of a month, July’
 SES: Arosi          hura             ‘moon, month’
 NCV: Mota           vula             ‘moon, month, season marked by moon’
 Fij:   Bauan        vula             ‘moon, month’
>

   As a verb, POc *sinaR ‘sun, shine’ (Ch. 6, p.163; above, p.310) has given rise to a
number of Polynesian terms which, with the addition of the stativising prefix mā- (Ch. 6, p.164),
refer to the moon:

<
PPn *mā-sina ‘moon, month’
 Pn:   Rennellese    māsina
 Pn:    Tongan       māhina
 Pn:    Samoan       māsina
 Pn:    E Futunan    māsina
 Pn:    E Uvean      māhina
 Pn:    Maori        māhina
>

   Phases of the moon are probably named in every Oceanic language. However, there are
differences in how many phases are named. In most languages for which information is
available, the month seems to begin with the appearance of the narrowest crescent moon
after the three days of darkness. In western astronomical terminology, the ‘new moon’
refers to the days of darkness, but in many of the sources terms glossed ‘new moon’ appear
to denote the first appearance after the days of darkness.[13] Minimal systems have terms
glossed ‘new moon’ in the latter sense, for the first quarter (half-moon, roughly 7th day),
the full moon (roughly 15th day), the last quarter (half-moon, roughly 22nd day) and the
period of darkness. However, it is clear that in some systems these terms may denote a
period of two or more nights, whilst in others the sources do not allow us to determine
whether they are used for more than a single night. There are also numerous confusions in
the English glosses of moon phase terms. Some of these simply reflect the mismatch
between 24-hour days and the lunar month of 29.53 days, so that phases do not exactly
match days. Others are the result of different uses of terms and perhaps from failures to
recognise that phases recognised by Oceanic speakers do not match with those recognised
by westerners.

[13] ‘New moon’ is also used in this sense in everyday English.

316    Malcolm Ross


   Maximal systems, like those found in Micronesia and in Central Eastern Polynesian
languages, have thirty names, one for each day of a lunar month.[14] Between the minimal
and the maximal systems are systems that divide the month into phases of two or three
nights each (e.g. Sa’a as reported by Ivens 1927, 1929). Some Oceanic communities, like
Mwotlap (NCV), seem to divide the lunar month into phases based on sixths rather than
quarters. That is, they have terms for the new moon and (roughly) the 5th, 10th, 15th, 20th
and 25th days (François 2001). From White, Kokhonigita and Pulomana’s (1988)
dictionary definitions it seems that Maringe may also be such a language. Kiriwina
apparently names days only from the 10th to the 20th day. The Lamotrek days, as listed by
Christian (1899) are divided into two sections of respectively ten and twenty days.

[14] Sources listing days of the moon’s age are Christian (1899:387–395) for Yapese, Ponapean, Lamotrek,
   Mortlockese and Woleaian, Jackson and Marck (1991) for Carolinian, Lee (1976) for Kosraean, Tregear
   (n.d.) for Hawai’ian, Tahitian, Marquesan, Rarotongan, Māori and Moriori, Stimson (1928) for Tahitian,
   Williams (1928) for Hawai’ian, Mangareva, Tahitian, Marquesan, Rarotongan, and Māori.

   Proto Micronesian and Proto Central–Eastern Polynesian sets of day names could
probably be reconstructed, but the two sets would not be cognate and, unlike the month
names, it is not possible to attribute literal meanings to most of their members (although
some of the Polynesian sets apparently name supernatural beings). Hence for POc purposes
there is little point in reconstructing them. In fact, there is not a great deal that can be
reconstructed of the way that POc speakers talked about moon phases.

   The first phase is strictly speaking the days of darkness. Interestingly, the sources vary
as to how many of these there are, and Grimble (1931) claims that the Kiribati did not
know.

   The denotation of the first visible phase often makes reference to the moon’s thin
crescent shape. A number of languages compare it to a crescent-shaped pearlshell
ornament, and it is possible that this image was also used in POc. Such artefacts have not
appeared in the archaeological record, but they are fairly common ethnographically and a
term for them, POc *japi was reconstructed in vol. 1 (p.104). It is reflected in the Arosi
term below.

__pre__
 PT:      Motu          hua doɣaɣi          ‘new moon’ (doɣaɣi ‘crescent shaped pearl
                                               shell ornament’)
 MM: Nakanai            mapa-le-Gileme ‘moon when it is small’ (lit. ‘payment for
                                               Gileme’: the reference is to a goldlip shell
                                               used in brideprice)
                        kalisu              ‘noseplug of mother-of pearl; new moon’
 SES: Arosi             siʔe-dahi           ‘a phase of the moon’ (siʔe ‘rub fire’ or ‘stripes’,
                                                dahi ‘crescent shaped ornament made from
                                               gold-lipped pearlshell’)

Other descriptive terms also occur:

                                                                               Time    317

__pre__
 PT:     Kiriwina     kapatu             ‘new moon’ (-kapatu ‘close, become small’)
 SES:    Gela         rau ni lei         ‘thin sickle of young moon, new moon’
                                           (‘blade of grass, Imperata cylindrica’)
                      vula taŋeu         ‘crescent moon’ (vula ‘moon’, taŋeu ‘split’)
 Fij:    Wayan        tāgaga ni vula     ‘horns of the moon’ (tāgaga ‘forked top piece
                                           of mast of traditional canoe’)

   Other languages refer to what was apparently the same phase as ‘the young moon’, and
here a reconstruction is perhaps possible: POc *pulan paqoRu, where *pulan is ‘moon’
(p.315) and *paqoRu is ‘new, young’ (Ch. 7, p.210). Note, however, that I have also
treated terms in which lexical replacement has occurred as reflexes of this item.

<
POc *|pulan paqoRu| ‘new moon, young moon’
 MM: Roviana      |sidara vaqura|     ‘new moon’ (sidara ‘moon’, vaqura ‘new, young’)
 NCV: Mwotlap     |no-wol wɛhɛy|          ‘new moon’ (no ART, wol ‘moon’, wɛhɛy ‘new, young’)
 SV: Lenakel      |mouk vi|           ‘new moon’ (mouk ‘moon’, vi ‘new’)
 Fij:  Wayan      |vula vou|          ‘new moon’ (vula ‘moon’, vou ‘new’)
 Pn:   Tongan     |māhina foʔou|      ‘new moon’ (māhina ‘moon’, foʔou ‘new’)
 Pn:   Niuean     |mahina pula fōu|   ‘new moon’ (mahina ‘moon’, pula ‘rise’, fōu ‘new’)
>

   Some languages have a term which means, literally, ‘unripe moon’. This evidently
refers to a phase between the new moon and the full moon, but exactly what part of the
waxing half of the month it denotes is not clear.

__pre__
 PT:     Kiriwina    tubukona tubu-geguda      ‘first quarter’ (tubukona ‘moon’, tubu
                                                  ‘grow’, geguda ‘unripe’)
 PT:     Motu       hua karukaru               ‘young moon’ (hua ‘moon’, karukaru
                                                  ‘undercooked, not fully ripe’
 Pn:     Niuean     mahina pula mui            ‘new moon, first quarter’ (mahina ‘moon’,
                                                   pula ‘rise’, mui ‘unripe’)

   Mwotlap, where we know with reasonable certainly that the moon phases are roughly of
five days apiece, has a term meaning ‘a piece of the moon’, which refers roughly to the 5th
day after the moon’s appearance (whereas ‘the unripe moon’ seems to refer roughly to the
7th). One other language, Drehet, has a similar term:

__pre__
 Adm: Drehet         puŋ rekxek                moon phases: 1st and 3rd quarters (puŋ
                                               ‘moon’, rekxek ‘a quarter, a piece’)
 NCV: Mwotlap        no-wol ɣaytɛ-ɣi           ‘one-third moon’ (wol ‘moon’, ɣayte ‘half,
                                                 piece’)

Maringe has a term with an apparently similar meaning to Mwotlap:

__pre__
 MM:     Maringe     khafa                     ‘moon between new and half moon’

   Curiously, this is about as far as we can go with reconstructing POc moon phases. Many
languages have a term which is glossed in English as ‘half moon’, but I have found none
that are cognate with each other, and none that agree on the metaphor they use. Every
language has a term for the full moon, but, again, I find no cognates and no agreement on
metaphor. A good many languages also have terms for the night (or two nights)
immediately before and/or immediately after the full moon.

318   Malcolm Ross

9.2.4 The year and its seasons

   Probably the main seasons for POc speakers living in northwest Melanesia were
meteorological: the dry, when the southeast trades blew with reasonable consistency, and
the wet, when there were sporadic northwesterly winds. The POc terms for these were
respectively *raki and *apaRat, which seem to have referred centrally to the seasons, with
typical weather and wind direction as inevitable components of their meanings. More
details are given in Chapter 5, §4.2, whence the reconstructions below are repeated.

<
POc *raki ‘dry season when the southeast trades blow’
 Adm: Lou               ra              ‘northeast, northeast wind’
 Adm: Titan             ᵑray            ‘wind from the mainland, mountain breeze, blows at night’
 NNG: Gitua             rak             ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Mangap            rak-rak         ‘fresh morning (during windy season)’
 NNG: Tami              lai             ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Maleu             (na)lai         ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Ali               rai             ‘southeast trade’
 NNG: Tumleo            riei            ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Vitu               raɣi            ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Bulu               laɣi            ‘southeast trade’
 MM: Tigak              rei             ‘wind’
 NCV: Lewo              lagi(pesoi)     ‘east wind ’
 Mic: Marshallese       ṛɯak           ‘south, summer’
 Mic: Ponapean          rāk             ‘breadfruit season, season of plenty’
 Fij:   Wayan           draki           ‘weather’
 Fij:   Bauan           draki           ‘weather’
 Pn:    Niuean          laki            ‘west’
 Pn:    Tongan          lak(oifie)      ‘fair, fine weather’
 Pn:    E Uvean         laki            ‘southeast or southwest wind’
 Pn:    Pukapukan       laki            ‘southwest wind ’
 Pn:    Samoan          laʔi            ‘southwest veering to northwest’
 Pn:    Hawaiian        laʔi            ‘calm, stillness, quiet (of sea, sky, wind)’
>

<
PMP *habaRat ‘west monsoon’ (Dempwolff 1938, ACD)
POc *apaRat ‘wet season when northwesterlies blow and sea is rough’
 Adm: Mussau            apae          ‘strong wind, storm wind’
 Adm: Wuvulu            afā           ‘northwest wind’
 Adm: Drehet            yaha          ‘stormy season, generally from November to March; strong wind and rough sea from the northwest’
 NNG: Kove              awaha         ‘rain’
 NNG: Gitua             yavara        ‘north wind’
 NNG: Tami                yawal           ‘northwest wind’
 NNG: Kairiru             yavar           ‘northwest wind, makes sea rough ’
 PT:  Iduna               yavalata        ‘rains with wind from the northwest in February and March’
 PT:     Tawala           yawalata        ‘light rain from southwest during dry season’
 PT:     Motu             lahara          ‘northwest wind and season’
 MM:     Bali             vurata          ‘northwest wind’
 MM:     Nakanai          le-avala        ‘year, wet season’
 MM:     Kara (East)      yefet           ‘wet season’
 MM:     Barok            awat            ‘year’
 MM:     Siar             yahrat          ‘year’
 MM:     Tinputz          ivat            ‘strong wind’
 Fij:    Wayan            ðavā            ‘storm, strong wind bringing rain’
 Pn:     Tongan           afā             ‘hurricane, gale or very severe storm’
 Pn:     Samoan           afā             ‘storm, hurricane’
>

                                                                                 Time     319


   The terms I have reconstructed above refer to wind directions and to seasons. A further
development is that one of the seasonal terms comes to mean ‘year’ (perhaps something
like ‘the annual round’ would be more accurate). Reflexes of both POc *raki ‘dry season’
and POc *apaRat which are used in this way are listed below, but local seasonal/wind
terms also tend to be used in this way.

__pre__
 NNG:    Kove             hai              ‘southeast trade, year’
 NNG:    Bariai           rai              ‘year’
 NNG:    Lukep            rai              ‘year’
 Mic:    Woleaian         ẓaxi            ‘year, age, summer season’
 MM:     Barok            awat             ‘year’
 MM:     Siar             yahrat           ‘year’


   In Ross (1995c) I wrote, ‘There is … no doubt that POc had a separate (and widely
reflected) word for year’, and followed it with the reconstruction of POc *taqun below.
This statement stands, but with a qualification. The Buang, Tongan and East Futunan
reflexes indicate that *taqun may have been used particularly to denote the yam-growing
cycle. This would not be surprising: the greater yam, Dioscorea alata (POc *qupi; Ross
1996d) is a highly prized—but not especially nutritious—crop throughout much of
Oceania, with much ritual associated with its growth cycle, and so it is a highly salient
marker of a year. It is likely that that it already had the meaning ‘yam season cycle’ in POc
times.

<
PMP *taqun ‘period of a year’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *taqun ‘period of a year, yam season cycle (?), any cyclic period’
 NNG: Bariai             taun            ‘the time when …’
 NNG: Buang              ta              ‘year; a complete cycle of yam growing’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain         taun            ‘year’
 MM: Bola                tahu(na)        ‘the time when …’
 MM: Sursurunga          taul            ‘season’
 MM:     Patpatar         t<in>ahon, t<in>ohon   ‘year’ (‹in› marks a nominalisation: vol. 1. p.33)
 MM:     Ramoaaina        t<in>əwon              ‘year’ (‹in› marks a nominalisation: vol. 1. p.33)
 NCV:    Mota             tau                    ‘season’
 NCV:    Nguna            (na)tau                ‘year’
 Mic:    Kiribati         tai                    ‘time, season, harvest’
 Mic:    Chuukese         sowu-                  ‘time, season’ (in compounds)
 Pn:     Tongan           taʔu                   ‘yam season cycle, year’
 Pn:     E Futunan        taʔu                   ‘yam season’
 Pn:     Samoan           tau                    ‘season, year’
 Pn:     Rennellese       taʔu                   ‘season’
 Pn:     Rennellese      | taʔu ika |              ‘fish season (late July to early January)’ (ika ‘fish’)
 Pn:     Tuvalu           tau(naŋa)              ‘year’
 Pn:     Rapanui          taʔu                   ‘year’
 Pn:     Anutan           tau                    ‘year’
 Pn:     Mangareva        tau                    ‘season, year’
>

320    Malcolm Ross


   Newell and Poligon (1993:486) define Batad Ifugao (Central Cordilleran, Philippines)
tawon as follows: ‘a measure of the time between a major event such as planting or
harvesting rice until it recurs. Traditionally, reference is not to a calendar year; a year does
not have a fixed beginning and end.’ The rice harvest was evidently replaced by the yam
harvest in POc. Glosses in other languages suggest that *taqun was perhaps originally the
name of a particular season, the dry season when food did not grow. We find Isneg
(North Cordilleran) mag-d‹in›axun ‘the hot, dry season’, derived from taxun ‘year’
(Vanoverbergh 1972), and Binukid (Manobo) taun ‘hunger season’ (Post 1992).

    In Polynesian languages, there is a tendency, stronger in the east that in the west, for the
reflex of POc *taqun/PPn *taqu to denote a ‘season’, in the sense of the dry season or the
wet season. Kirch and Green (2001:261, 265) believe that the use of these reflexes to mean
‘year’ postdates western contact, but it does seem that the annual cycle of planting and
harvesting was a major element of the meaning of both POc *taqun and PPn *taqu (Kirch
& Green 2001:267). The presence of the nominaliser ‹in› in the Patpatar and Ramoaaina
reflexes above suggests that POc *taqun was also a verb meaning ‘last a year’.

9.2.5 Lunar month names

   Throughout much of Oceania there were calendars based on lunar months. However,
discussion of these lies beyond the scope of this chapter, which is concerned with the
labelling of time units whose connection to nature is fairly transparent. Calendrical names
have complex associations with their users’ culture, both material and non-material, and
will receive a chapter to themselves in a later volume.

9.3 Directed times: present, past and future

                                                                                    Time    321

   As noted in the introduction to this chapter (p.295), directed times—adjuncts expressing
past, present and future—may be purely deictic (‘now’, ‘today’), may express vague
distance (‘in the past’, ‘in the future’), or may express a specified distance within a cycle
(e.g. ‘this morning’, ‘this evening’) or measured by cycles (e.g. ‘yesterday’, ‘tomorrow’,
‘the day before yesterday’).

   There is strong evidence that most of the temporal terms that are reconstructable in this
semantic category belong to the same class as the local nouns reconstructed in Chapter 8
(p.233), and that like those nouns, they occurred in a local construction with the POc
preposition *i or formed adverbs with the prefix *qa- (p.322). Some temporal members of
the class, however, also formed adverbs by reduplicating the disyllabic root.


9.3.1 Deictic time: ‘now’, ‘today’

   No POc form which uniquely means ‘now’ or ‘today’ is reconstructable. In many
languages the same term is used for both meanings. Insofar as etymologising is possible
(and more often than not it isn’t), the term for ‘now’ or ‘today’ is formed by one of two
strategies. In the first, the proximal demonstrative is used. Thus Lou (Adm) tapoŋ, Drehet
(Adm) indah, Kaulong (NNG) ai, Bing (NNG) nien, Takia (NNG) ete, Gumawana (PT)
ame, Patpatar (MM) kaiken, Longgu (SES) nene are each both ‘here’ and ‘now’. Nêlêmwa
(NCal) lheny is both ‘this’ and ‘today’.

    The second strategy is an extension of the first: a phrase corresponding to ‘this day’ is
used. Hence Drehet (Adm) laŋ nane, Nguna raŋi waia, Niuean (Pn) aho nei, all ‘day’ +
‘this’. Nehan (MM) ene dān once meant ‘this day’ (dān < POc *raqani ‘daytime’) but now
means only ‘today’.

    The claim is sometimes made that Oceanic systems of spatial deixis are also used for
temporal purposes. There are very few well documented cases of this beyond the use of the
proximal demonstrative ‘here’ for ‘now’. Such cases are Nêlêmwa (Bril 2002), Iaai
(Ozanne-Rivierre 2004), Kosraean (Lee 1975:129), Mokilese (Harrison 1976:77–81, 85)
and Samoan (Mosel 2004). However, as Anderson and Keenan (1985:298–299) observe
with regard to Kosraean and Mokilese, even in these two Micronesian languages the
temporal applications of the spatial deictics are not parallel. The same observation is true
of the other languages just listed, and so no precise reconstruction of a temporal usage of
spatial deictics in POc is possible.

9.3.2 Vague temporal distance

   There are relatively few lexical items in Oceanic languages denoting vague temporal
distances. Lexical items for ‘in the past’ and ‘in the future’ used relative to the time of
speaking are also used respectively for ‘earlier’ and ‘later’, i.e., for expressions relative to
a time named by the speaker. Expressions for ‘recently’ and ‘soon’ are usually phrasal or
clausal (e.g. ‘a little time has passed/will pass …’), not lexical.


9.3.2.1 ‘in the past’/‘earlier’ and ‘in the future’/‘later’

   Curiously English and other European languages have two superficially contradictory
ways of using the spatial analogy to express temporal direction. We say that the past is
behind us and the future lies before us, yet when the deictic point is not the time of
speaking we say that something in the past relative to that point is beforehand whilst
something in the future relative to it is afterwards. The Oceanic spatial metaphor for past
and future is the second of these: ‘front’ is past, ‘back’ is future, presumably because that
which is in front of one is visible, and so is, metaphorically speaking, the past.

322     Malcolm Ross

   The reconstructions below are repeated from Chapter 8, but only reflexes with a
temporal meaning are listed here. The POc terms for ‘formerly’ were apparently *i muqa,
*qa-muqa and *muqa-muqa, for ‘later, afterwards’ *i muri/*i buri and *muri-muri. In
PWOc *muga also occurred (p.258).

<
POc *muqa- ‘front’
POc *muqa ‘front; be in front’
POc *|i muqa|, *qa-muqa *muqa-muqa ‘in front, formerly’ (p.257)
 Adm: Mussau              mu-mua           ‘first of all, formerly’
 MM: Tabar                mu-mua           ‘formerly’
 MM: Lihir                (i)muo           ‘formerly’
 MM: Taiof                (i)mua(n)        ‘formerly’
 NCV: Mota                (a)mʷoa          ‘before, first’
 NCV: Raga                (a)mua           ‘before, at first, first, in front of’
 NCV: Port Sandwich (a)mo                  (POSTVERBAL ADV) ‘before’
 Mic: Woleaian            [i]mʷowa-        ‘front, before’
 Mic: Woleaian             mʷ-mʷa-          ‘front, first, tip, before’
 Pn:      Tongan         | (ʔi) muʔa [-atu] | ‘formerly’ (-atu DIR; p.279)
 Pn:      Samoan          (ana)mua         ‘formerly, in those days’
PWOc *muga ‘front; be in front; formerly’
 NNG: Bariai            muga(eai)                   ‘formerly’ (-eai POSTP)
 NNG: Arop-Lokep        mugu                        ‘first of all, formerly’
 NNG: Mangap            muᵑgu                       ‘first of all, formerly, long ago’
 NNG: Bing              mug                         ‘formerly’
 NNG: Adzera            moŋʔ                        ‘prior’
 MM: Bali               muga-                       ‘front’
 MM: Ramoaaina          (nə)mugə                    ‘in front; formerly’
>

<
PMP *ma-udehi ‘be last; be after or behind; be late, be later; future’ (ACD)[15]
POc *muri[-] ‘be behind, be after; back part, rear, behind, space to the rear of, time after; (canoe) stern; space outside’
POc *|i muri|, *muri-muri ‘at the back, later’ (p.261)
 Adm: Titan               muri-n             ‘behind, afterwards’
 NNG: Bariai              muri(ai)           ‘later, afterwards’
 NNG: Sio                 muri               ‘later’
 NNG: Gitua               mur                ‘behind, afterwards’
 NNG: Bing                mur(gam)           ‘later’
 PT:     Dobu             muri-na            ‘behind, afterwards’
 PT:     Gapapaiwa        muri               ‘back of s.t.; behind, afterwards’
 PT:     Tawala           muri               ‘back of s.t.; behind, afterwards’
 PT:     Sinaugoro        muri-na(i)         ‘behind, afterwards’
 MM:     Meramera         (muli)muli        ‘later’
 MM:     Nakanai          (muli)muli        ‘later’
 MM:     Tigak            (ai)muk           ‘later’
 MM:     Ramoaaina        (na)mur           ‘later, afterwards’
 MM:     Mono-Alu         (muri)muri        ‘later’
 MM:     Vangunu          (tara)meji-na     ‘after’
 MM:     Varisi           (tara)muzi-na     ‘after’
 SES:    Gela             muri              ‘behind, afterwards; back; outside of s.t.; afterbirth; posterity’
 SES:    Lengo            (i)muri(a)        ‘after’
 SES:    Arosi            muri              ‘follow; behind, back; outside of s.t.; afterwards; left hand when facing an object’
 Fij:    Bauan           | (e) muri |         ‘behind, later’
 Pn:     Tongan           (ʔa)mui           ‘later on, at some future time’
 Pn:     Maori            muri              ‘rear, hind part; sequel, time to come; behind, afterwards, backwards; youngest child’
 Pn:     Maori           | (i) muri |         ‘afterwards’
>

[15] Blust (ACD) does not provide a gloss for *ma-udehi. The gloss here is based on that for *udehi.

                                                                                 Time     323

<
PMP * burit ‘hind part, rear, back’ (ACD)
POc *burit ‘be behind, be after; back part, rear, behind, space to the rear of, time after; (canoe) stern’
POc *|i burit| ‘behind, afterwards’ (p.262)
 SES: Lau                  | (i) buri |        ‘afterwards’
 SES: ’Are’are              puri-na          ‘after’
>

9.3.2.2 ‘long ago’

   It is hard to avoid the conclusion that *tuqaRi ‘(be) long ago; old (of inanimates)’ is
historically related to *[ma]tuqa ‘ripe, mature, adult, old’. POc *tuqaRi appears to be both
verb and temporal adverb. The full cognate set is given on p.212, with a discussion of the
form of the reconstruction.

<
POc *tuqaRi ‘(be) long ago; take a long time, old (of inanimates)’
 NCV: Mota               tuai              ‘of long duration, old’
 NCV: Tamambo            tuai              ‘of old’
 NCV: Nguna              tuai              ‘long ago, (thing) old’
 SV:    Sye              (e)twai           ‘recently’
 SV:    Sye              (it-e)twai        ‘long time ago’
 SV:    Kwamera          tui               ‘old, previous, of the past, long ago’
 SV:    Anejom           (i)tuwu           ‘long ago’
 Fij:   Wayan            tuei              (V, ADJ) ‘take a long time; be slow, late’
 Pn:     Tongan            tuai              (V) ‘be slow, late’
 Pn:     Tongan           | (mai) tuai |       (PP) ‘from of old, since very early times’
 Pn:     Samoan            tuai              (V) ‘be late, be delayed’
>

9.3.3 Distances within a day or measured by days

   POc temporal bases themselves were in general directionless, i.e. neutral between
past and future. The exception to this was *ñoRap ‘yesterday’. There is no clearly
reconstructable term for ‘tomorrow’, and both ‘yesterday’ and ‘tomorrow’ are often
denoted by terms which reflect as their base either POc *boŋi ‘night, day of twenty-four
hours’ (p.305) or POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’ (p.309). ‘The day before yesterday’ and
‘the day after tomorrow’ both had as their base the directionless *waRisa ‘two days from
today’ (p.332).

   Pawley (1972:32–33, 82) reconstructed the PEOc prefixes *qa- and *qana- as
formatives of future and past temporal expressions respectively. In the light of wider
evidence, it seems that *qana- was originally two prefixes: *qa- and *na-. In both
formatives *qa- is the POc adverbialising prefix described in Chapter 8 (p.235), whilst
*na- was a prefix forming temporal bases situated in the past. Sometimes, it seems, it was
attached to a base which had past meaning, but often it formed a past term from a base
which did not express temporal direction. This *na- may well be of PMP antiquity, as it is
reflected with the same function in (Western Malayo-Polynesian) languages of the Kaili-
Pamona, Wotu-Wolio and SE Celebic families on the island of Sulawesi (Mead 2001).

9.3.3.1 Distances within a day

   By distances within a day, I mean expressions corresponding to English ‘last night’,
‘tonight’, ‘this morning’, ‘this evening’. Oceanic data relating to these are very thin indeed.
I suspect the main reason for this is that expressions consisting of ‘today’ or ‘yesterday’
plus ‘morning’ or ‘evening’ are often used, and they are simply not noted in dictionaries.
For example:

__pre__
  Adm: Drehet         kumwiŋ ‘now, today’      piŋ ‘night’        piŋ kumwiŋ ‘tonight’
  PT:     Ubir        ari ‘now, today’         fom ‘night’        ari-fom ‘tonight’
  PT:     Kiriwina lagaila ‘today’             bogi ‘night’       lagaila bogi ‘tonight’

   There are a few languages where *qa- is prefixed to a part of the day to form a future
expression, *[qa]na- to form a past expression, but it is not clear whether these
expressions are reconstructable for POc or are simply independent innovations resulting
from the productivity of the prefixes. Thus we find Nakanai (MM) ala-logo ‘last night’ vs
ga-logo ‘tonight’ (-logo < *rodrom ‘night’), Nehan (MM) na-boung ‘last night’, na-liwo
‘this morning (past)’ vs ro-liwo ‘tomorrow’ (the origin of ro- is unknown), and Tongan
(Pn) ʔane-pō ‘last night’ vs ʔa-pō ‘tonight’. Niuean (Pn) has terms reflecting *[qa]na-: ne-
poŋi-poŋi ‘this morning (past)’, ne-pō ‘last night’, and ne-afi-afi ‘yesterday evening’.
Biggs and Clark (1993) reconstruct PPn *qana-pō ‘last night’:

<
PPn *qana-pō ‘last night’
 Pn:    Tongan          ʔanepō            ‘last night’
 Pn:    Niuean          ne-pō             ‘last night’
 Pn:    Samoan          anapō             ‘last night’
 Pn:     Anutan          anapo        ‘last night’
 Pn:     E Futunan       nāpō         ‘last night’
 Pn:     E Uvean        | ʔana pō |     ‘last night’
 Pn:     Nukuria         anabō        ‘last night’
 Pn:     Tahitian        napo         ‘last night’
>

                                                                             Time   325


9.3.3.2 ‘yesterday’

   The POc base for ‘yesterday’ was *ñoRap. A few reflexes reflect accretion of the
preposition *i, and just two reflect *qa-. Whether *qa-ñoRap occurred in POc or whether
*qa- continued to be productive and came later to be attached to reflexes of *ñoRap is
unclear. This question is compounded by an interesting distributional phenomenon. We
can also reconstruct POc *na-ñoRap, with past formative *na- (p.324). This is reflected
largely, but not exclusively, in Eastern Oceanic languages, whilst unprefixed *ñoRap is
reflected mainly in Western Oceanic languages. There is an overlap zone in the southeast
Solomons and northern Vanuatu.

<
PMP *ñeRab ‘yesterday’
POc *ñoRap ‘yesterday’ (*|i ñoRap|, *qa-ñoRap (?))
 NNG: Kove              noha         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Gitua             nora         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Mangap            nēri         (ADV) ‘yesterday, subjectively recent time, just recently’
 NNG: Sio               nola         (ADV) ‘yesterday; any unspecified prior time or day’
 NNG: Kilenge           nola         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Amara             noro         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Aria              narep        ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Poeng             ŋalla        ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Kakuna            ŋala-na      ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Roinji            nola         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Takia             nor          (ADV) ‘yesterday, recently’
 NNG: Numbami           nolowa       ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Yabem             no(gɛŋ)      ‘yesterday ’
 NNG: Kaiwa             nolik        ‘yesterday ’
 NNG: Medebur           nora         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Manam             nora         ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain        nira-ñ       ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Ali               nari         ‘yesterday’
 PT:   Misima           noru         ‘yesterday’
 MM: Bali               ŋorapa       ‘yesterday’
 MM: Bulu               nola         ‘yesterday’
 MM: Lavongai           (a)noŋo      ‘yesterday’
 MM: Tigak              nogo         ‘yesterday’
 MM: Ramoaaina          narap        ‘before, formerly’
 MM:     Nehan           nerau          ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Solos           nonoh          ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Halia (Haku)   | (i) nolaha |    ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Halia (Selau)   narowa         ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Taiof           nanaf          ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Teop            nanava         ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Banoni          (ɣa)nanava     ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Roviana         norae          ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Kia             norao          ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Maringe         ñora           ‘yesterday’
 SES:    Gela            nola           ‘yesterday’
 SES:    Bugotu          (i)ñoða        ‘yesterday’
 SES:    W Guad.         (i)noa         ‘yesterday’
 NCV:    Motlav          a-nor          ‘yesterday’
 Mic:    Kiribati        noa            ‘yesterday’
>

326   Malcolm Ross

The Southern Vanuatu members of the set below reflect a Proto South Vanuatu form
reconstructed by Lynch (2001c:211) as *na-yan(a,u)v. POc *R is sporadically lost in Proto
South Vanuatu, and these forms seem to reflect a metathesis of a reflex of na-ñoRap to
*na-Rañop.

<
POc *na-ñoRap ‘yesterday’ (*i na-ñoRap, *qa-na-ñoRap (?))
 NNG: Lamogai          narnop          ‘yesterday’ (< *na-norap: metathesis)
 MM: Tabar             nenora          ‘yesterday’
 MM: Nduke             nonoro          ‘yesterday’
 SES: ’Are’are         nonora          ‘yesterday’
 SES: Sa’a             nonola          ‘yesterday’
 SES: Arosi            nanora          ‘yesterday’
 SES: Fagani           nanora          ‘yesterday’
 SES: Bauro            ananora         ‘yesterday’
 SES: Kahua            nanora          ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Mota             ananora         ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Motlav           (n)ananoa       ‘yesterday’
 NCV: NE Ambae         nainoa          ‘yesterday’
 SV:    Sye            ninu            ‘yesterday’
 SV:    Whitesands     neniəv          ‘yesterday’
 SV:    Lenakel        nenav           ‘yesterday’
 SV:    Kwamera        neiv            ‘yesterday’
 SV:    Anejom         (i)yenev        ‘yesterday’
 Mic: Kiribati         nanoa           ‘yesterday’
 Mic: Mortlockese      nanaw           ‘yesterday’
 Mic: Puluwatese       nænewɨ          ‘yesterday’
 Mic: Woleaian         rarowa          ‘yesterday’
 Fij:   Bauan         | (e) nanoa |      ‘yesterday’
>

                                                                              Time    327


   There seem to be at least two other variants on this form. Certain Papuan Tip languages
reflect *Ropa:

__pre__
 PT:      Tawala          lolowa          ‘before, (a few) days back’
 PT:      Dobu            lowa            ‘day before yesterday’
 PT:      Kiriwina        lova            ‘yesterday’

This seems to be the outcome of a three-step process. First, the vowels of *ñoRap
metathesised to *ñaRop (as they have done in Selau narowa in the first *ñoRap set above).
Then, *ñ became *n and a paragogic *-a was added, both regular changes, giving
*naRopa. Finally, *na- was reinterpreted as the past formative, leaving the base *Ropa
reflected above.

   The forms below reflect Proto NCV *na-novi ‘yesterday’. This contrasts with Proto
NCV *novi ‘tomorrow’ (Nokuku pwa-novi, Kiai i-novi, Tolomako i novi) and so may have
nothing to do with *na-ñoRap. Clark (1996) thinks it reflects a conflation of POc *na-
ñoRap and *na-Rapi (below), however, and he may be right.

__pre__
 NCV: Raga               ninovi           ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Nokuku             nonovi           ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Kiai               nanovi           ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Tamambo            (na)nanovi       ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Lonwolwol          nono             ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Namakir            nanov            ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Nguna              nanova           ‘yesterday’
 NCV: Tolomako           na novi          ‘yesterday’

   The term below reflects POc *boŋi ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’ prefixed with the
past formative *na-. The reconstruction of *na-boŋi ‘yesterday’ as far back as POc is
questionable, as it is not well attested outside Meso-Melanesian languages.

<
POc (?) *na-boŋi ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Kairiru            nubuoŋ(nai)       ‘yesterday’
 MM: Sursurunga          nabuŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Tangga              nabiŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Konomala            nabuŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Patpatar            nabuŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Tolai               nabuŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Ramoaaina           nabuŋ             (ADV) ‘yesterday’
 MM: Kandas              nubuŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Bilur               naboŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Label               naboŋ             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Tinputz             noboen            ‘yesterday’
 MM: Kwaio               nāboni            ‘yesterday’
 cf. also
 NNG: Kairiru            (ra)buŋ           ‘yesterday’
 NNG: Hote               (wak)buk          ‘yesterday’ (wak < POc *qaco ‘sun’)
 PT:      Tawala         pom               ‘yesterday’
 MM: Siar                (la)buŋ           ‘yesterday’
 MM:     Hahon             (ro)bon           ‘yesterday’
 SES:    Gela              (i)boŋi           ‘yesterday’
 NCV:    Port Sandwich     (xi)mboŋ          ‘yesterday’
 NCV:    Labo              (lo)mbun          ‘yesterday’
>

328    Malcolm Ross


   A few Western Oceanic terms for ‘yesterday’ reflect POc *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’
(p.309). Reflexes in Sio (NNG) and in the Central Papuan subgroup of Papuan Tip
languages have a prefix which appears to reflect a preposition reflex of POc *ua (VF) ‘go
towards addressee’, (DIR) ‘towards addressee’ (Ch. 8, §3.4.4).

__pre__
 NNG:    Sio               wa-lani           (ADV) ‘day before yesterday ’
 NNG:    Wogeo             ra-ran            ‘yesterday’
 PT:     Sinaugoro         ɣwa-laɣani        ‘yesterday’
 PT:     Keapara           va-raɣani         ‘yesterday’
 PT:     Motu              va-rani           ‘yesterday’
 PT:     Roro              ua-rani           ‘yesterday’
 PT:     Kuni              ua-nani           ‘yesterday’
 PT:     E. Mekeo          a-ŋani            ‘yesterday’

   The term below is clearly the same root as *Rapi/*Rapi-Rapi ‘late afternoon and
evening, from about 3 p.m. to sunset’ (p.313). I have placed a question mark against the
reconstructed gloss below, as it is not attested in the data. However, the gloss ‘yesterday’ is
presumably the result of extension of meanings denoting ‘last evening’. Nuclear
Polynesian languages reflect an unexplained innovation whereby *qa-na-api became *qa-
na-napi.

<
POc *|i Rapi| ‘(?) in the evening’
POc *na-Rapi ‘yesterday’
POc *qa-na-Rapi ‘yesterday’
 PT:      Gapapaiwa        ravi-ravi        (ADV) ‘yesterday’
 MM: Bola                  ravi             (ADV) ‘yesterday’
 MM: Meramera              lavi             ‘yesterday’
 MM: Nakanai               (ala)lavi        ‘yesterday’
 MM: Kara (East)           (la)nef          ‘yesterday’ (metathesis)
 MM: Kara (West)           (ne)ief          ‘yesterday’
 MM: Nalik                 (la)raf          ‘yesterday’
 MM: Lihir                 (la)leh          ‘yesterday’
 MM: Barok                 la               ‘yesterday’
 MM: Minigir               (na)ravi         ‘yesterday’
 MM: Nehan                 (ne)rau          ‘yesterday’
 MM: Mono-Alu              lahi             ‘yesterday’
 Pn:       Tongan          (ʔane)afi        ‘yesterday’
 Pn:       Niuean          (ne)afi          ‘yesterday’
 Pn:       Samoan          (ana)nafi        ‘yesterday’
 Pn:       Ifira-Mele      (nā)nafi         ‘yesterday’
 cf. also:
 SES: Longgu               (ŋa)lavi         ‘yesterday’
 Fij:      Wayan           (ni)avi          ‘yesterday’
>

                                                                                 Time    329

9.3.3.3 ‘tomorrow’

   There is no POc term for ‘tomorrow’ that is as unambiguously reconstructable as
*ñoRap is for ‘yesterday’.

    We might expect that just as POc *na-boŋi (p.327), with the past formative, was
perhaps used for ‘yesterday’, so *boŋi ‘night, day of twenty-four hours’, without a
formative, might also have served for ‘tomorrow’. But this would have been ambiguous in
at least some contexts, so we would expect some disambiguating marker. We do indeed
find reflexes of *boŋi used for ‘tomorrow’, and some of these are listed below, but they do
not form a cognate set, and their disambiguating markers vary from demonstratives (Iduna,
Sinaugoro) through an adposition (Dawawa) to irrealis enclitics (Mindiri, Bilibil, Matukar).

__pre__
  Adm: Drehet             (neke)piŋ          (ADV) ‘tomorrow’
  Adm: Lou                (ti)peŋ            ‘tomorrow’
  Adm: Nyindrou           (na)biŋi           ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Malalamai          boŋ(o)             ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Bing               boŋ(sag)           ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Mindiri            bum(po)            ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Bilibil            boi(lap)           ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Gedaged            boŋ(anip)          ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Takia              boŋ                ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Matukar            bo(ip)             ‘tomorrow’
  NNG: Sera               puiŋ(eteik)        ‘tomorrow’
  PT: Iduna               bogi(yadi)         ‘tomorrow’
  PT: Muyuw               (nu)bweig          ‘tomorrow’
  PT: Sinaugoro           boi(nani)          (ADV) ‘tomorrow’
  NCV: Paamese            (visu)voŋ          ‘tomorrow’
  NCV: Namakir            (paʔa)bog          ‘tomorrow’
  Mic: Kiribatese         (niŋā)boŋ          ‘tomorrow’

   We also find reduplicated reflexes of *boŋi, but I take these to be reflexes of POc *boŋi-
boŋi ‘early morning from dawn to 9 or 10 a.m.’ (p.310). I doubt whether the sense
‘tomorrow’ is also reconstructable for *boŋi-boŋi and assume that these are the outcomes
of parallel innovations, similar to those via which reflexes of *Rapi ‘evening’ came to
mean ‘yesterday’.

<
POc *|i boŋi-boŋi| ‘(?) in the morning’
POc *qa-boŋi-boŋi ‘(?) in the morning’
 NNG: Barim                buŋ-buŋ          ‘tomorrow’
 NNG: Arop-Lokep           boŋ-boŋ          ‘tomorrow’
 NNG: Malasanga            buŋ-boŋ          ‘tomorrow’
 PT: Dawawa                boi-boi          ‘morning, tomorrow’
 PT: Tangga                (na)biŋ-biŋ      ‘tomorrow’
 SES: Lau                  bo-boŋi          ‘tomorrow’
 Pn:     Tongan            (ʔa)poŋi-poŋi    ‘tomorrow’
 Pn:     Niuean            poŋi-poŋi        ‘tomorrow, this morning’
 Pn:    E Futunan          (ā)poŋi-poŋi     ‘tomorrow’
 Pn:    E Uvean            (a)poŋi-poŋi     ‘tomorrow’
  Pn:     Tikopia         (a)poŋi-poŋi       ‘tomorrow’
  Pn:     Maori           (ā)pō-pō           ‘tomorrow’
>

330     Malcolm Ross


   Reflexes of POc *puko ‘morning’ (p.311) have also come to mean ‘tomorrow’ in a
number of languages.

   POc *ma-pua ‘tomorrow’ is reconstructable from the rather skewed cognate set below.
Data from Sulawesi languages and Balinese cited by Mead (2001) point to the
reconstruction of PMP *i-pu(h)a-n ‘day after tomorrow, day before yesterday’, and the
POc root *-pua here apparently reflects PMP *-pu(h)a-. However, the apparent shift in
meaning is unexplained.

<
POc *ma-pua ‘tomorrow’
 Adm: Loniu            mahu                 ‘tomorrow’
 PT: Kukuya            mapu(tua)            ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Tigak             (a)mau(a)            ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Tiang             məu(ə)               ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Kara (East)       mofu                 ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Kara (West)       mofu                 ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Nalik             (la)maf              ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Solos             mahu                 ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Petats            mahu                 ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Halia (Haku)      mahu                 ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Halia (Selau)     mawu                 ‘tomorrow’
>

   POc *ma-raqani was presumably originally a verb meaning ‘become light’, derived
from *raqani ‘daytime, daylight’ (p.309). Its reflexes in a number of languages mean
‘tomorrow’, as do several other reflexes of *raqani listed below. If it is the case, as
suggested on p.300, that the POc day began at sunset, then, once sunset had passed, *i
raqani ‘in the daylight’ (reflected directly in Sa’a and ’Are’are) would have referred to the
daylight of the present day—‘tomorrow’ in an English-speaker’s terms.

<
POc *ma-raqani ‘become light’
 PT: Gapapaiwa         maram                ‘tomorrow, in the future’
 PT: Kandas            markan               ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Patpatar          marakan              ‘tomorrow’
 NCV: Mota             maran                ‘light, daylight, morning, day; be light; tomorrow’s light; the morrow’
  NCV: Raga                maran            ‘morning light, morning’
  NCV: Labo                maxan            ‘tomorrow, morning ’
  SV: Sye                  mran             ‘tomorrow’
  SV: Anejom               (i)mrañ          ‘tomorrow’
  cf. also:
  SES: Longgu              dañi             (V) ‘tomorrow; daylight’
  SES: Sa’a               | i deni |          ‘tomorrow’
  SES: ’Are’are            itani            ‘tomorrow’
  NCV: Sakao               (lak)ren         ‘tomorrow’
  NCV: Port Sandwich       (pe)an           ‘tomorrow’
>

                                                                                  Time    331


There is also a variety of forms that seem to reflect a root *tuqu ‘tomorrow’.

<
POc *la-tuqu ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Label                  latu             ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Sursurunga             latiu            ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Siar                   latu             ‘tomorrow’
 Mic: Marshallese           (i)lcu           ‘tomorrow’
 Mic: Kosraean              lutu           ‘tomorrow, morning’
 Mic: Chuukese              ɾəwɨ           ‘tomorrow’
 Mic: Puluwatese            layɨ           ‘tomorrow’
 Mic: Woleaian              raɨ            ‘tomorrow’
Proto Northwest Solomonic *na-tuqu ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Papapana            natui             ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Ghove               natui             ‘tomorrow’
 MM: Maringe             natuʔu            ‘tomorrow’
PPn *a(r,l)etuqu ‘tomorrow’
 Pn:    Mae               aretū            ‘tomorrow, day after’
 Pn:     Nukuria          (bō)aledū        ‘tomorrow night’ (bō ‘night’)
  Pn:    W Futunan        aratu            ‘tomorrow’
>

9.3.3.4 A note on the derivations of ‘yesterday’ and ‘tomorrow’

   The derivational relationships (i) between POc *na-Rapi ‘yesterday’, *qa-na-Rapi
‘yesterday’ and POc *Rapi ‘evening’ and (ii) between POc *raqani ‘(become) daylight’
and POc *ma-raqani ‘tomorrow’ reflect a tendency across the world’s languages whereby
terms for ‘yesterday’ and ‘tomorrow’ are derived from terms for ‘evening’ and ‘morning’
respectively. Terms meaning ‘in the evening’ and ‘in the morning’ lack temporal direction,
but this is filled in by the presence of tense or (in some Oceanic languages) mood markers
in the verb phrase, i.e. ‘in the evening’ is interpreted as ‘yesterday evening’, then comes by
semantic extension to mean simply ‘yesterday’. A similar observation can be made for
‘tomorrow’. This interpretation is proposed by Buck (1949:999–1000) for the similar
derivations that are found for ‘tomorrow’ across much of the Indo-European family and for
‘yesterday’ in Modern Greek, and the Baltic and Slavonic languages. Parallel derivations
have also occurred in Finnish and Estonian, in Turkic languages, in Arabic, in Pama-
Nyungan and non-Pama-Nyungan Australian languages, in Siouan, in Chinese and in
Japanese (Ross 2001c).

    It seems possible that the one directed lexical root above, PMP *ñeRab, POc *ñoRap
‘yesterday’ is itself derivationally related to PMP *Rabi ‘evening’.


9.3.3.5 ‘the day before yesterday’ and ‘the day after tomorrow’

332   Malcolm Ross

   As I noted earlier, both ‘the day before yesterday’ and ‘the day after tomorrow’ were
denoted by the inherently directionless temporal term POc *waRisa ‘two days from today’.
Past direction, i.e. ‘the day before yesterday’, was specified by the past formative *na-,
but, as with *na-ñoRap and *na-boŋi above, *na- is reflected only (patchily) among Meso-
Melanesian languages and more widely in Eastern Oceanic languages. Hence unprefixed
reflexes of *waRisa in Western Oceanic languages often denote ‘the day before yesterday’.

    Note that reflexes in Bing, Takia and Yabem which lack a reflex of final *-sa have lost
it as a result of regular sound changes.

    The Proto Tanna (SV) and Proto Polynesian reflexes of *qa-na- lost the past-marking
function. Tanna languages add a prefix for future direction, and PPn *qanoisa came to
mean ‘the day after tomorrow’.

<
POc *|[i] waRisa| ‘two days from today’
 NNG: Gitua            wariza             ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Lukep            airi               ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Mangap           urizi              ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Kilenge          olia               ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Amara            ueri(o)            ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Uvol             alia               ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Roinji           walia              ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Bing             wari(nan)          ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Takia            wari               ‘day before yesterday, in the past’
 NNG: Medebur          waijira            ‘day before yesterday’
 NNG: Numbami          walisawa           ‘day before yesterday ’
 NNG: Yabem            wali(gɛŋ)          ‘day before yesterday’
 PT: Misima            varira             ‘before (in time)’
 PT: Kiriwina          (silo)valela       ‘a few days ago’
 PT: Sudest            vaiya              ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Bali              varira             ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Bola              rira               ‘day before yesterday’ (for expected **arira)
 MM: Bola              (gi)rira           ‘day after tomorrow’
 MM: Meramera          lisa               ‘day before yesterday; formerly’ (for expected **walisa)
  MM:    Nakanai        uaisa             ‘the day after tomorrow’ (for expected **ualisa)
  MM:    Patpatar       uaris             ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Tolai          oari              ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Siar           urisa(i)          ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Nehan          iorih             ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Halia (Haku)   ialisa            ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Halia (Haku)   alisa             ‘day before yesterday’
  MM:    Banoni         (d)onisa          ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Mono-Alu       elila             ‘day after tomorrow’
  MM:    Maringe        (na)uriha         ‘day after tomorrow’ (na ART)
  SES:   Gela           valiha            ‘day before yesterday, day after tomorrow, some time ago, by and by, some day’
  SES: Kwaio            kwalita           ‘three days ago’
  SES: ’Are’are         warita            ‘former, previous, past’
  SES: ’Are’are        | i warita |         ‘formerly, in the old days’
  SES: Ulawa              | i welita |        ‘two days hence’
  SES: Sa’a               | i waite |         ‘two days ago’
  NCV: Mota                arisa            ‘day before yesterday, day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Raga                (vai)wehe        ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Port Sandwich       (x)ois           ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Lonwolwol           wuh              ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Lewo                vewo             ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Namakir             (pa)waih         ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: Nguna               wāsa             ‘day after tomorrow’
  NCV: S. Efate            uāsa             ‘day after tomorrow’
  SV: Sye                  wisas            ‘five days hence’
  SV: Anejom               (ho)viṣ          ‘three days from today’
>

                                                                               Time   333

<
POc *[qa-]na-waRisa ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Patpatar           nauaris           ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Tolai–Nodup        nari(a)                ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Solos              nanis             ‘day before yesterday’
 MM: Petats             nalis             ‘day before yesterday’
 NCV: Mota              anarisa           ‘day before yesterday’
 NCV: Port Sandwich (xi)nois              ‘day before yesterday’
 NCV: Paamese           noeise            ‘day before yesterday’
 NCV: Nguna             (n)anoasa         ‘day before yesterday’
 SV: Sye                nowisas           ‘five days ago’
 SV: Lenakel            nihin             ‘day before yesterday’
 SV: Lenakel            (to)nhi           ‘day after tomorrow’
 SV: Kwamera            neis              ‘day before yesterday’
 SV: Kwamera            (tə)neis          ‘day after tomorrow’
 SV: Anejom             nviṣ              ‘day before yesterday, day after tomorrow’
 Pn:    Tongan          [ʔa]ʔanoiha       ‘day after tomorrow’
 Pn:    Niuean          [a]noiha          ‘day after tomorrow’
 Pn:    E Uvean         anoia             ‘day after tomorrow’
 Pn:    Mae             anoisa            ‘day after tomorrow’
>

The contrast between *waRisa with and without *na- is reflected in the following pairs:

__pre__
                           *waRisa                           *[qa-]na-waRisa
                           ‘day after tomorrow’              ‘day before yesterday’
  MM: Patpatar             uaris                             nauaris
  MM: Tolai (Nodup)        oari(a)                           nari(a)
  NCV: Mota                arisa                             anarisa
  NCV: Port Sandwich       (x)ois                            (xi)nois
  SV: Sye                  wisas ‘five days hence’           nowisas ‘five days ago’
  SV: Anejom               (ho)viș ‘three days from today’   nviș ‘day before yesterday,
                                                               day after tomorrow’

334   Malcolm Ross

   Apparently an alternative way of expressing ‘the day after tomorrow’ in POc was *boŋi
rua ‘day of twenty-four hours’ + ‘two’ (in a few languages the opposite order of elements
is reflected, in line with syntactic change). This was perhaps a way of avoiding the
ambiguity of temporally directionless *waRisa. However, in a few modern languages this
expression can also mean ‘day before yesterday’ (in Wayan a preposed particle indicates
temporal direction). In two widely separated languages, Tami and Mono-Alu, the reflex
apparently means ‘tomorrow’: one can imagine several ways in which this meaning change
might have occurred, but none is especially convincing.

<
POc *|boŋi rua| ‘the day after tomorrow’ (apparently by default, literally ‘two days’)
 Adm: Lou                ru-peŋ              ‘day after tomorrow’
 Adm: Titan              lu-poŋ              ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Kove               voŋo-hua            ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Bariai             boŋ-rua             ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Tami               boŋ-lu              ‘tomorrow’
 NNG: Kilenge            voŋ-a               ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Maleu              vuŋ-ua              ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Amara              voŋo-ruo            ‘day after tomorrow’
 NNG: Poeng              (ŋa)voŋa-lua        (ADV) ‘day after tomorrow’
 MM: Kandas              ura-buŋ             ‘day after tomorrow’
 MM: Mono-Alu            boi-ua              ‘tomorrow’
 NCV: Nokuku            | pon rua |            ‘two days hence’
 NCV: Kiai               pon-rua             ‘the day after tomorrow’
 NCV: Uripiv            | bon eru |            ‘day before yesterday’
 Fij:   Bauan            boŋi-rua            ‘day before yesterday’
 Fij:   Wayan           | ei boŋi-rua |        ‘day after tomorrow’
 Fij:   Wayan           | a boŋi-rua |         ‘day before yesterday’
>


9.3.3.6 More than two days from now

   A number of languages have terms meaning ‘in three days time’ (i.e. ‘the day after the
day after tomorrow’) and ‘three days ago’, and some have similar terms for up to five days.
However, there is no sign of cognacy among them, and it is difficult to reconstruct terms in
lower-order proto languages, let alone POc.

9.3.4 Distances within a month/years or measured by months/years

  As far as I can tell, only temporal distances within a day and those measured in days
were lexicalised in POc. Distances related to the longer periods of months, seasons or
years were not lexicalised.

9.3.5 The interrogative local noun ‘when?’

                                                                                Time    335

   Blust (ACD) reconstructs PAn *ijan ‘when?’, and we would expect the POc form to be
*ican. This is indeed attested, always with a prefix, but only in a few languages. What we
find more widely are reflexes of POc *ŋaican or *ŋican, sometimes prefixed with *qa- or
*[qa]na-. The added *ŋ[a]- of *ŋa-ican or *ŋ-ican seems to be a fossilised reflex of the
POc prefix *ŋa-, an occasionally reflected alternant of POc *qa- (p.237). This prefix is
also reflected in Nakanai ga-isa, shown as a reflex of *ican below. The reason Nakanai ga-
isa is treated as a reflex of *ican, and not of *ŋaican, is that in Nakanai ga- remains as a
productive adverbial formative on temporal bases, alternating with the past formative ala-
(reflecting POc *[qa]na-).

    From the distributions of their reflexes, it seems that *ŋaican or *ŋican were already
alternants to *ican by the time POc broke up.

<
PAn *ijan ‘when?’ (ACD)
POc *ican ‘when?’
POc *qa-ican ‘when?’
 NNG: Manam               aira               ‘when?’
 MM: Nakanai              (ga)isa            ‘when?’
 MM: Meramera             aisa               ‘when?’
 MM: Tabar                (si)sa             ‘when?’
 MM: Mono-Alu             (ro)isa            ‘when?’
>

<
POc *|[i] ŋaican| ‘when?’
POc *qa-ŋaican ‘when?’
 NNG: Malai                ŋez           ‘when?’
 NNG: Gitua                ŋeza          ‘when?’
 NNG: Arop-Lokep           ŋe(lo)        ‘when?’
 MM: Sursurunga            aŋes          ‘when?’
 MM: Tolai                 (vi)ŋaia      ‘when?’
 MM: Ramoaaina             (na)ŋaian     ‘when?’
 MM: Label                 (na)ŋse       ‘when?’
 MM: Siar                  (la)ŋsiŋ      ‘when?’
 SES: Arosi                ŋaita         ‘when (future)?’
 SES: Fagani               kaitā         ‘when?’
 SES: Kahua                keta          ‘when?’
 NCV: Mota                 aŋaisa        ‘when (future)?’
 NCV: Nokuku               (pwa)nes      ‘when (future)?’
 NCV: Port Sandwich        ŋais          ‘when?’
 Mic: Kosraean             ŋɛ            ‘when?’
 Mic: Mokilese             ŋēt          ‘when?’
 Mic: Mortlockese          iŋɛ̃t         ‘when?’
 Mic: Puluwatese           yiŋet         ‘when?’
 Mic: Satawalese           ilēt         ‘when?’
 Mic: Carolinian           inēta        ‘when?’
 Mic: Woleaian             irēta        ‘when?’
>

<
POc *|[i] ŋican| ‘when?’
POc *qa-ŋican ‘when?’
 MM: Bali                  ŋizaŋa         ‘when?’
 MM: Lavongai              aŋisan         ‘when?’
 MM: Notsi                 (la)ŋisa       ‘when?’
 MM: Madak                 (na)ŋisa       ‘when?’
 MM: Barok                (la)ŋis           ‘when?’
 MM: Tangga               (na)ŋis           ‘when?’
 MM: Bilur                iŋian             ‘when?’
 MM: Nehan                (ma)ŋiha          ‘when?’
 MM: Solos                (ha)ŋis           ‘when?’
 MM: Halia (Haku)         (iha)ŋisa         ‘when?’
 MM: Teop                 (tobo)nihi        ‘when?’
 MM: Kia                  niha              ‘when?’
 MM: Kokota               niha(o)           ‘when?’
 MM: Maringe              (a)ñiha           ‘when?’
 MM: Gela                 ŋiha              ‘how many?’; ‘how much?’; ‘when?’
 SES: Bugotu              ñiha              ‘when?’
 SES: Lengo               iŋiða             ‘when?’
 SES: Talise              (ka)ŋisa          ‘when?’
 SES: Malango             iŋisa             ‘when?’
 SES: Birao               (daka)ŋisa        ‘when?’
 SES: Longgu              aŋita             ‘when?’
 SES: Lau                 aŋita             ‘when?’
 SES: Kwaio               aŋita             ‘when?’ (also nānita ‘when?’)
 NCV: Kiai                nisa              ‘when (future)?’
 NCV: Tolomako           | i ŋisa |           ‘when (future)?’
 SV: Anejom               iñiθ              ‘when?’
 Fij: Wayan              | ei ŋiða |          ‘when (future)?’
 Fij: Wayan              | a ŋiða |           ‘when (past)?’
>

336   Malcolm Ross


  A scattering of languages reflect the past formative with either *ŋaican or *ŋican.

<
POc *[qa]na-ŋaican, *[qa]na-ŋican ‘when (past)’
 MM: Nakanai             alaisa, alisa   ‘when (past)?’
 MM: Halia (Selau)       naŋsa           ‘when?’
 MM: Papapana            noŋovita        ‘when?’
 SES: Kwaio              nānita          ‘when?’ (also aŋita ‘when?’)
 SES: ’Are’are           nanita          ‘when?’
 SES: Arosi              nageita         ‘when (past)?’
 SES: Oroha              nanita          ‘when?’
 SES: Sa’a               ŋanite          ‘when?’
 SES: Fagani             anakaita        ‘when?’
 SES: Bauro              anakaita        ‘when?’
 NCV: Mota               anaŋaisa        ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Nokuku             nenesa          ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Kiai               nanisa          ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Tolomako           naŋisa          ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Lonwolwol          neŋeh           ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Paamese            neŋeise         ‘when (past)?’
 NCV: Nguna              naŋasa          ‘when?’
  SV:    Sye               niŋoi            ‘when?’
  Mic:   Kiribatese        niŋaira          ‘when?’
>

                                                                              Time    337


In Proto Polynesian, reflexes of POc *ican and its derivatives had been lost. Instead, the
PPn local root *fea ‘where’ (Ch. 8, p.265) was used. The local and temporal uses remained
distinct, since ‘where’ was expressed by the preposition *i + root, whereas ‘when’ was
expressed by prefixing PPn *qā- for the future and *[qa]na- for the past.

<
PPn *qā-fea ‘when (future)’
 Pn:    Tongan            ʔafē         ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Niuean            fē           ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Samoan            āfea          ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Nanumean          āfea          ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Ifira-Mele        āfea          ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Hawaiian          āhea          ‘when (future)?’
 Pn:    Tahitian          āfea          ‘when (future)?’
>

<
PPn *[qa]na-fea ‘when (past)’
 Pn:    Tongan           ʔanefē        ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Niuean           nefē          ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Samoan           anafea         ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Nanumean         nāfea          ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Rennellese       anafea         ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Ifira-Mele       nafea          ‘when (past)?’
 Pn:    Hawaiian         ināhea         ‘when (past)?’
>
