              Acknowledgments


Special thanks go to our co-editor, Andrew Pawley. His ostensible contributions to the volume
are to chapters 4 and 5, but he has also spent many an hour reading version after version of our
chapter drafts, giving insightful comments that have aided their improvement, adding data we
had missed, and correcting error.
    We also thank Alexandre François and the late John Lynch, who have generously
contributed data and local reconstructions, improving the coverage of many cognate sets.
Other scholars have made various contributions to individual chapters, and are acknowledged
in the first footnote of the chapter.
    We are grateful to Simon Foale for supplying the cover photo. Our thanks also go to James
Ross for redrawing the fifteen maps in Appendix B.

Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross
Canberra, June 2023


As this project comes to an end, all three of us would like to acknowledge the longsuffering
patience of our spouses — Andrew’s wife Medina, Meredith’s husband Len and Malcolm’s wife
Ingrid — and our families as they have lived with this project since the early 1990s.

Andrew Pawley, Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross
Canberra, June 2023






1               Introduction

Map 1.1: Oceanic and non-Oceanic Austronesian languages

1.1 Aims[1]

This is the sixth and last of a set of volumes on the lexicon of the Proto Oceanic (POc)
language.[2] POc was the immediate ancestor of the Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian
language family. This subgroup consists of all the Austronesian languages of Melanesia
east of 136˚ E, together with those of Polynesia and, with two exceptions, those of
Micronesia—around 500 languages in all (see Map 1.1).[3] Extensive arguments for the
existence of Oceanic as a clearly demarcated branch of Austronesian were first put forward
by Dempwolff (1927, 1937), and the validity of the subgroup is now recognised by
probably all scholars working in Austronesian historical linguistics.

    The development and break-up of the POc language and speech community were stages
in a truly remarkable chapter in human prehistory—the colonisation by Austronesian speakers
of the Indo-Pacific region in the period after about 2000 BC. The outcome was the largest of
the world’s well-established language families and (until the expansion of Indo-European
after Columbus) the most widespread. The Austronesian family comprises more than
1,000 distinct languages. Its eastern and western outliers, Madagascar and Easter Island,
are two-thirds of a world apart, and its northernmost extensions, Hawai‘i and Taiwan,
are separated by 70 degrees of latitude from its southernmost outpost, Stewart Island in
New Zealand.


[1] This introduction incorporates material in the introductions to Volumes 1–5, replicated so that each
    volume can be used independently, but also includes new material (§1.8 and §1.9). Our presentation of
    Oceanic subgrouping was revised in the introduction to volume 3, and this is largely retained here. We
    are indebted to Charles Grimes and Owen Edwards for their comments, especially on §§1.7-1.8.

[2] The project, the brainchild of Andrew Pawley, has been jointly directed by him and by Malcolm Ross,
    with research assistance from Meredith Osmond, in the Department of Linguistics of the Research
    School of Pacific and Asian Studies and its successor, the College of Asia and the Pacific, at the
    Australian National University.

[3] Ethnologue (Eberhard et al. 2022) lists 513 Oceanic languages, Glottolog 4.6 (Hammarström et al. 2022)
    lists 521. The two Micronesian exceptions are Chamorro in the Marianas and Palau, both
    apparently single-language branches within western Malayo-Polynesian (see Figure 1.5). There is broad
    agreement that speakers of pre-Chamorro migrated from the northern Philippines, but the origin of
    Palauan remains a mystery (Blust 2000a; Reid 2002; Smith 2017). Zobel 2002 gives an alternative view.

Map 1.2: Geographic limits of historically identified Oceanic speakers and presently documented Lapita sites

                                                                            Introduction 3


   A strong school of opinion associates the subsequent break-up of POc with the rapid
colonisation of Island Melanesia and the central Pacific by bearers of the Lapita culture
between about 1200 and 900 BC (see Map 1.2 and vol. 2, chapter 2).

   The present project brings together a large corpus of lexical reconstructions for POc,
with supporting cognate sets, organised according to semantic fields and using a standard
orthography for POc. We hope that it will be a useful resource for culture historians,
archaeologists and others interested in the prehistory of the Pacific region. The comparative
lexical material should also be a rich source of data for various kinds of purely linguistic
research, e.g. on subgrouping (as in §1.8 and §1.9), phonological change, semantic change
and semantic structure (e.g. colexification) in the 500 or so daughter languages.

   Volume 1 of _The lexicon of Proto Oceanic_ reconstructs terms associated with material
culture. Volumes 2, 3 and 4 examine relevant sets of cognate terms that provide insights
into how POc speakers viewed their environment. Volume 2 deals with the geophysical
or inanimate environment, and volumes 3 and 4 treat plants and animals respectively.
Volume 5 and the present volume return to terminologies centring on people. Volume 5
concerns gender and age, the body, and human conditions and physical and cognitive
activities that arise from nature rather than nurture. The present volume concerns
culturally learned structures, including social organisation, beliefs in the supernatural,
the seasons of the year, counting and other elements of non-material culture.

   A consideration of the totality of our reconstructions across volumes 1 to 5 has led to an
unexpected reassessment of the origin of Proto Oceanic (§§1.8–1.9) together with a small
revision to its phonology (§1.8.2.4).

   The editors had intended to provide a seventh volume that would perform several
functions. It would treat closed classes of lexical roots; review the project’s main
findings concerning Proto Oceanic speakers’ culture and environment and compare these
findings with what archaeology tells us about the way of life and environment of the
bearers of the Lapita culture. Some of these matters are partially folded into the chapters
of the present volume, e.g. social anthropology into chapters 3 and 4, archaeology into
chapter 5 and archaeogenetics briefly into chapter 15. Two factors have led to the
decision not to proceed with volume 7 and to make this the last volume. Firstly, the
editors are now octogenarians and would like to live somewhat less hectic lives.
Secondly, and importantly, funds have been provided by the (Australian Research
Council’s) Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language to set up a publicly
accessible electronic database of the reconstructions from the six volumes along with
their supporting data, thereby fulfilling at least the purposes of the cumulative indexes
intended for volume 7. It will also provide a locus for updating the project’s findings and
for additions by other scholars.

   This introduction follows a similar path to that taken in earlier volumes, but deviates in
§1.8 and §1.9 to outline the fresh insights into the prehistory of Proto Oceanic itself based
on the reconstructions in volumes 1–5. Section 1.2 gives an overview of this volume’s
contents. and §1.3 summarises its relationship to previous work. Section 1.4 examines
the issues that arise in reconstruction. It falls into four main subsections. Subsection
1.4.1 sketches our approach to reconstruction. Section 1.4.2 is a brief introduction to
sound correspondences. The third, §1.4.3 looks at the kinds of language grouping found
in Oceania, as this bears on the validity of our reconstructions. Section 1.4.4, sets out the
criteria that we apply in making a reconstruction, and our answers to the challenges this
raises. In section 1.5 we briefly explain the conventions used in the cognate sets that
make up much of this and previous volumes. Section 1.7 brings us to Proto Oceanic
itself and presents its phonology as it has been understood until now, and the two
orthographies that have been used to represent it. After a short note on POc morphology
in §1.6, section 1.8 takes us—we think appropriately in this our final volume—to the
study of Proto Oceanic phonology and origins based on volumes 1–5 (Ross, in prep.).
The results are summarised in §1.9.

4 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

1.2 The present volume

   Inspection of the table of contents shows that the chapters in the present volume vary
hugely in length. Each chapter concerns a semantic domain. For some of these
domains—kinship, seasonal cycles, counting—we found a wealth of data and were
dealing with internally structured closed classes of lexemes whose presentation required
numerous tables (and diagrams in the case of kinship). For other domains—the spirit
world, measurement—there was limited lexical material, and for yet others—_*mana_,
_*tabu_—the author chose to limit domains to single concepts considered by others to be key
cultural concepts in the Oceanic lexicon.

   Chapters 2 to 5 of this volume are concerned with POc speakers’ social organisation.
Chapter 2 is a detailed reconstruction of kinship terms and structures. Chapter 3, by the
late Per Hage, is a slightly edited and abridged version of a paper first published in
_The Journal of the Polynesian Society_ in 2007. It complements chapter 2 by using evidence
from disciplines other than linguistics to answer the question, “Was POc society
matrilineal?” Chapter 4 returns to a much discussed issue, reconstructing terms
associated with chieftainship and rank in POc and examining the consequences of this
reconstruction.[4] Chapter 5 uses reconstructed terms to investigate POc speakers’
settlement patterns.

   Chapter 6 concerns the probable recreational activities of POc speakers, looking at
music, song, dance and games.

   In chapters 7 to 10 we turn to topics that have to do with belief systems and the
supernatural. Chapter 7 concerns the beings that inhabited the POc spirit world.
Chapters 8 and 9 both deal with human manipulation of the supernatural. Chapter 8
takes a broad look at magic, while chapter 9 focuses on the reconstruction of PEOc
_*mana_, a term that has been much discussed by Pacific anthropologists and denotes the
pervasive supernatural power given by ancestral spirits to certain powerful individuals to
ensure their success. Chapter 10 analyses the meanings of the POc term _*tabu_, which
has reflexes throughout Oceanic. It meant ‘prohibited’, but in certain EOc languages it
also attributes an aura of sanctity to the ‘prohibited’ person or object.

[4] Terms for people (rather than for kinship or rank) are reconstructed in vol.5, ch.2. They include
    ‘person’, ‘woman’, ‘man’, age cohort terms from early childhood to old age, terms for people by
    absence or deprivation of relationship (‘orphan’, ‘unmarried adult’, ‘widow(er)’) and for twins.

                                                                            Introduction 5


   Chapter 11 investigates in some detail the way that Oceanic speakers have referred to
the cyclic nature of time and have used the sun, moon and stars to regulate the agricultural
cycle.

   The terms that POc speakers used to refer to various aspects of speech are the subject
of chapter 12.

   Chapter 13 reconstructs terms that had to do with trade and more generally with
change of possession: giving, receiving and stealing. It also introduces the practice of
ceremonial exchange, which plays a role in chapter 14 on counting. There it is argued
that the POc decimal counting system and its associated complexities were kept alive by
their use in ceremonial exchange feasts. Chapter 15 suggests that POc may also have
had a digit-tally system used in everyday counting. One counting complexity covered in
chapter 14 is the use of numeral classifiers, and chapter 16 deals with the subset of
classifiers used in measurement.

   Appendix A lists the data sources employed in this volume. Appendix B lists the
languages from which data for this and previous volumes are drawn. It includes
alternative names of languages, an index to languages, maps showing their approximate
locations, and a list of their ISO codes, glottocodes and longitudes and latitudes.


1.3 The relation of the current project to previous work

Reconstructions of POc phonology and lexicon began with Dempwolff’s pioneering
work in the 1920s and 1930s. Dempwolff’s dictionary of reconstructions attributed to
Proto Austronesian (PAn) (Dempwolff 1938)—but equivalent in modern terms to Proto
Malayo-Polynesian (PMP)—includes some 600 reconstructions with reflexes in Oceanic
languages.

   Since the 1950s, POc and other early Oceanic interstage languages have been the
subject of a considerable body of research. However, relatively few new reconstructions
safely attributable to POc were added to Dempwolff’s material until the 1970s. In 1969
George Grace made available as a working paper a compilation of reconstructions from
various sources amounting to some 700 distinct items, attributed either to POc or to
early Oceanic interstages. These materials were presented in a new orthography for POc,
based largely on Biggs’ (1965) orthography for an interstage he called Proto Eastern
Oceanic. Updated compilations of Oceanic cognate sets were produced at the University
of Hawai‘i in the period 1977–1983 as part of a project directed by Grace and Pawley.
These compilations and the supporting data are problematic in various respects and we
have made only limited use of them.

   Comparative lexical studies have been carried out for several lower-order subgroups
of Oceanic: for Proto Polynesian by Biggs (resulting in Walsh & Biggs 1966, Biggs,
Walsh & Waqa 1970 and subsequent versions of the POLLEX file, including Biggs & Clark 1993,
Clark & Biggs 2006 and online as Greenhill & Clark 2011); for Proto
Micronesian by scholars associated with the University of Hawai‘i (Bender et al. 1983, 2003a,b);
for the ancestor of the Banks and Torres languages by Alexandre François
(several unpublished manuscripts); for Proto North and Central Vanuatu by Clark (2009);
for Proto Southern Vanuatu by Lynch (2001b); for New Caledonia by Ozanne-Rivierre (1992),
Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre (1982) and Geraghty (1989); for Proto
SE Solomonic by Levy (1980) and Lichtenberk (1988); for Proto Central Pacific by
Hockett (1976), Geraghty (1983, 1986, 1996, together with a number of unpublished
papers); for Proto Eastern Oceanic by Biggs (1965), Cashmore (1969), Levy (1980), and
Geraghty (1990); and for Proto Central Papuan by Pawley (1975), Lynch (1978, 1980),
and Ross (1994).

6 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    Robert Blust of the University of Hawai‘i, in a series of papers (1970, 1980a,
1983-84a, 1986, 1989) published extensive, alphabetically ordered, lexical
reconstructions (with supporting cognate sets) for interstages earlier than POc,
especially for Proto Austronesian, Proto Malayo-Polynesian and Proto Eastern Malayo-Polynesian.
He has also written several papers investigating specific semantic fields
(Blust 1980b, 1982b, 1987, 1994). Blust & Trussel had a major work in progress, the on-
line Austronesian Comparative Dictionary (ACD), which brings together Blust’s
reconstructions for Proto Austronesian and lower-order stages up to mid 2020, when the
sudden death of Steve Trussel, who was responsible for the web interface and data input,
brought this work to a sudden halt. With the passing of Robert Blust in January 2022,
the ACD was bequeathed to Alexander Smith and found a new home with the Cross-Linguistic
Linked Data project, where hopefully it will continue to grow.[5]

    Several papers predating our project systematically investigated particular semantic
domains in the lexicon of POc, e.g. Milke (1958a), French-Wright (1983), Pawley
(1982, 1985), Pawley & Green (1984), Lichtenberk (1986), Walter (1989), and the
various papers in Pawley & Ross (1994). Ross (1988) contained a substantial number of
new POc lexical reconstructions, as well as proposed modifications to the reconstructed
POc sound system and the orthography. However, previous Oceanic lexical studies were
limited both by large gaps in the data, with a distinct bias in favour of ‘Eastern Oceanic’
languages, and by the technical problems of collating large quantities of data. Although
many languages in Melanesia remain poorly described, there are now many more
dictionaries and extended word lists, particularly for Papua New Guinea, than there were
in the 1980s. And developments in computing hardware and software now permit much
faster and more precise handling of data than was possible then. A list of sources is
found in Appendix A.

    Several compilations of reconstructions have provided valuable points of reference,
both inside and outside the Oceanic group. We are indebted particularly to Bender et al.
(2003a,b), two editions of POLLEX (Biggs & Clark 1993 and Clark & Biggs 2006),
Blust & Trussel (2020 = ACD), Clark (2009) and Lynch (2001b).

    In the course of planning the several volumes of the present project, we came to
realise that the form in which preliminary publications were presented—namely as
essays, each discussing cognate sets for a particular semantic field at some length—
would also be the best form for the presentation of this set of volumes. A discursive
treatment of individual terminologies, as opposed, say, to a dictionary-type listing of
reconstructions with supporting cognate sets, makes it easier to relate the linguistic
comparisons to relevant issues of culture history, language change, and methodology.
Hence each of the present volumes has as its core a collection of analytic essays. Some
of these have been published or presented elsewhere, but are included here in revised form.

[5] The 2020 ‘frozen’ ACD continues to be stored at the University of Hawai‘i (http://www.trussel2.com/
    acd/), but is now also available and under development in somewhat different format as part of the
    Cross-Linguistic Linked Data project (https://acd.clld.org/).
                                                                            Introduction 7


In some cases we have updated the earlier versions in the light of subsequent research, and,
where appropriate, have inserted cross-references between contributions. Authorship is in
some cases hard to pin down, as a number of people have had a hand in collating the
data, doing the reconstructions, and (re)writing for publication here. In most chapters,
however, one person did the research which determined the structure of the terminology,
and that person appears as the first or only author, and where another or others had a
substantial part in putting together the chapter they appear as the second or further
authors.


1.4 Reconstructing the lexicon

1.4.1 Terminological reconstruction

Our method of doing ‘terminological reconstruction’ is as follows. First, the
terminologies of present-day speakers of Oceanic languages are used as the basis for
constructing a hypothesis about the semantic structure of a corresponding POc
terminology, taking account of (i) ethnographic evidence, i.e. descriptions of the
lifestyles of Oceanic communities and (ii) the geographical and physical resources of
particular regions of Oceania. For example, by comparing terms in several languages for
parts of an outrigger canoe, or for growth stages of a coconut, one can see which
concepts recur and so are likely to have been present in POc. Secondly, a search is made
for cognate sets (§1.4.2), i.e. words from different languages that appear to be descended
from the same protoform, from which forms can be reconstructed to match each
meaning in this hypothesised terminology. The search is not restricted to members of the
Oceanic subgroup; if a term found in an Oceanic language proves to have external (non-Oceanic)
cognates, the POc antiquity of that term will be confirmed and additional
evidence concerning its meaning will be provided. Thirdly, the hypothesised
terminology is re-examined to see if it needs modification in the light of the
reconstructions. There are cases, highlighted in the various contributions to these
volumes, where we were able to reconstruct a term where we did not expect to do so and
conversely, often more significantly, where we were unable to reconstruct a term where
we had believed we should be able to. In each case, we have discussed the reasons why
our expectations were not met and what this may mean for Oceanic culture history. We
have set out to pay more careful attention to reconstructing the semantics of POc forms
than has generally been done in earlier work, treating words not as isolates but as parts
of terminologies.

    Blust (1987:81) distinguishes between conventional ‘semantic reconstruction’, which
asks, “What was the probable meaning of protomorpheme X? ”, and Dyen and Aberle’s
(1974) ‘lexical reconstruction’, where one asks, “What was the protomorpheme which
probably meant ‘X’?” At first sight, it might appear that terminological reconstruction is
a version of lexical reconstruction. However, there are sharp differences. Lexical
reconstruction applies a formal procedure: likely protomeanings are selected from
among the glosses of words in available cognate sets, then an algorithm is applied to
determine which meaning should be attributed to each set. This procedure may have
unsatisfactory results, as Blust points out. Reconstructions may end up with crude and
overly simple glosses; or no meaning may be reconstructed for a form because none of
the glosses of its reflexes is its protomeaning.

8 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

   Terminological reconstruction is instead similar to the semantic reconstruction
approach. In terminological reconstruction the meanings of protomorphemes are not
determined in advance. Instead, cognate sets are collected and their meanings are
compared with regard to:

__block__
•   their specific denotations, where these are known;
•   the geographic and genealogical distribution of these denotations (i.e. are the glosses
    from which the protogloss is reconstructed well distributed?);
•   any derivational relationships to other reconstructions;
•   their place within a working hypothesis of the relevant POc terminology (e.g., are
    terms complementary —‘bow’ implies ‘arrow’; ‘seine net’ implies ‘floats’ and
    ‘weights’? Are there different levels of classification—generic, specific, and so
    on?).

For example, it proved possible to reconstruct the following POc terms for tying with cords
(vol.1:290–293):

__block__
-    POc _*buku_ ‘tie (a knot); fasten’
-    POc _*pʷita_ ‘tie by encircling’
-    POc _*paqu(s)_, _*paqus-i-_ ‘bind, lash; construct (canoe +) by lashing together’
-    POc _*pisi_ ‘bind up, tie up, wind round, wrap’
-    POc _*kiti_ ‘tie, bind’

In each of the supporting cognate sets from contemporary languages there are a number
of items whose glosses in the dictionaries or word lists are too vague to tell the analyst
anything about the specific denotation of the item, and in the case of _*kiti_ this prevents
the assignment of a more specific meaning. The verb _*buku_ can be identified as the
generic term for tying a knot because of its derivational relationship (by zero derivation)
with a noun whose denotation is clearly generic, _*buku_ ‘node (as in bamboo or
sugarcane); joint; knuckle; knot in wood, string or rope’ (vol.1:85–86). Other senses are
extensions of this meaning (vol.2:50, vol.5:159, 175–176, 341). Reconstruction of the
meaning of _*pʷita_ as ‘tie by encircling’ is supported by the meanings of the Lukep,
Takia and Longgu reflexes, respectively ‘tie by encircling’, ‘tie on (as grass-skirt)’, and
‘trap an animal’s leg; tie s.t. around ankle or wrist’: Lukep and Takia are North New
Guinea languages, whilst Longgu is SE Solomonic. Reconstruction of the meaning of
_*paqu(s)_, _*paqus-i-_ as ‘bind, lash; construct (canoe +) by tying together’ is supported by
the meanings of the Takia, Kiribati and Samoan reflexes, respectively ‘tie, bind;
construct (a canoe)’, ‘construct (canoe, house)’, and ‘make, construct (wooden objects,
canoes +)’: Takia is a North New Guinea language, Kiribati is Micronesian, and Samoan
is Polynesian. The meaning of _*pisi_ is similarly reconstructed by reference to the
meanings of its Mono-Alu, Mota, Port Sandwich, Nguna and Fijian reflexes.

    Often, however, the authors have been less fortunate in the information available to
them. For example, Osmond (vol.1:222–225) reconstructs six POc terms broadly
glossed as ‘spear’. Multiple terms for implements within one language imply that these
items were used extensively and possibly in specialised ways. Can we throw light on
these specialised ways? Unfortunately, some of the word lists and dictionaries available
give minimal glosses, e.g. ‘spear’, for reflexes of the six reconstructions. What we need
to know for each reflex is: what is the level of reference? Is it a term for all spears, or
perhaps all pointed projectiles including arrows and darts? Or does it refer to a particular
kind of spear? Is it noun or verb or both? If a noun, does it refer to both the instrument
and the activity? Most word lists are frustratingly short on detail. For this kind of detail,
ethnographies have proven a more fruitful source of information than many word lists.

                                                                                             Introduction 9

   Another problem is inherent in the dangers of sampling from some 500 languages.
The greater the number of languages, the greater are the possible variations in meaning
of any given term, and the greater the chances of two languages making the same
semantic leaps quite independently. Does our (sometimes quite limited) cognate set
provide us with a clear unambiguous gloss, or have we picked up an accidental bias, a
secondary or distantly related meaning? Did etymon x refer to fishhook or the material
from which the fishhook was made? Did etymon y refer to the slingshot or to the action
of spinning round?

1.4.2 Sound correspondences

Phonological changes, whereby one sound evolves into another, are mostly regular. For
example, the initial consonant of the reflexes of the three words below is the same for all
three items (and for numerous others).[6] In each language all instances of initial *p- have
evolved “regularly”, i.e., in the same way.

__table__
            POc         |         _*papine_     |          _*pisiko_        |        _*pat[i]_ [7]  |       _*p-_
                        |         ‘woman’     |          ‘meat, flesh’  |        ‘four’       |
    Adm: Aua            |         _pifine_      |          _pirio_          |        —            |      _p-_
    Adm: Baluan         |         _pein_        |          _pusio_          |        _pa-_        |      _p-_
    NNG: Numbami        |         —             |          _wiso_           |        _wata_       |      _w-_
    PT:  Kilivila       |         _vivila_      |          _viliy-na_       |        _-vasi_      |      _v-_
    PT:  Yamalele       |         _vavine_      |          _viɣo_           |        —            |      _v-_
    PT:  Sinaugoro      |         _vavine_      |          _vi-viɣo_        |        _vasi-vasi_  |      _v-_
    PT:  Motu           |         _hahine_      |          _hidio_          |        _hani_       |      _h-_
    MM: Tolai           |         _vavina_      |          _vio_            |        _-vat_       |      _v-_
    MM: Vaghua          |         _vavene_      |          _vəzəɣo_         |        _-vac_       |      _v-_
    SES: Arosi          |         _haihine_     |          _hasiʔo_         |        _hai_        |      _h-_
    NCV: Mota           |         _vavine_      |          _visoɣo-i_       |        _vat_        |      _v-_
    Mic: Woleaian       |         _faifile_     |          _fitixo_         |        _faa-_       |      _f-_
    Fij: Wayan          |         _vavine_      |          _viðiko_         |        _vā_         |      _v-_
    Pn:  Samoan         |         _fefine_      |          —              |        _fā_           |      _f-_

The grouping to which each language belongs is indicated by an abbreviation on the left
(§1.5.1).

[6] Differences in meaning are ignored here, but see §1.4.1.

[7] A hyphen before or after a form for ‘four’ indicates the addition of a numeral classifier (§14.1.1).

10 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   The “sound correspondence” that concerns us here, the initial consonant
correspondence, is shown on the right. Reconstructing forms in a protolanguage depends
on working out the systematic sound correspondences among cognate vocabulary in
contemporary languages and on having a working hypothesis about how the sounds of
POc have changed and are reflected in modern Oceanic languages. Working out sound
correspondences even for twenty languages is a large task, and so we have relied heavily
on the work of others and our own previous work. The sound correspondences we have
used are as follows: Ross (1988) for Western Oceanic and Admiralties; Ross (1996a) for
Yapese; Ross (1996b) for Oceanic languages of Indonesian Papua; Pawley (1972) for
Eastern Oceanic; Levy (1979, 1980) for SE Solomonic and Lichtenberk (1988) for
Cristobal-Malaitan; Pawley (1972) and Tryon & Hackman (1983) for SE Solomonic;
Ross & Næss (2007) for Temotu; François (pers. comm.) for the Banks and Torres
Islands of Vanuatu; Tryon (1976) and Clark (2009) for North and Central Vanuatu;
Lynch (2001b) for Southern Vanuatu; Geraghty (1989), Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre
(1982), Ozanne-Rivierre (1992, 1995) and Lynch (2015) for New Caledonia; Jackson (1986)
and Bender et al. (2003a, 2003b) for Micronesian; Geraghty (1986) for Central Pacific;
and Biggs (1978) for Polynesian. We have also done additional work on North and
Central Vanuatu and New Caledonia ourselves.

   For non-Oceanic languages we have referred to sound correspondences given by
Tsuchida (1976) for Formosan languages; by Zorc (1977, 1986) and Reid (1982) for the
Philippines; by Adelaar (1992) and Nothofer (1975) for Malay and Javanese; by
Sneddon (1984) for Sulawesi; by Collins (1983) for central Maluku; by Grimes & Edwards (in prep.)
for what is conventionally known as CMP; and by Blust (1978a) and Kamholz (2014) for SHWNG.

   Regular sound correspondences can be interfered with in various ways: by phonetic
conditioning that the analyst has not identified (see, e.g., Blust 1996), by borrowing (for
an extreme Oceanic case, see Grace 1996), or by the frequency of an item’s use (Bybee 1994).
We have tried at least to note, and sometimes to account for, irregularities in
cognate sets.


1.4.3 The internal structure of the Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian family

Figure 1.1 shows nine primary subgroups of Oceanic. Its rake-like structure indicates
that no convincing body of shared innovations has been found to allow any of the nine
subgroups to be combined into higher-order groupings. Section 1.4.3.1 explains the
theory that underlies the formulation of Figure 1.1, which is important to the practice of
reconstruction. Sections 1.4.3.2 and 1.4.3.3 offer some commentary on our subgrouping,
and in §1.4.4 we explain how our criteria for making a reconstruction and attributing it
to a protolanguage are related to subgrouping issues.


1.4.3.1 Subgroups and linkages

In Figure 1.1 each node is, with one minor exception, either a single language, usually a
reconstructed protolanguage, or, in italics, a group of languages. The exception is the
two very closely related languages Mussau and Tench.

                                                                 .           .

Figure 1.1:           Schematic diagram showing the subgrouping of Oceanic Austronesian languages.
                                                                                                                                                                             Introduction 11
12 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Where a node is a protolanguage, its descendants form a subgroup. The only descendant
languages shown in Figure 1.1 are reconstructed protolanguages, but Appendix B lists by
grouping the descendant languages referred to in these volumes. A subgroup is identified by
innovations shared by its member languages, i.e. it is ‘innovation-defined’ in the terminology
of Pawley & Ross (1995). These innovations are assumed to have occurred just once, in the
subgroup’s protolanguage, i.e. the exclusively shared ancestor of its members. Thus
languages of the large Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian share a set of innovations
relative to the earlier Austronesian stages shown in Figure 1.5. By inference these
innovations occurred in their common ancestor, POc, and the claim that they are
innovations is based on a comparison of reconstructed POc with reconstructed PMP. The
phonological innovations of POc were identified by Dempwolff (1934), and have been
somewhat modified by subsequent research (§1.8.1). POc also reflects morphosyntactic
innovations (Lynch et al. 2002: ch.4), morphological innovations (e.g. POc acquired a
morphological distinction between three kinds of alienable possessive relationship: food,
drink and general; Lichtenberk 1985), and lexical innovations (e.g. PMP *limaw ‘citrus
fruit’ was replaced by POc *molis; Lynch 1984).

    Italics are used in Figure 1.1 to indicate a group of languages that is not a subgroup,
i.e. has no identifiable exclusively shared parent. Thus Southern Oceanic linkage in
Figure 1.1 indicates a collection of languages descended from POc (Ross 1988). They
comprise the languages of Vanuatu, the Loyalties and New Caledonia, but they do not
form a subgroup. There was no “Proto Southern Oceanic”, as no convincing innovation
has been identified that is reflected by all Southern Oceanic languages. Nonetheless,
there are innovations which chain various, sometimes overlapping, groups of Southern
Oceanic languages together (§1.4.3.2). Some of these innovations are inherited, i.e. they
define smaller subgroups within Southern Oceanic. Of these, Southern Vanuatu is the
best known example (Lynch 2001b:181–184). Others are probably the result of contact
between fairly similar languages. The recently discovered fact that there were multiple
immigrations by, we take it, speakers of early Oceanic languages probably gave rise to
this kind of contact (see the discussion in §15.8.1).

    The term “linkage” occurs in several of the italicised labels in Figure 1.1. The
distinction between a subgroup and a linkage is important in reconstruction.[8]

    A __subgroup__ is defined by a set of coterminous innovations that are inferred to have
occurred in its common ancestor (its protolanguage).[9] By “coterminous” is meant that all
the innovations are shared by all the languages of the group.[10] This is the situation in
Figure 1.2.[11] Languages A and B share a set of innovations and form one subgroup.
Languages C–J share another set of innovations and form another subgroup. The
processes of language change that give rise to innovations are continuous, meaning that
subgroup formation is recursive. Within the subgroup CDEFGHJ are two (sub)subgroups
CDE and FG, alongside two languages H and J. This situation can be represented in two
ways: by a tree (left) or a maplike representation (right). The tree, like Figure 1.1, also
displays the protolanguages from which the languages of each subgroup are inferred to
be descended.

[8]  For a lucid and concise account of the history of the matters we touch on here, and of the matters
     themselves, see François (2014).

[9]  In previous volumes, Appendix B, showing the groupings of Oceanic languages, followed Ross (1988),
     using the term family as a synonym for subgroup. This confusing usage is abandoned here.

[10] In the jargon of biological phylogenetics a shared innovation is a synapomorphy.

[11] Figure 1.4 and the right-hand diagram of Figure 1.2 were inspired by François’ (2014) diagram 6.3.

                                                                                            Introduction 13

Figure 1.2: Schematic diagram of a subgroup

    Figure 1.4 shows the same subgroup AB as figure 1, but languages C–J display a
pattern of intersecting subgroups.[12] Languages CDEF form a “subgroup” on the basis of
a set of coterminous innovations, and languages CDE form one on the basis of a further
set. But E and F also share innovations with G, H and J, forming a subgroup EFGHJ that
intersects with CDEF. What is more, E and F share further innovations with H and G
respectively; that is, E and F each reflect innovations that are coterminous neither with
those that define CDEF, nor with those that define EFGHJ. This intertwining of groups
formed by intersecting innovation domains is a __linkage__ (an ‘innovation-linked group’ in
Pawley & Ross 1995). Its boundary can be defined, but no tree that accounts for all
innovations can be drawn. If no tree can be drawn, then no protolanguage can be
posited, and, since a reconstruction must belong to a protolanguage, strictly speaking
no reconstructions can be made. We return to this matter in §1.4.3.2.

Figure 1.4: Schematic diagram of a linkage

    Innovations begin as changes that occur in the language of an individual speaker, and
some of these changes spread across the community. As long as languages are mutually
intelligible, changes continue to spread. Their places of origin, and directions and
extents of spread, may differ, so that the resulting innovations are not coterminous but
instead intersect. And over time, social relationships may change, so that changes arrive
from new origins. The outcome of these processes is a linkage.

    However, untangling the history of a linkage is difficult, and sometimes impossible.
In the “worst-case” scenario one or more innovations spreads right across the languages
of the linkage. In this case it becomes virtually impossible to distinguish it from a
subgroup. But returning to Figure 1.4, perhaps EFGHJ in fact reflects innovations that
occurred in Proto EFGHJ. If so, then we cannot posit Proto CDEF or Proto CDE.
Instead, we infer that at some date relationships were realigned so that speakers of pre-C
and pre-D came into intimate enough contact with speakers of Proto EFGHJ or one of its
descendants for innovations to pass between them, creating the illusion of a subgroup
CDEF. But, with a little thought one could come up with a good number of scenarios
that result in the pattern in Figure 1.4, and determining which reflects the actual
history can be difficult.

[12] In this discussion of linkages, ‘language’ is used to mean ‘language or dialect’.



Map 1.3: Oceanic language groups in northwest Melanesia: the Admiralties and St Matthias groups and the subgroups of Western Oceanic.

                                                                                           Introduction 15


   It is tempting to see a subgroup and a linkage as opposing patterns, but comparison of
Figure 1.4 with the righthand diagram of Figure 1.2 shows that a subgroup is a subtype
of a linkage, one in which the ranges of innovations happen not to intersect (François
2014:171). Nonetheless, we maintain the distinction between a subgroup and a linkage,
as the former reflects a reconstructable protolanguage but the latter does not (or
sometimes, as emerges below, does so more weakly).


1.4.3.2 Oceanic linkages

A number of Oceanic linkages have been recognised by scholars. They include Fijian
(Geraghty 1983), the Caroline Islands (Jackson 1983), Vanuatu (Tryon 1976; Clark 1985;
Lynch 2000a; 2004; François 2011, 2014), NW Melanesia (Ross 1988), the SE Solomons
(Lichtenberk 1988, 1994; Pawley 2011c) and E Polynesian (Walworth 2014). In some of
these there is evidence for events that would further complicate the description of a
linkage in §1.4.3.1.

   One such event sequence is indicated in Figure 1.1 by a dashed line around the
relevant groups of languages. These are instances of a group of languages undergoing a
division and then coming back into contact to form a grouping in a different
constellation from before. The best researched of these is the Fijian linkage, which
represents the partial resynthesis of the Fiji-based descendants of earlier Western Central
Pacific and Eastern Central Pacific linkages after Rotuman and Polynesian had split off
from them (Geraghty & Pawley 1981; Geraghty 1983; Pawley 1996).[13] Geraghty
reconstructed the history of the Fijian linkage by painstaking analysis of innovations
from at least two stages in its history. From the earlier period Western Fijian languages
share innovations with Rotuman and Eastern Fijian with Polynesian. From a more recent
period Western Fijian and Eastern Fijian languages share innovations with each other,
reflecting their reintegration into a single linkage, within which the present Western/
Eastern boundary has shifted relative to the (fuzzy) boundary of the earlier period. This
kind of process also forms part of the history of the Guadalcanal-Gelic subgroup within
SE Solomonic (Pawley & Green 1984).

   A linkage sometimes consists of some but not all of the languages descended from a
single parent. The Western Oceanic linkage (reflects the innovations of POc, but no
innovation is exclusive to the whole of Western Oceanic (although the merger of POc _*r_
and _*R_ comes close). However, the languages of its three component linkages (Map
1.1)—North New Guinea, Papuan Tip and Meso-Melanesian—display complex patterns
of intersecting innovations.[14] The WOc linkage is evidently descended from the dialects
of POc that were left behind in the Bismarck Archipelago after speakers of the
languages ancestral to the other eight primary subgroups in Figure 1.1 had moved away
to the north or east (Ross 2014, 2017). After these departures various innovations
occurred. Each arose somewhere in the Western Oceanic dialect network and spread to
neighbouring dialects without reaching every dialect in the network.

[13] ‘Eastern Fijian languages’ in Figure 1.1 is our label for Geraghty’s (1983) ‘Tokalau Fijian’.

[14] WOc also includes the Sarmi/Jayapura (SJ) group (see Map 1.1). It may belong to the NNG linkage, but
     this is uncertain Ross (1996b).

16 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    The Southern Oceanic linkage as proposed by Lynch (1999, 2000a, 2001a, 2004) is
characterised by complex overlapping innovations, but by none that are reflected in all
its member languages and would qualify it as a subgroup (see discussion in Lynch, Ross
& Crowley 2002:112–114).

1.4.3.3 Oceanic subgroups

Figure 1.1 also shows a number of Oceanic groups for which a protolanguage is
reconstructable. By definition these are subgroups. They are Admiralty (Ross 1988:
ch.9), SE Solomonic (Pawley 1972:98–110; Levy 1979, 1980, n.d.; Tryon & Hackman
1983; Lichtenberk 1988), Temotu (Ross & Næss 2007; Næss & Boerger 2008; Lackey
& Boerger 2021), S Vanuatu (Lynch 2001b:181–184), Micronesian (Jackson 1983,
1986; Bender et al. 2003a), and Papuan Tip (Ross 1992)

   Central Pacific is also a subgroup, but one defined by only a handful of shared
innovations, indicating that the period of unity was short (Geraghty 1996). The high-
order subgrouping of Central Pacific is due to Geraghty (1983), except for the position
of Rotuman (Pawley 1996b). Within Central Pacific is another long recognised
subgroup, Polynesian, for which Pawley (1996a) lists diagnostic innovations.

1.4.4 Criteria for reconstruction

1.4.4.1 The distributional criterion

The strength of a lexical reconstruction rests crucially on the distribution of the
supporting cognate set across language groups. The distribution of cognate forms and
agreements in their meanings is much more important than the number of cognates. It is
enough to make a secure reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in just two languages in a
family, with agreement in meaning, with two provisos. The first is that the two
languages belong to different primary groups, and the second that there is no reason to
suspect that the resemblances are due to borrowing or chance. The PMP term _*(h)abij_
‘twins’ is reflected in several western Malayo-Polynesian languages (e.g. Batak _apid_
‘twins, double (fused) banana’) but, when the reconstruction was made, only one
Oceanic reflex was known,[15] namely Roviana _avisi_ ‘twins of the same sex’ (vol. 5, §2.6).
Because Roviana belongs to a different first-order branch of Malayo-Polynesian from
the western Malayo-Polynesian witnesses (cf Figure 1.5) and because there is virtually
no chance that the agreement is due to borrowing or chance similarity, this distribution
was enough to justify the reconstruction of PMP _*(h)abij_, POc _*apic_ ‘twins’.

[15] A second Oceanic reflex, ’Are’are rapi ‘a twin; two stones in one fruit’, was later added in the ACD.

                                                                                        Introduction 17


1.4.4.2 Which protolanguage? Handling the Oceanic tree’s rakelike structure

Here we deal with two issues relating to the question, To which protolanguage should a
reconstruction be assigned? In this section we explain how we handle the rake-like
structure of the Oceanic tree in Figure 1.1. In §1.4.4.3 we respond to the fact that a
linkage has no identifiable protolanguage (§1.4.3.2).

   The rake-like form of Figure 1.1 almost certainly reflects the very rapid settlement of
Oceania out of the Bismarcks,[16] but it confronts us with a methodological question. If we
follow the standard rubric that we make a reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in
languages of just two primary language groups (§1.4.4.1), then reflexes of an etymon in,
say, a SE Solomonic language and a Micronesian language would be sufficient evidence
for a POc reconstruction and the absence of reflexes in Admiralty and Western Oceanic
would be irrelevant. Given what we know about the location of the POc homeland (in the
Bismarcks; vol.2, ch.2) and the early eastward spread of Oceanic speakers, this is too loose
a criterion. Instead, we assume two hypothetical nodes not shown in the tree in Figure
1.1.[17] These are

__block__
•     Remote Oceanic, comprising Southern Oceanic, Micronesian and Central Pacific;
•     Eastern Oceanic, comprising SE Solomonic and Remote Oceanic.[18]

   If a cognate set occurs in two or all three of the groups in Remote Oceanic, the
reconstruction is attributed to Proto Remote Oceanic (Proto Remote Oceanic). If a cognate set occurs in one
or more of the groups in Remote Oceanic and in SE Solomonic, it is attributed to Proto
Eastern Oceanic (PEOc). In this way we acknowledge that such reconstructions may
represent an innovation that postdates the spread of the early Oceanic speech community.
There are enough Proto Remote Oceanic and PEOc reconstructions to suggest that such lexical innovations
indeed occurred. This in turn provides evidence for Remote Oceanic and Eastern Oceanic
subgroups, but evidence that is too weak to be relied on, for at least two reasons. First, it is
quite possible that some of our Proto Remote Oceanic and PEOc reconstructions will be promoted to POc
as more Admiralty and Western Oceanic data become available. Second, it is reasonable to
assume that some of our Proto Remote Oceanic and PEOc etyma are of POc antiquity but happen to have
been lost in Proto Admiralty and Proto Western Oceanic. Without supporting phonological
or morphological evidence we are unwilling to treat Proto Remote Oceanic or PEOc as anything other than
convenient hypothetical groups which allow us to retain conservative criteria for a POc
reconstruction.

[16] Bearers of the Lapita culture had settled various parts of the Bismarck Archipelago by around 1400 BC
     (Specht 2007) and colonised the Reefs and Santa Cruz Is. in the Temotu Archipelago, Vanuatu and New
     Caledonia by about 1000 BC (Green 2003; Green, Jones & Sheppard 2008; Sand 2001b). Maybe a
     century later they settled in Fiji (Nunn et al. 2004; Clark & Anderson 2009). They reached Tonga by 850
     BC (Burley & Connaughton 2007), Samoa by 750 BC (Clark and Anderson 2009).

[17] We included these nodes in the corresponding tree in Figure 1 of volumes 1 and 2, but this was too
     easily interpreted as a statement of our views on subgrouping..

[18] The term ‘Eastern Oceanic’ and the search for evidence of an Eastern Oceanic subgroup has a relatively
     long pedigree in Oceanic linguistics (Biggs 1965; Pawley 1972, 1977; Lynch & Tryon 1985; Geraghty
     1990). However, by the time volume 1 of the present work was published in 1998 it was evident that no
     convincing evidence supported an Eastern Oceanic subgroup. Our use of the term here is more inclusive
     than most, resembling the ‘Central/Eastern Oceanic’ of Lynch & Tryon (1983) (the 1985 published
     version is less inclusive) and of Lynch, Ross & Crowley (2002:94–96), who express reservations about
     its status.

18 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    A reconstruction here labelled ‘Proto Remote Oceanic’ was labelled ‘PEOc’ in volume 1 or 2, but if it
lacks SE Solomonic reflexes, it is labelled as a Proto Remote Oceanic reconstruction in volumes 3–6.
Two factors have led to the distinction between PEOc and Proto Remote Oceanic in more recent
volumes. One is that the historical separateness of SE Solomonic both from Western
Oceanic and from groups treated as Remote Oceanic has become increasingly clear
through recent research (Pawley 2009). The other, especially relevant to volume 3 on
plants and to volume 4 on animals, is that the primary biogeographic divide in Oceania
is between Near and Remote Oceania (see vol. 2, Map 5), i.e. between the main
Solomons archipelago and the Temotu islands. Whether or not a plant or animal name
has a SE Solomonic reflex is thus significant. Many plant names do not, and are thus
attributed in volume 3 to Proto Remote Oceanic.

    Our criterion for attributing a reconstruction to POc is that the cognate set must
include data from at least two out of three criterial groupings: Admiralties (or Yapese or
Mussau), Western Oceanic, and our hypothetical Eastern Oceanic. Both here and at the
hypothetical interstages defined above, no reconstruction is made if there are grounds to
infer borrowing from one of these groupings to another.[19] We also reconstruct an etymon
to POc if it is reflected in just one of the four criterial groupings and in a non-Oceanic
Austronesian language (a member of one of the lefthand branches in Figure 1.5), as
illustrated above by the reconstruction of POc *apic ‘twins’.

    There are indications that Yapese (a single-language “subgroup”) and Mussau and
Tench (a subgroup with two closely related languages) may be more closely related to
Admiralty than to any other Oceanic subgroup,[20] and for this reason they are tentatively
treated as Admiralty languages for the purposes of reconstruction. That is, the presence
of a reflex in one or more of these languages and in Admiralty does not support a POc
reconstruction, but the presence of of a reflex in one or more of these languages and one
of Western Oceanic or Eastern Oceanic does support one.

    In chapter 2 (§4) of volume 2 Pawley discusses Blust’s (1998b) proposal that the
primary split in Oceanic divides Admiralty from a subgroup embracing all other Oceanic
languages. Pawley dubs the latter ‘Nuclear Oceanic’. If Blust’s subgrouping were
accepted, then an etymon which lacked cognates outside Oceanic would need to be
reflected both in an Admiralties language and in a non-Admiralties language for a POc
reconstruction to be made. Etyma with reflexes in both Western and Eastern Oceanic,
but not in the Admiralties, would be reconstructed as Proto Nuclear Oceanic. Under the
criteria outlined above, however, we attribute these reconstructions to POc. These
criteria were used in volumes 1 and 2, and we have thought it wise to maintain them
throughout the volumes of this work. The reader who wishes to single out
reconstructions attributable to a putative Proto Nuclear Oceanic (rather than to POc) can
easily recognise them. They are those POc reconstructions for which (i) there are no
Admiralties reflexes, and (ii) there is no higher-order reconstruction (i.e. PEMP,
PCEMP, PMP or PAn).

[19] Cases where such an inference can be made occur mostly at the boundary (in the Solomon Islands)
     between Western and Eastern Oceanic. Borrowing is likely (and is often reflected in unexpected sound
     correspondences) where an etymon occurs (i) in Western Oceanic and only in SE Solomonic languages
     or (ii) in SE Solomonic languages and only in the NW Solomonic languages (a subgroup within the
     Meso-Melanesian linkage of Western Oceanic).

[20] On the positions of Yapese and Mussau, see respectively Ross (1996a) and Ross (1988:315–316, 331).

                                                                         Introduction 19


1.4.4.3 Which protolanguage? Handling linkages

The languages of a linkage have no identifiable exclusively shared parent. Yet we have
found many instances in which a cognate set is limited to one of the linkages in Figure
1.1: Western Oceanic, New Guinea Oceanic, Southern Oceanic or the reintegrated North
and Central Vanuatu linkage. By the logic of §1.4.3.2 a form reconstructed from a
cognate set restricted to a linkage should be reconstructed to the next protolanguage
node up the tree. For a Western Oceanic cognate set, for example, this would mean
reconstructing it to POc—this would defy the condition that a POc cognate set must be
spread over at least two out of the four criterial groupings (§1.4.4.2).

   As with PEOc and Proto Remote Oceanic (§1.4.4.2), we think it is more realistic to attribute these
reconstructions to a hypothetical protolanguage rather than to a higher node in the tree.
Hence there are reconstructions labelled PWOc and so on. Again these apparent lexical
innovations offer only weak evidence for the protolanguage to which they are attributed.
In addition to the explanations of the kinds offered above for PEOc and Proto Remote Oceanic etyma, it
is possible, for example, that an innovatory ‘PWOc’ etymon arose when the Western
Oceanic dialect network was still close-knit, and spread from dialect to dialect before
the network broke into the two networks ancestral to its present-day first-order
subgroups.

   It is probable that the NNG and PT linkages form a grouping within WOc, separate
from MM. We call this grouping the New Guinea Oceanic linkage, and so etyma
reflected only in NNG and PT languages are attributed to a weakly supported Proto New
Guinea Oceanic (Milke 1958b, Pawley 1978), and etyma reflected in either NNG or PT
(or both) and in MM are labelled PWOc.


1.5 Conventions common to the series

1.5.1 Presentation of reconstructions

Each of the contributions to these volumes concerns a particular POc ‘terminology’.
Generally, each contribution begins with an introduction to the issues raised by the
reconstruction of its particular terminology, and the rest consists of reconstructed etyma
with supporting data and a commentary on matters of meaning and form.

   The reconstruction of POc *pale below, abbreviated from Chapter 5, shows how
reconstructions and supporting cognate sets are presented. Above it is a superordinate
(PMP) reconstruction drawn from published sources. Below it are supporting reflexes.
Sometimes a lower-order reconstruction like PMic *fale below is included, either in
acknowledgment of others’ work, or because it reflects a significant change in form or
meaning.

20 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

<
PMP *balay ‘public building’ (Blust 1987); ‘unwalled building’ (Waterson 1993)
POc *pale ‘building for storage or public use, open-sided building, shed’
 Adm: Lou               pal           ‘canoe hut’
 Adm: Mussau            ale           ‘house’
 NNG: Yabem             ale           ‘house’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono)      para          ‘yam house’
 MM: Tolai              pal           ‘house, room’
 MM: Mono-Alu           hale-hale     ‘public building’
 SES: Arosi             hare          ‘shed for yams’ (E Arosi); ‘house with side of roof only, made in garden’ (W Arosi)
 SES: Bauro             hare          ‘canoe house, men’s house’
 SES: Sa’a              hale          ‘yam shed outside a garden’
 SES: Kwaio             fale          ‘hut for childbirth’
 MM: Gela               hale          ‘house’
 NCV: Raga              vale          ‘house, hut, garden house’
 NCV: Nokuku            vale          ‘shelter’
 NCV: Nokuku            val-val       ‘garden shelter’
PMic *fale ‘meeting house’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Puluwat           fǣl           ‘meeting house’
 Mic: Woleai            fal, fale-    ‘men’s house, club house’
 Fij: Bauan             vale          ‘house’
 Pn:  Samoan            fale          ‘house’
 Pn:  Hawaiian          hale          ‘house’
>

   In putting together cognate sets, we have sometimes found apparent or uncertain
reflexes which do not quite ‘fit’ the set: either they display a phonological irregularity or
their meaning is just a little too different from the rest of the set for us to assume
cognacy. Rather than eliminate them, we often include them below the cognate set under
the rubric ‘cf. also’.

   Because our supporting data are drawn from such a wide range of languages, the
convention is adopted of prefixing each language name with the abbreviation for the
genealogical or geographic group to which the language belongs, so that the distribution
of a cognate set is more immediately obvious. The abbreviations are:

__tablenh__
     Yap:   |  Yapese (one language)
     Adm:   |  Admiralty and Mussau/Tench
     NNG:   |  North New Guinea
     SJ:    |  Sarmi/Jayapura
     PT:    |  Papuan Tip
     MM:    |  Meso-Melanesian
     SES:   |  Southeast Solomonic
     TM:    |  Temotu
     NCV:   |  North/Central Vanuatu
     SV:    |  South Vanuatu
     NCal:  |  New Caledonia and Loyalties
     Mic:   |  Micronesian
     Fij:   |  Fijian and Rotuman
     Pn:    |  Polynesian

We have sought to be consistent in always listing these groups in the same order, but
contributors vary in the ordering of languages within groups.

                                          Introduction 21

Map 1.4: Groups of Oceanic languages used in cognate sets

22 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

    Lynch’s research on Southern Oceanic (§1.4.3.2) renders the NCV group mildly
anomalous, although there is no doubt that it reflects an integrated dialect network. There
are a number of etyma whose reflexes are confined to North and Central Vanuatu, and
so we continue to include ‘Proto North/Central Vanuatu’ reconstructions. These perhaps
represent a Southern Oceanic term that has been lost in southern Vanuatu and New
Caledonia. Where the distribution of reflexes requires it, the chapters in this volume
include reconstructions for Proto Remote Oceanic and for PSOc. Etyma with these distributions were
attributed to PEOc in volumes 1 and 2, but the distributions are transparent, thanks to the
presence of the group labels in cognate sets (cf §1.4.4.2).

    In the interests of space we do not give the history of the reconstructions themselves,
as this would often require commentary on the modifications made by others and by us,
and on why we have made them. Where a reconstruction is not new, we have tried to
give its earliest source, e.g. ‘Blust 1987’ above, but this is difficult when earlier
reconstructions differ in form and meaning and when their sources are not reported.

    In general, the contributions to these volumes are concerned with items
reconstructable in POc, PWOc, PEOc, Proto Remote Oceanic and occasionally Proto New Guinea
Oceanic (PNGOc). Etyma for PWOc, PNGOc and PEOc are reconstructed because these
may well also be POc etyma for which known reflexes are not well distributed (see
discussion in §1.4.4). Reconstructions for lower-order interstages are decreasingly likely
to reflect POc etyma and may be the results of cultural change as Oceanic speakers
moved further out into the Pacific.

    Contributors to these volumes have usually not made fresh reconstructions at
interstages superordinate to POc. What they have done, however, is to cite other
scholars’ reconstructions for higher-order interstages, as these represent a summary of
the non-Oceanic evidence in support of a given POc reconstruction. These interstages
are shown in Figure 1.5.

    Sometimes non-Oceanic evidence has been found to support a POc reconstruction
where no reconstruction at a higher-level interstage has previously been made. In this
case a new higher-order reconstruction is made, and the non-Oceanic evidence is given
in a footnote.

    Whilst we have tried to use the internal organisation of the lexicons of Oceanic
languages themselves as a guide in setting the boundaries of each terminology, we have
inevitably taken decisions which differ from those that others might have made. There
are, obviously, overlaps and connections between various semantic domains and
therefore between the contributions here. We have done our best to provide cross-
references, but we have sometimes duplicated information rather than ask the reader
repeatedly to look elsewhere in the book. Indexes at the end of each volume and in the
final volume are intended to make it easier to use the volumes collectively as a work of
reference.

1.5.2 Data

Data sources are listed in Appendix A.

   For some reconstructed etyma only a representative sample of reflexes is given. We
have endeavoured to ensure, however, that in each case this sample not only is
geographically and genealogically representative, but also provides evidence to justify
the reconstruction’s shape and gloss. Where only a few reflexes are known to us, this is
usually noted.

                                                                                           Introduction 23

    Although there are accepted or standard orthographies for a number of the languages
from which data are cited here, all data are transcribed as far as possible into a standard
phonemic orthography based on that used by Ross (1988:3–4) in order to facilitate
comparison.[21] This means, for example, that the _j_ of the German-based orthographies of
Yabem and Gedaged becomes _y_, Yabem _c_ becomes _ʔ_, Gedaged _z_ becomes _ɬ_ and so on;
the _ng_ of English-based orthographies becomes _ŋ_; and Fijian _g_, _q_ and _c_ become _ŋ_, _g_ and
_ð_ respectively.

    The following symbols have more or less their usual IPA (Interenational Phonetic
Association) values: _ð_, _ɢ_, _ɣ_, _h_, _k_, _l_, _ʟ_, _ɬ_, _ʎ_, _m_, _n_, _ŋ_, _ñ_, _p_, _q_,
_χ_, _ɾ_, _r_, _s_, _t_, _w_, _x_, _z_, _ʔ_, _a_, _æ_, _e_, _ɛ_, _ə_, _i_, _ɨ_,
_o_, _œ_, _ɔ_, _ʌ_, _u_, _ɯ_. As far as possible, however, our orthography is phonemic and does not show
allophonic variation, so that there are instances where a symbol does not have its usual
phonetic value. For example, Wayan Fijian _k_ is a voiceless stop word-initially but [k] is in
free or stylistic variation with [ɣ] word-medially. The voiced stops _b_, _d_, _g_ and the voiced
bilabial trill _ʙ_ are prenasalised in some languages, but prenasalisation is not written unless it is
phonemically distinctive. Where a language has just one rhotic, we usually write _r_, despite
the fact that that rhotic is sometimes a flap. Other orthographic symbols (with values in IPA)
are:

__tablenh__
               _f_   |  [ɸ, f]    |    voiceless bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
               _v_   |  [β, v]    |    voiced bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
               _c_   |  [ts], [ʧ] |    voiceless alveolar or palatal affricate
               _j_   |  [ʣ], [ʤ]  |    voiced alveolar or palatal affricate
               _y_   |  [j]       |    palatal glide
               _dr_  |  [ⁿr]      |    prenasalised voiced alveolar trill (as in Fijian)
               _ö_   |  [ø]       |    rounded mid front vowel
               _ü_   |  [y]       |    rounded high front vowel

Other superscripts and diacritics are as follows:

__block__
•     contrastive long vowels are represented by a macron, e.g. _ā_;
•     contrastive vowel nasalisation is represented by a tilde, e.g. _ã_;
•     high and low tone are represented respectively by an acute and a grave accent, e.g. _é_, _è_;[22]
•     labialisation is marked by a superscript w, e.g. _pʷ_;
•     velarisation is marked by a superscript ɯ, e.g. _pᵚ_;
•     contrastive aspiration is marked by a superscript h, e.g. _pʰ_;
•     contrastive devoicing is marked by a small circle beneath, e.g. _n̥_;
•     apicolabials are represented by the corresponding apical symbol and the linguolabial diacritic (the ‘seagull’), e.g. _t̼_;
•     retroflexes are represented by the corresponding apical symbol with a dot beneath, e.g. _ṛ_.

[21] The main reason for retaining Ross’s orthography was that the electronic files initially used in this
     project were drawn in large part from those used in the research reported in Ross (1988).

[22] Tone is rare in Oceanic languages, and very rare in the data in this volume. Tonal languages are Yabem,
     Bukawa (both NNG), Cèmuhî, Paicî, Drubea, Kwênyii, Numèè (all five NCal).

24 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


Except for inflexional morphemes, non-cognate portions of reflexes, i.e. derivational
morphemes and non-cognate parts of compounds, are shown in parentheses (…). Where an
inflexional morpheme is an affix or clitic and can readily be omitted, its omission is
indicated by a hyphen at the beginning or end of the base. This applies particularly to
possessor suffixes on directly possessed nouns (see §2.2). Where an inflexional morpheme
cannot readily be omitted, it is separated from its base by a hyphen. This may happen
because of complicated morphophonemics or because the morpheme is always present, like
the attributive _-n_ in some NNG and Admiralties languages and prefixed reflexes of the POc
article _*na_ in scattered languages. When a reflex is itself polymorphemic (i.e. the
morphemes reflect morphemes present in the reconstructed etymon) or contains a
reduplication, the morphemes or reduplicates are also separated by a hyphen.

    Languages from which data are cited in this volume are listed in Appendix B in their
subgroups or linkages, together with an index allowing the reader to find the subgroup to
which a given language belongs. Appendix B also includes alternative language names.
The difficulty of deciding where the borderline between dialect and language lies,
combined with the fact that these volumes contain work by a number of contributors,
has resulted in some inconsistency in the way dialects are labelled in cognate sets. Some
occur in the form ‘Lukep (Pono)’, i.e. the Pono dialect of the Lukep language, whilst
others are represented simply by the dialect name, e.g. Iduna, noted in Appendix B as
‘Iduna (= dialect of Bwaidoga)’.

1.5.3 Conventions used in representing reconstructions

Reconstructions are marked with an asterisk, e.g. _*Rumaq_ ‘dwelling house’, in keeping
with the standard convention in historical linguistics. POc reconstructions, and also
PWOc and PNGOc reconstructions, are given in the orthography of §1.7. For
reconstructions at higher-order interstages the orthographies are those used by Blust in
his various publications and the ACD. Reconstructions at lower-order interstages are
given in the standard orthography adopted for data (§4.2). Geraghty’s (1986) PCP
orthography, for example, is based on Standard Fijian spelling, and is converted into our
standard orthography in the same way as Fijian spelling is. In practice, this means that
the orthographies for PEOc, Proto Remote Oceanic and PCP are the same as for POc, except that a
distinction between _*p_ and _*v_ is recognised and _*R_ is generally absent from PCP.[23]
Biggs and Clark’s PPn reconstructions are in any case written in an orthography
identical to our standard. Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms are
shown in Table 1.1.

   PMP final consonants are usually retained in POc in absolute word-final position. In
many cases decisive evidence for retention or loss can be found in those Oceanic
languages that usually retain final consonants. However, there are some cases where it
is uncertain whether POc kept a PMP final, as when a PMP etymon is not attested in
an Oceanic language that consistently retains POc final consonants. An example is
_*-d_ in PMP *palahud ‘go down to the sea or coast’, a term reflected in Oceanic only
inlanguages that regularly lose POc final consonants. In such cases the consonant is
reconstructed in parentheses, e.g. POc _*palau(r)_ ‘go to sea, make a sea voyage’.

[23] Geraghty (1990:91) records a small number of cases where certain Fijian dialects retain POc _*R_ as _l_,
     indicating that it was retained sporadically in PCP. It is always lost in his ‘Tokalau Fijian’ and in
     Polynesian.

                                                                                    Introduction 25


: Table 1.1.      Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms

__tablenh__
       (x)        |  it cannot be determined whether x was present
        (x,y)     |  either x or y was present
        [x]       |  the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with and one without x
        [x,y]     |  the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with x and one with y
        x-y       |  x and y are separate morphemes
        x-        |  x takes an enclitic or a suffix
        ‹x›       |  x is an infix


   In presenting words that display anomalies of form, it is often necessary to posit an
expected form. For example, in §14.6.5.1, the Banoni term _raus_ ‘100’ is accompanied by
the note “metathesis of †_rasu_”, i.e. ‘metathesis of expected _rasu_’. In this volume we use
a less widely employed convention and mark expected forms with a dagger, to
distinguish an expected form both from reconstructions and real data.[24] Sometimes we
need to refer to a reconstructed form that one would expect as the regular reflex of an
established POc etymon, but which does not occur because an irregular sound change
has occurred. In such cases the dagger and asterisk conventions are used together. For
example, in vol. 5:99, we reconstruct PNCV _*kaRo_ ‘vine, rope; vein’. It is descended,
however, from POc _*waRo(c)_ ‘vine, creeper; string, rope; vein, tendon’, and the
expected PNCV form, referred to in our discussion there, would be †_*waRo_. The dagger
marks it as expected but unattested.

   When historical linguists compile cognate sets they commonly retain word for word
the glosses given in the sources from which the items are taken. However, again in the
interests of standardisation, we have often reworded (and sometimes abbreviated) the
glosses of our sources, while preserving the meaning. Where glosses were in a language
other than English we have translated them. In the interests of space and legibility, and
because data often have multiple sources, we have given the source of a reflex only
when it is not included in the listings in Appendix A.

   Sometimes our authors use the convention of providing no gloss beside the items in a
cognate set whose gloss is identical to that of the POc (or other lower-order)
reconstruction at the head of the set, i.e. the reconstruction which they reflect.
   Where necessary, we use ‘(N)’ to indicate that a gloss is a noun, and ‘(V)’, ‘(VI)’,
‘(VT)’ or ‘(VSt)’ to indicate that it is a verb, intransitive verb, transitive verb or stative
verb. Because in many environments transitive verbs were regularly formed from the
intransitive stem by adding the suffix _*-i-_ (vol. 5:24), in many cases the intransitive and
transitive verbs are simply shown in sequence, e.g. POc _*qalo(p)_, _*qalop-i-_ ‘beckon
with the palm downward, wave’. In such cases, the first verb is always intransitive, the
second (in _*-i-_) transitive.

   Within glosses we use the conventional abbreviations ‘k.o.’ (as in ‘k.o. yam’) for
‘kind of’, ‘s.o.’ for ‘someone’ and ‘s.t.’ for ‘something’.

[24] Another convention sometimes used for this purpose is a double asterisk, e.g. _**tau_: we prefer the
     dagger on aesthetic grounds.

26 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


: Table 1.2. POc consonants used in reconstructions in the six volumes of this work
                               Shadings are explained in §1.8.2

__table__
                   | labialised bilabial |  bilabial | dental | alveolar |  palatal | velar | labialised velar | uvular
  stop voiceless     | *pʷ     |   *p    |   *t |         |      *c  |    *k |   *kʷ   |     *q
  stop voiced        | *bʷ     |   *b    |      |    *d   |      *j  |    *g |         |
  trill              |         |         |      |   *r    |          |       |         |
  prenasalised trill |         |         |      |   *dr   |          |       |         |
  nasal              | *mʷ     |   *m    |      |    *n   |      *ñ  |    *ŋ |         |
  fricative          |         |         |      |   *s    |          |       |         |
  lateral            |         |         |      |   *l    |          |       |         |
  approximant        | *w      |         |      |         |      *y  |       |         |


1.6 Proto Oceanic bound morphology

Proto Oceanic bound morphology is not discussed in this volume, other than in §2.2, as
the use of possessor suffixes with inalienably possessed nouns plays a role in
reconstructions in chapter 2.

   An account of aspects of POc morphology, especially verbal derivational
morphology, is given in vol.5:21–26, where it is followed by some comments on the
fossilisation of earlier morphology in POc forms (vol. 5:26–30).


1.7 Proto Oceanic phonology and orthography

   Work based on the sound correspondences of both Oceanic and non-Oceanic
languages has resulted in the reconstructed paradigm of POc consonants shown in Table
1.2. A number of Oceanic (and non-Oceanic) languages attest to the facts that *t was
dental, *d alveolar. This is significant in the prehistory of POc discussed below
(§1.8.2.3). The POc vowels that occur in our reconstructions are *i, *e, *a, *o, *u.

   In the light of recent work it is likely that both the consonant and vowel sets require
some revision. We return to this in sections 1.8.2 and 1.8.3.

   Lynch (2000b) concludes that POc stress fell on the penultimate mora. Each vowel
counted as one mora, and so did the final consonant if there was one. Hence the stress of
a word that ended in a vowel like *ku̱ tu̱ ‘head louse’ (a mora is indicated by an
underscore) fell on its penultimate syllable: *kútu. The stress of a word that had a final
consonant, like *ma̱ nu̱ ḵ ‘bird’, fell on the final syllable: *manúk. Note that an
inalienably possessed noun (§2.2) took a possessor suffix, and that this must have
resulted in stress shift: *máta ‘eye’, but *matá-gu ‘my eye’. Inalienably possessed nouns
are marked with a final hyphen in our reconstructions: *mata- ‘eye’.

                                                                                           Introduction 27

: Table 1.3. POc orthographies after Grace (1969) and Ross (1988)

__tablenh__
     Grace                   *p          —           *t        *d/*r      *s         *j    *k    —
             oral grade
     Ross                    *p          *pʷ         *t         *r        *s         *c    *k    *kʷ
     Grace                   *mp   *ŋp/*mpw *nt                *nd             *nj         *ŋk
             nasal grade
     Ross                    *b          *bʷ         *d    *dr/*nr             *j          *g
     Grace      *m    *ŋm/*mw      *n           *ñ        *ŋ         *w    *y         *l    *q   *R
     Ross       *m         *mʷ     *n           *ñ        *ŋ         *w    *y         *l    *q   *R
                          Grace     *i         *e     *a        *o        *u
                          Ross      *i         *e     *a        *o        *u

   Table 1.3 shows two POc orthographies. The first was established by Biggs (1965)
for PEOc and applied to POc by Grace (1969). It was used with a number of variants,
separated by a slash in Table 1.3. The second orthography, used here and in the
POc reconstructions in these volumes is from Ross (1988, 1989), with the addition of
*pʷ (introduced without comment by Blust 1984) and *kʷ (Ross 2011). The terms “oral
grade” and “nasal grade” belong to the terminology of Oceanic historical phonology
(§1.8.1 and §1.8.2).


1.8 The phonological prehistory of Proto Oceanic

In section 1 we expressed the hope that the material would be a rich source of data for
historical linguistics. Section 1.8.2 and its subsections, along with §1.9, report on research
based on the POc reconstructions in volumes 1–5. First, however, we recapitulate the
currently conventional view of POc phonology.

   The widely accepted hypothesis about the provenance of Proto Oceanic is shown in
Figure 1.5. It is due to Robert Blust, originally presented in Blust (1977a) and repeated
with modifications and accumulated supporting evidence in subsequent publications
(Blust 1978a, 1982a, 1983–84b, 1993, 2009). New research based on the reconstructions
in volumes 1–5 and summarised in §1.8.2 and its subsections, §1.9.1 proposes that this
hypothesis—we will call it the “accepted hypothesis”—should be retired. The fresh
research confronts us with the need to reassess the part of the tree that is headed by
Proto Central/Eastern Malayo-Polynesian. This leads to a re-evaluation in §1.9.3 of
where Proto Oceanic came from.

   The conventions used in Figure 1.5 are those outlined in §1.4.3.1 for Figure 1.1. Thus
_Formosan languages_ in Figure 1.5 indicates a collection of languages descended (along with
PMP) from PAn (Blust 1999). They are spoken in Taiwan, but do not form a subgroup. There
was no ‘“Proto Formosan”, as Formosan languages and language groups are all descended
directly from PAn. Despite references to “Proto Western Malayo-Polynesian”,
_Western Malayo-Polynesian languages_ have never been seriously considered a subgroup
of Austronesian (Ross 1995; Adelaar 2004). Smith (2017) provides a set of hypotheses
about the groups that make up WMP.[25] Their common ancestor is PMP. Recent years
have seen renewed research into the Central Malayo-Polynesian languages and those of
South Halmahera/West New Guinea, and we turn to this in §1.9.

[25] We use Blust’s abbreviations for the groupings he discusses, including “CMP”. We use “central
     Malayo-Polynesian”, abbreviated “CMP” and “WMP” respectively for the languages of his CMP and
     Western Malayo-Polynesian when we want to refer to them without Blust’s subgrouping assumptions.

28 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


Figure 1.5: Schematic diagram showing the widely accepted genealogy of the Austronesian family


1.8.1 The Proto Austronesian and Proto Malayo-Polynesian antecedents of Proto Oceanic phonology

   First, though, it is noteworthy that much research on the prehistory of the POc
lexicon has focussed on phonological changes that occurred between PMP and POc.
This is because PMP and POc are protolanguages clearly defined by shared innovations,
the bedrock of the linguistic comparative method, whereas Blust’s two proposed
interstages, PCEMP and PEMP (Blust 1978), are only weakly defined.

   We give here a conventional account of POc innovations, before revising this history in
§1.8.2 in the light of research based on the reconstructions in volumes 1–5.

                                                                   Introduction 29



Map 1.5: The Austronesian language family and the major subgroups according to the standard hypothesis

30 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


: Table 1.4. Correspondences between PMP and POc protophonemes as currently understood

__tablenh__
     PAn      |                |  *p, *b   |   —   |  *t, *C    |     *d, *r |   *s, *z   |  *j     |   *k, *g |  —
     PMP      |                |  *p, *b   |   —   |    *t      |     *d, *r |   *s, *z   |  *j     |   *k, *g |  —
              | oral grade:    |   *p      |   *pʷ |    *t      |      *r    |     *s     |  *c     |    *k    |  *kʷ
     POc      |                |           |       |            |            |            |         |          |
              | nasal grade:   |      *b   |   *bʷ |       *d   |      *dr   |         *j |         |    *g    |  —

__tablenh__
     PAn      |     *m   |      —   |   *n, *-L(-) |  *ñ    |    *ŋ |   *w  |    *y  |  *l, *L- |   *q   |   *R |   *S
     PMP      |     *m   |      —   |       *n     |  *ñ    |    *ŋ |   *w  |    *y  |     *l   |   *q   |   *R |   *h
     POc      |     *m   |     *mʷ  |       *n     |  *ñ    |    *ŋ |   *w  |    *y  |     *l   |   *q   |   *R |   *0̸

__tablenh__
     PAn/PMP  |    *i, *-uy(-)  |    *e [ə],* -aw |   *-ay   |        *a   |    *u
     POc      |         *i      |         *o      |    *e    |        *a   |    *u

   The Oceanic subgroup is defined by a set of shared innovations relative to PMP. It was on
the basis of some of these that Dempwolff (1927, 1937) first recognised his _Urmelanesisch_
(‘Proto Melanesian’) as a major Austronesian subgroup. In the 1937 work he also recognised
that Polynesian languages shared the innovations of _Urmelanesisch_, and so the concept of an
Oceanic subgroup entered the literature. However, naming it took a while. Grace (1955)
defined the borders of the new subgroup and called it “Eastern Malayo-Polynesian”.[26]

   Meanwhile, Milke (1958b) made frequent reference to ozeanisch-austronesische
Sprachen (‘Oceanic-Austronesian languages’) and in 1961 finally adopted the terms
ozeanische Sprachen and proto-Ozeanisch (‘Oceanic languages’, ‘Proto Oceanic’), which
were soon adopted by his colleagues.

   Correspondences between PAn, PMP and POc protophonemes are shown in Table 1.4.
PAn protophonemes are shown for reference, as the volumes of this work cite PAn
reconstructions fairly often.

   Certain POc innovations exclusive to Oceanic languages are immediately visible in the
form of a number of mergers and splits, highlighted in colour in Table 1.4.

__block__
(a) The PMP voiced/voiceless pairs _*p_/_*b_, _*k_/_*g_ and _*s_/_*z_ and the PMP pair _*d_/_*r_ each
    merged respectively as _*p_, _*k_, _*s_ and _*r_ in an interstage that we label ‘Proto X’
(b) Proto X _*p_, _*k_, _*s_ and _*r_ then split to give POc “oral-grade” _*p_, _*k_, _*s_ and _*r_ and
    “nasal-grade” _*b_, _*g_, _*j_ and _*dr_ (the “grade” terms are explained in §1.8.2). Although
    _*t_ did not participate in the merger in (a), _*t_ did participate in the split, with POc oral-grade
    _*t_ and nasal-grade _*d_.
(c) A small complication is that PMP _*j_ did not participate in the merger in (a), but did
    participate in the split in (b), its POc nasal grade merging with that of _*s_.

   Ozanne-Rivierre (1992) suggests that the corresponding *t/*d merger was hindered by
the mismatch in point of articulation between dental *t and alveolar *d, a mismatch attested
in many non-Oceanic Austronesian languages.

   Table 1.5 is a corrected and expanded version of the table in Blust (2013:599) showing
examples of PMP reconstructions and their POc continuations. It illustrates the combined
effect of (a) and (b): each of the PMP pairs *p/*b, *k/*g, *s/*z and *d/*r first merged and
then split. The set of changes in (a) and (b) alone is unusual enough to be strong evidence
for the integrity of the Oceanic subgroup.


[26] Blust (1978a) redefined this label as also including the SHWNG languages.

                                                                          Introduction 31



: Table 1.5. Examples of PMP reconstructions and their POc continuations showing the effects of the mergers and splits giving rise to POc consonant grade

__table__
segment |  PMP         |         POc       |         grade     |     gloss
_*p-_   |  _pitu_      |         _pitu_    |         oral      |     seven
_*p-_   |  _punay_     |         _bune_    |         nasal     |     pigeon
_*-p-_  |  _hapuy_     |         _api_     |         oral      |     fire
_*-mp-_ |  _t-umpu_    |         _tubu_    |         nasal     |     ancestor
_*b-_   |  _bulan_     |         _pulan_   |         oral      |     moon
_*b-_   |  _beRek_     |         _boRok_   |         nasal     |     pig
_*-b-_  |  _qabu_      |         _qapu_    |         oral      |     ashes
_*-mb-_ |  _ambit_     |         _abit_    |         nasal     |     hold in hand
_*t-_   |  _taqun_     |         _taqun_   |         oral      |     year
_*t-_   |  —           |         —         |         (nasal)   |     —
_*-t-_  |  _qutin_     |         _qutin_   |         oral      |     penis
_*-nt-_ |  _-nta_      |         _-da_     |         nasal     |     P:1INC.PL
_*-nt-_ |  _punti_     |         _pudi_    |         nasal     |     banana
_*d-_   |  _duha_      |         _rua_     |         oral      |     two
_*d-_   |  _daRaq_     |         _draRaq_  |         nasal     |     fresh water
_*-d-_  |  _kuden_     |         _kuron_   |         oral      |     cooking pot
_*-nd-_ |  _pandan_    |         _padran_  |         nasal     |     pandanus
_*s-s-_ |  _susu_      |         _susu_    |         oral      |     breast
_*s-_   |  _siRi_      |         _jiRi_    |         nasal     |     a shrub: Cordyline
_*-s-_  |  _ŋusuq_     |         _ŋuju-_   |         nasal     |     lips, snout, beak
_*z-_   |  _zaqat_     |         _saqat_   |         oral      |     bad
_*-z-_  |  _quzan_     |         _qusan_   |         oral      |     rain
_*z-_   |  _zalan_     |         _jalan_   |         nasal     |     path, road
_*-z-_  |  _tazim_     |         _tajim_   |         nasal     |     sharp
_*k-_   |  _kali_      |         _kali_    |         oral      |     dig
_*k-_   |  _kumuR_     |         _gumu_    |         nasal     |     gargle, rinse mouth
_*-k-_  |  _seka_      |         _soka_    |         oral      |     pierce, stab
_*-ŋk-_ |  _laŋkaw_    |         _lago_    |         nasal     |     tall, long
_*g-_   |  _gaway_     |         _kawe_    |         oral      |     octopus tentacle
_*g-_   |  _gemgem_    |         _gogom_   |         nasal     |     hold in fist
_*-g-_  |  _liget _    |         _likot_   |         oral      |     turn, rotate
_*-g-_  |  —           |         —         |         (nasal)   |     —

32 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Another set of innovations is the introduction of the labiovelars _*pʷ_, _*bʷ_, _*mʷ_ and _*kʷ_
into Proto Oceanic (Blust 1981b; Lynch 2002; Ross 2011). Many items containing a
labiovelar lack non-Oceanic cognates, and some, at least, must have been borrowed into
POc from neighbouring Papuan languages. For example, _*mʷapo(q)_ ‘taro’ was
apparently borrowed by POc speakers as they copied taro-growing techniques from
Papuan speakers (vol.3, p267). In some inherited items a labial became a labiovelar next to
a round vowel, but it is not clear whether the labiovelar actually occurred in POc. Thus a
number of Oceanic languages reflect _*tamʷata_ ‘man, husband’, derived from _*tau_ ‘body,
person’ + _*mataq_ ‘unripe, immature, young’, but we cannot be sure whether _*tamʷata_ or
_*taumata(q)_ was the POc form (vol. 5:43–44).

   Collectively, innovations affecting the vowels are also exclusive to Oceanic, although
individually each of them occurs in various non-Oceanic languages:

__block__
(i) PMP _*e_, phonetically [ə], became POc _*o_.
(ii) PMP word-final diphthongs _*-uy(-)_, _*-aw_ and _*-ay_ were simplified to POc _*-i_, _*-o_ and
     _*-e_ respectively, the first two thereby merging with plain vowels.[27]

    A further innovation that has come to light during work on these volumes concerns
certain PMP trisyllabic roots with _*-e-_ (*[ə]) as the nucleus of their penultimate syllable.
These trisyllables lost _*-e-_ in POc, along with one consonant of the resulting consonant
cluster:

__tablenh__
     PMP *biseqak       |       POc *pisa(k)~*pisak-i- ‘split’ (vol. 1:261)
     PMP *ma-udehi      |       POc *muri ‘be behind’ (vol. 2:251)
     PMP *tuqelan       |       POc *tuqan ‘bone’ (vol. 5:85)
     PMP *baReqaŋ       |       POc *paRa(ŋ) ‘molar tooth’ (vol. 5:133),
     PMP *buteliR       |       POc * putiR ‘wart’ (vol. 5:344).
     PMP *buqeni        |       POc *puni ‘ringworm, Tinea imbricata’ (vol. 5:346)
     PMP *ma-heyaq      |       POc *maya(q) ‘shy, embarrassed; ashamed’ (vol. 5:585).

The conditioning of this change remains unclear, as it did not affect the etyma below:

__tablenh__
  PMP *maqesak       |    POc *maosak ‘ripe, cooked’ (vol.1:157),
  PMP *baqeRu        |    POc *paqoRu ‘new’ (vol.2:203),
  PMP *qateluR       |    POc *qatoluR ‘egg’ (vol.4:278)
  PMP *qulej-an      |    POc *quloc-a(n) ‘maggoty’ (vol.4:415).

PMP _*qalejaw_/POc _*qaco_ ‘daylight, sun’ (vol. 2, pp153–155) appears exceptionally to
have lost the first consonant of the cluster, but there is evidence that a PAn variant _*qajaw_
was ancestral to POc _*qaco_.

1.8.2 Reinterpreting the origins and distribution of POc oral- and nasal-grade consonants

This section presents a revision of the history sketched in §1.8.1, as promised there.

   Figure 1.6 diagrams three accounts of the history of POc *p and *b. In the first two
accounts ‘(N)’, “nasal grade”, implies that POc *b reflected an earlier nasal + obstruent
sequence (*mp, *mb) and was perhaps prenasalised (POc *[ᵐb]). The terms “oral grade”
and “nasal grade” were coined by Grace (1959:27) to refer to the pairs of POc obstruents
that had been recognised by Dempwolff (1927).

[27] The notation *-uy(-) reflects the fact that there is one known case where the change to *i occurred word-
     medially: PMP *kamuihu (independent 2PL pronoun) > *kamuyu > POc *kamiu.

                                                                                            Introduction 33

Figure 1.6: Three analyses of the phonological history of POc *p and *b

    Dempwolff inferred that PMP *p and *b, for example, merged as POc *p, while PMP
*mp and *mb merged as POc *b.28 He made parallel assumptions about PMP *k/*g
versus PMP *ŋk/*ŋg, and PMP *s/*z/*j versus PMP *ns/*nz/*nj.[29] He also assumed that,
e.g., PMP *p and *mp, or *b and *mb, were in free variation and that they became
fossilised randomly in each Oceanic daughter-language, such that a word might begin with
a reflex of *p in one daughter-language but a reflex of *mp in another.

    Despite the obvious improbability of this assumption and the frequent discussions of
consonant grade, reviewed by Grace (1990), the randomness assumption was maintained in
some form until the publication of Ross (1988).[30] The latter found that in the vast majority of
POc etyma with one or more “graded” consonants, the grade of each consonant can be
reconstructed unambiguously because its Oceanic reflexes agree in grade, a finding supported
by the cognate sets in the present work. The illusion of randomness had two sources. First,
although Milke (1968) had correctly identified POc *j (his *nj) as the nasal-grade consonant
paired with oral-grade *s, most scholars assumed that various lenited reflexes of *s reflected
the nasal grade, so that the pair of *s grades seemed almost chaotic (Ross 1988:71–93; 1989).
Second, various regular local processes such as Admiralties secondary nasal grade (Ross
1988:337–341) and Eastern Fijian apical prenasalisation (Geraghty 1983:74–96) had masked
consonant grade in some languages.

    The fact that consonant grade can be reconstructed without ambiguity in most POc
etyma largely rids POc of Dempwolff’s posited randomness, but, as the middle panel in
Figure 1.6 indicates, PMP *p and *b must have merged as Proto X *p, which then split into
POc *p and *b. Similar processes applied to PMP *k/g and *s/*z/*j. This is the position
adopted in the introductions to volumes 1 to 5 of this work. Ross (1988) retained the
assumption that the POc voiced obstruents were “nasal grade”, i.e. reflected nasal +
obstruent sequences. He attempted unsatisfactorily to explain the splits as the effects of
derivational morphology (Reid 2000).

[28] We replace Dempwolff’s orthographies with those of Table 1.4.

[29] Dempwolff (1927, 1937) and Milke (1961) both used the term Nasalverbindung for *mp, *mb etc,
     translated as ‘nasal cluster’ by Milner (1965). Grace coined terms that expressed the pairedness of *p/
     *mp etc. The assumption that a “nasal grade” consonant reflected an earlier nasal cluster is enshrined in
     his POc orthography (Table 1.3).

[30] Grace notes in his 1990 paper that he had written the latter before he had access to Ross (1988).

34 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   This still leaves two questions about the origin of POc consonant grade unanswered:

__block__
(a) How did the POc splits come about?
(b) Do POc “nasal-grade” consonants have a nasal origin?

As a result of new research based on the POc reconstructions in volumes 1–5, we have a
partial answer to (a) and a definitive answer to (b), shown in the righthand panel of Figure
 1.6. Following Proto X (§1.8.1), this panel shows two further interstages, “ePOc” and POc.
“POc” denotes the language reconstructed in these volumes, equated with its state
immediately before its break-up into daughter-languages (Pawley 2008a); and “ePOc”
denotes “early POc”, a stage sometime before POc, but after its speakers settled in the
Bismarck Archipelago.

   Comparing reconstructions in previous volumes with their ancestral PMP forms in the
acd, we find that ePOc had three grades of obstruent: voiceless, voiced and prenasalised. Its
voiceless obstruents are Grace’s oral-grade segments, but a majority of his “nasal-grade”
segments reflect plain voiced obstruents. The prenasalised obstruents are true nasal-grade
obstruents, reflecting inherited nasal + obstruent clusters. They may be inherited from PMP
or from a more recent ancestor. This is the situation depicted in the righthand diagram of
Figure 1.6, where the grey of the prenasalised obstruents indicates their rarity.

1.8.2.1 The POc voiceless and voiced obstruents

   Our database of POc reconstructions from volumes 1–5, along with their PMP ancestral
forms (drawn directly from the ACD), contains 729 etyma.[31] In total these reconstructions
contain 429 initial and medial instances of the the PMP obstruents listed in the leftmost
column of Table 1.6. The columns headed ‘> POc’ show the voiceless and voiced
outcomes of the PMP phonemes (prenasalised ePOc outcomes are discussed in the next
subsection). To the right of each POc obstruent in Table 1.6 are shown its number of
instances as an absolute figure and as a percentage of the PMP obstruent in the leftmost
column.

: Table 1.6. Instances of PMP obstruents and their POc voiceless and voiced reflexes

__table__
        |         | POc voiceless reflexes | | | POc voiced reflexes | |
  PMP   |   total | > POc       | total|    %  | > POc    | total  |       %
  *p    |      94 | *p          |   82 | 87.2  | *b       |    12  | 12.8
  *b    |     128 | *p          |  101 | 78.9  | *b       |    27  | 21.1
  *s    |      75 | *s          |   69 | 92.0  | *j       |      6 |    8.0
  *z    |      14 | *s          |   10 | 71.4  | *j       |      4 |  28.6
  *-j-  |      17 | *-c-        |   13 | 76.5  | *-j-     |      4 |  23.5
  *k    |      93 | *k          |   91 | 97.8  | *g       |      2 |    2.2
  *g    |       8 | *k          |    8 | 100.0 | (*g)     |     0  |
  *C    |     429 | *Cvoiceless |  374 | 87.2  | *Cvoiced |    55  |  12.8


[31] This total excludes POc reconstructions for which no ancestor was found in the ACD.

                                                                                Introduction 35


    The table tells a somewhat unexpected story. Only 13 per cent of the instances of
PMP obstruents end up as POc voiced obstruents. It is also unclear whether Proto X *k
actually split into POc *k and *g. PMP *p/*b, *k/*g and *s/*z each evidently merged as
the Proto X phonemes *p, *k and *s. Proto X *p and *s then split into POc *p/*b and *s/*j
respectively. If Proto X *k split, the outcome is inconsequential. Only eight instances of
PMP *g occur in the first place, against 93 instances of PMP *k. No instances of PMP *g
end up as POc *g, and just two instances of PMP *k do so.

    As noted above, PMP *t (129 instances) did not participate in these processes and is
always reflected as POc *t. PMP *r, with 27 instances, is omitted from the table because all
its POc outcomes are *r. PMP *d probably underwent a split, but the split was in
prenasalisation, not in voicing (§1.8.2.3).


1.8.2.2 The POc prenasalised obstruents

POc reflexes of PMP nasal + obstruent clusters are omitted from Table 1.6, as the numbers
of reflexes are generally few and would skew the table’s percentages. Instead, POc reflexes
of these PMP clusters are shown separately in Table 1.7. The instances are all in etyma
drawn from the ACD (and found among the POc reconstructions in volumes 1-5). Instances
of nasal + obstruent clusters that arose sometime between the break-up of PMP and the
break-up of POc are not shown in Table 1.7, as they would obscure the relationship
between PMP and POc.

   PMP nasal + obstruent clusters are reflected as POc unitary phonemes. In fact their POc
outcomes appear to be the same as those of PMP voiceless and voiced obstruents in Table
 1.6, but we argue below in §1.8.2.4 that this is incorrect, and reconstruct ePOc prenasalised
rather than voiced outcomes in Table 1.7. The PMP clusters are shown in the table as
*-Np-/*-Nb- etc as there are instances where the cluster is not homorganic. Some are the
result of reduplication of a monosyllable, e.g., PAn/PMP *demdem ‘dark, gloomy,
overcast’, attested with -md- in Formosan and many Philippine reflexes (ACD), but
becoming *dendem at some intermediate interstage and thence POc *rodrom (vol.2:308).
POc *-dr- is a unitary phoneme reflecting earlier *-nd- (PCEMP *-nd- according to Blust 1977b).

: Table 1.7. Instances of PMP nasal + obstruent clusters and their POc reflexes

__table__
             |         |  POc voiceless reflexes | |   ePOc prenasalised reflexes | |
  PMP        |   total |  > POc |   total          |  > ePOc   |     total
  *-Np-      |      4  |  *-p-  |      2           |  *-ᵐb-    |        2
  *-Nb-      |     12  |  *-p-  |      5           |  *-ᵐb-    |        7
  *-Nk-      |     13  |  *-k-  |      8           |  *-ᵑg-    |        5
  *-Ng-      |      2  |  *-k-  |      0           |  *-ᵑg-    |        2
  *-Nt-      |      6  |  *-t-  |      3           |  *-ⁿd-    |        3
  *-Nd-      |      3  |  *-r-  |      1           |  *-ⁿr-    |        2
  *-Ns-      |      2  |  *-s-  |      1           |  *-ñj-    |        1
  *-Nz-      |      1  |  *-s-  |      1           |  *-ñj-    |        0
  totals     |     44  |        |     21           |           |       22

36 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    Blust (2022) shows that homorganic nasal + obstruent clusters were present in PMP, but
were rare, as Table 1.7 confirms. Their very rarity has meant that scholars have paid little
attention to them as a discrete category (Collins 1983 and Mills 1991 are exceptions). Further,
reconstructions in the ACD for PCEMP, the next node below PMP in Blust’s tree (Figure 1.5),
show little sign of acquiring nasal + obstruent clusters, other than those resulting from
reduplications.

    The ACD includes just four PCEMP items which contain nasal + obstruent clusters and have
no cognates outside CEMP. They are:[32]

__tablenh__
     PCEMP *tambu          |      POc *tabu       | ‘forbidden, taboo’ (this volume, chapter 10)
     PCEMP *kandoRa        |      POc *kadroRa    | ‘cuscus’ (vol. 4:225)
     PCEMP *waŋka          |      POc *waga       | ‘canoe’ (vol. 1:178)
     PCEMP *mans[ə,a]r     |      POc *mʷaja(r,R) | ‘bandicoot’ (vol. 4:228)

    Table 1.5 illustrates the fact that voiced and prenasalised obstruents are conventionally
treated as a single—nasal-grade—POc category, as their reflexes in almost all Oceanic
languages are identical. Of the POc medial nasal-grade items in that table, those
reflecting PMP *t-umpu, *ambit, *-nta, *punti, *pandan and *laŋkaw ancestrally had a
nasal + obstruent cluster, while those reflecting *ŋusuq and *tazim did not. Only 22 POc
“nasal-grade” consonants in our database were descended from nasal + obstruent clusters
(Table 1.7). Fifty-five reflect PMP plain voiceless or voiced obstruents (Table 1.6).

    Table 1.6 allows us finally to understand where POc voiced initial consonants came
from. Ever since Dempwolff (1927) the default assumption has been that they reflected
nasal + obstruent clusters, with scholars trying—and failing—to find grounds to
reconstruct ancestral initial nasal + obstruent clusters (Milner 1965; Ross 1988:39–43;
Grace 1990; Reid 2000). The reason for the failure is now evident: POc initial “nasal-
grade” obstruents actually reflect PMP plain voiceless or voiced obstruents (Table 1.6).
PMP nasal + obstruent clusters were always medial (Table 1.7). They never occurred
initially.

1.8.2.3 PMP _*t_, _*d_ and _*r_

    We have seen that PMP *t and *d did not form a voiceless/voiced pair, as they had
different points of articulation.

    With regard to PMP *t, there is a mismatch between the findings reported in Table
 1.6 and Table 1.7. The former reports that PMP *t did not undergo the merger-and-split
sequence that affected PMP *p and *s, and therefore did not give rise to POc “nasal-
grade” (voiced) reflexes. Hence PMP initial *t is never reflected as POc *d. But Table
 1.7 reports three POc etyma reflecting PMP *-nt-, namely the P:1INC.PL suffix *-ⁿda (<
PMP *-nta < *=ni-ta; Blust 1977a), *puⁿdi ‘banana’ (< PMP *punti) and *maⁿdala(q) ‘the
morning star’ (< PMP *mantalaq-). This was the sole source of “nasal-grade” reflexes of
*t, and the overall rarity of earlier nasal + obstruent sequences explains why POc has so
few reflexes of *-nt-.


[32] We are aware that the PCEMP reconstructions for ‘cuscus’ and ‘bandicoot’ are controversial. The POc
     reconstructions, however, are well supported. See further Grimes & Edwards, in prep.

                                                                                     Introduction 37


    POc *r and *dr, outcomes of the split of PMP/Proto X *d, have conventionally been
treated as one of the POc oral-/nasal-grade phoneme pairs (§1.8.2.1). Within the earlier
framework this characterisation was correct, as the POc phonological contrast was
evidently *[r] vs *[n(d)r].[33] However, we have above recast the conventional POc oral-/
nasal-grade pairings as voiceless/voiced pairings. But the feature that distinguishes *dr
from *r is prenasalisation, not voicing, so it does not belong to this pair set.

   Our database has 40 instances of PMP *d, of which 33 are reflected as POc *r and seven
as POc *dr. PMP *r, with 27 instances, is omitted from Table 1.6 because all its POc
outcomes are *r. At some point the *r reflexes of PMP *d and *r merged as POc *r.

1.8.2.4 More evidence for POc prenasalised obstruents

In most Oceanic languages the proposed POc voiced (§1.8.2.1) and prenasalised
(§1.8.2.2) phonemes at each point of articulation have merged. The evidence that they
were once separate is based primarily on the different sources of each and on the fact
that the theory accounts neatly for the relative rarity of reflexes of PMP *-nt-. Had they
already merged in POc? In this section we propose that they had not, because there is
evidence from five Western Oceanic languages that the distinction between voiced and
prenasalised obstruents posited for ePOc was retained in POc.

   We know of five Western Oceanic languages that contrast voiceless, plain voiced and
prenasalised voiced obstruents. They are Mangap (now better known as Mbula), Sio,
Tami, Numbami and Sudest. The only close examination of the contrasts that persist in
one of these languages is Bradshaw (1978) on Numbami. The first four languages are
located in the area of greatest diversity within the North New Guinea cluster, and are not
especially closely related, making them possible candidates for retaining an ancient
feature. Sudest is a Papuan Tip language. Contra Ross (1988:192) the immediate
ancestor of Sudest and Nimowa now appears to have been the first language to break
away from the rest of the early Papuan Tip family, making Sudest another candidate for
ancient retentions.[34] We refer to these five languages as the “distinction-retaining
languages”.

   The obstruent series in the distinction-retaining languages are:

: Mangap

__tablenh__
     p  | t  | k
     b  | d  | g
     ᵐb |ⁿd  |ᵑg

: Sio

__tablenh__
   pʷ | p      |     t  |    k
   bʷ | b      |     d  |    g
  ᵐbʷ | ᵐb     |    ⁿd  |   ᵑg

: Tami

__tablenh__
   pʷ | p     |    t  |    s  |    k   |    kʷ
   bʷ | b     |    d  |    j  |    g   |    gʷ
  ᵐbʷ | ᵐb    |   ⁿd  |   nj  |   ᵑg   |   ᵑgʷ

: Numbami

__tablenh__
                 p  |   t   |  s  |   k
                 b  |   d   |  z  |   g
               -ᵐb- | -ⁿd-  | -ⁿz- | -ᵑg-

: Sudest

__tablenh__
    pʷ | p    |  t   |  s    |  k   |   kʷ
    bʷ | b    |  d   |  j    |  g   |   gʷ
   ᵐbʷ | ᵐb   | ⁿd   | nj    | ᵑg   |  ᵑgʷ


   A preliminary search for cognate sets reflecting POc etyma that include prenasalised
consonants reveals an interesting pattern. A small group of etyma is almost always
reflected with the prenasalised consonant intact, while a larger collection of etyma is
reflected unpredictably with a mixture of plain voiced and prenasalised voiced reflexes.
This larger collection suggests that in these items, plain and prenasalised consonants are
gradually falling together into a single category. The membership of the small group of
cognate sets is significant, as its members include some sets that reflect POc etyma that
on independent evidence contained prenasalised obstruents in PMP or PCEMP.

[33] The POc digraph ‹dr› was adopted from Fijian orthography to represent POc *[ndr], the reflex of *dr in
   some Admiralties languages (Ross 1988:322) and in most Fijian dialects (Geraghty 1983:184).

[34] From the small amounts of data in Sheppard (2020), Nimowa appears not to have prenasalised consonants.

38 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Thus Blust (1977a) reconstructs PMP possessor suffixes that were prenasalised
because they consisted of the morph ni + pronoun. They retain their prenasalised
obstruents in ePOc:

__tablenh__
     *-ᵑgu  |   P:1SG      |  < PMP *-ŋku < *=ni-ku
     *-ⁿda  |   P:1INC.PL  |  < PMP *-nta < *=ni-ta
     *-dra  |   P:3PL      |  < PMP *-nda < *=ni-da

The first two of these are reflected in the distinction-retaining languages. The P:3PL
suffix was replaced by PWOc *-dri.[35] At some point prenasalisation has been copied
onto this etymon.

__table__
             |     P:1SG  |   P:1INC.PL |    P:3PL
     PMP     |     *-ŋku  |   *-nta     |    *-nda
     ePOc    |     *-ᵑgu  |   *-ⁿda     |    *-ⁿra
     POc     |     *-gu   |   *-da      |    *-dra, PWOc *-dri
     Mangap  |     -ŋ     |   -ndV      |    -n
     Sio     |     -ŋgu   |   -nda      |    -nzi
     Tami    |     -ŋ     |   -n        |    -n
     Numbami |     -ŋgi   |   -ndi      |    -ndi
     Sudest  |     -ŋgu   |   -nda      |    -nji

Further etyma with independent evidence of PMP or PCEMP prenasalised obstruents
and reflected in the distinction-retaining languages are given below. A few comments are
necessary. The blanks represent cases where, as far as we know, the etymon is not
reflected in the relevant language. This pattern reflects the level of lexical replacement
in Oceanic languages around the coasts of New Guinea.

__table__
              | ‘pandanus’        |    ‘sago’      |    ‘canoe’  |     ‘betelnut’ |   ‘banana’
     PMP/PCEMP| *paŋdan           |    *R(a,u)mbia |    *waŋka   |     *buaq      |   *punti
     ePOc     | *paⁿran           |    *Raᵐbia     |    waᵑga    |     *ᵐbuaq     |   puⁿdi
     POc      | *padran           |    *Rabia      |    *waga    |     *buaq      |   *pudi
     Mangap   |         pānda     |    —           |    wōŋgo    |     mbu        |   pin
     Sio      |         ponda     |    rambia      |    woŋga    |     —          |   —
     Tami     |         —         |    lambi       |    waŋ      |     mbu        |   pun
     Numbami  |         —         |    —           |    waŋga    |     buwa       |   undi
     Sudest   |         —         |    mbi         |    waŋga    |     —          |   —

PMP *paŋdan acquired its nasal + stop sequence by losing *-u- from PAn *paŋudaN,
leaving no doubt that the POc form had a prenasalised consonant. The evidence for the
other forms above is less pressing, but they all have so many WMP reflexes with a nasal +
stop cluster that one can be confident that the PMP or PCEMP form had the cluster, which
was inherited into ePOc as a prenasalised obstruent (*waŋga is PCEMP). This is true of
*punti, but if the argument about PMP *-nt- in §1.8.2.3 holds, then the POc form can only
be a prenasalised stop.

[35] PWOc *-dri reflects the nonhuman member of a human/nonhuman distinction found in the pronominal
     systems of a number of island languages to the west of New Guinea and adopted in Western Oceanic
     languages as the ordinary 3pl pronoun.

                                                                                   Introduction 39

    POc *ᵐbuaq appears to be unique in having a prenasalised initial. The story of this form
is difficult to reconstruct. According to the ACD’s version, PAn *buaq continued until POc,
where it split into oral-grade-initial *puaq ‘fruit (including betelnut)’ and nasal-grade-initial
*buaq ‘betelnut’. The mechanism of the split is unknown, but evidence shows that it
occurred earlier than POc, as it is reflected in some Wallacean languages.[36]

    These cognate sets attest to the presence of ePOc *ᵐb, *ⁿd and *ᵑg in addition to the
consonants in Table 1.2. Given that this preliminary search in distinction-retaining
languages was confined to the 200-word lists in the Austronesian Basic Vocabulary
Database (Greenhill et al. 2008) with some small additions from single-language sources,[37]
the result is quite telling.

    How do we account for the data from the distinction-retaining languages, four
belonging to NNG, one to PT? More research is needed, but the account with the best fit
says that they retain a distinction that was present in early POc, but lost in the vast
majority of its daughter-languages. This represents drift, i.e. independent parallel
innovation, probably due to the paucity of lexical items containing a prenasalised
obstruent. Because almost all Oceanic languages lack the distinction between plain
voiced and prenasalised voiced obstruents, researchers, including ourselves, have
reconstructed POc without it. But since a few WOc languages retained the distinction at
the time POc broke up, it should be reconstructed for POc.That is, “ePOc” and “POc” in
the righthand panel of Figure 1.6 need to be recalibrated. “ePOc” is the real Proto
Oceanic, and “POc” reflects the merger that by the time of its break-up had probably
occurred in the dialects ancestral to all non-WOc languages, and in many WOc dialects
too.

1.8.3 Revising the history of Proto Oceanic vowels?

Lynch (2022) argues entirely on the basis of Oceanic evidence that the POc vowel
system was not the neat conventionally accepted five-vowel system shown in §1.8.1, but
a system partway between the PMP four-vowel system of *i, *e [ə], *a, *u and the five-
vowel system that emerged later in most Oceanic languages. We showed in §1.8.1 that in
the conventional view the sources of POc vowels were as follows:

     POc *i < PMP *i, *-uy(-)
     POc *u < PMP *u
     POc *a < PMP *a
     POc *-e < PMP *-ay

[36] The *b- vs *mb- split is reflected, for example, in Dena-Oenal (Rote-Meto) boaʔ vs mbua; Tetun
     (Timor) fua-n vs bua; Uruangnirin (STB) pua-n vs buok; Masiwang (STB) fua-n vs bua; E Kola (Aru)
     fūi vs būi; but not in Buru-Lisela (Sula-Buru) fua-n ‘fruit’, fua ‘betelnut’.

[37] Bradshaw (1978), Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen (2007a), Anderson (2007), Anderson & Ross (2002),
     Lincoln (1978), Ross’s fieldnotes.

40 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     POc *o < PMP *ə, -aw
Lynch suggests that the POc system of non-final vowels (i.e. discounting POc *-ay and
*-o from PMP *-ay and *-aw) was one of the following three:

     (A)    *i             *u            (B)    *i             *u            (C)    *i             *u
                   *ə                                   *ə     *o                   *e      *ə     *o
                   *a                                   *a                                  *a

Lynch’s revision suggests no change to the origins of high *i and *u or low *a. It is the
mid vowels that changed, but he is uncertain when. His system A infers that there had
been no change in the PMP system by the time POc broke up. Systems B and C both
assume that PMP *ə was in the process of becoming *o when POc dispersed, and C
assumes that *ə also became POc *e under certain conditioning.


1.9 Where did Proto Oceanic come from?

The conventional answer to the question, “Where did Proto Oceanic come from?”, is the
accepted hypothesis in Figure 1.5. It says that POc is the sibling of PSHWNG, and the two
are the only children of PEMP (Blust 1978). PEMP in its turn is a sibling of the CMP
languages, and they are all children of PCEMP (Blust 1982a, 1983–84b, 1993). The latter
is a sibling of WMP languages and a child of PMP. To our knowledge, no scholar disputes
the claim that POc is descended from PMP. However, two recent pieces of research raise
the need to look more closely at the intervening stages between PMP and POc.

    The first, Kamholz (2014), uses a much larger body of evidence to establish the integrity
of Blust’s (1978) PSHWNG on the basis of shared innovations. Kamholz does not examine
the probity of PEMP, but the innovations that define his PSHWNG are different enough
from those defining POc to invite a re-examination of the PEMP hypothesis.

    The other work is Grimes & Edwards’ (in prep.) analysis of available CMP data. They
identify eight CMP subgroups on the basis of mostly shared phonological innovations.
They find areal similarities, some of them probably consequences of one or more
Papuan substrates (see also Schapper 2015; 2018), but no significant exclusively shared
innovations across subgroups, and thus no evidence for a putative Proto Central Malayo-
Polynesian.

    Blust (1993, 2009) views the CMP languages as a linkage on the basis of innovations that
chain (§1.4.3.1) various groups together,[38] but Grimes & Edwards find little evidence to
support such an analysis. Blust’s arguments for PCEMP have evoked vigorous criticism
(Donohue & Grimes 2008; Schapper 2011) and responses (Blust 2009, 2012). The lack of
evidence for Proto Central Malayo-Polynesian logically entails abandoning PCEMP as well,
and this leaves a gap in the the prehistory of POc according to the accepted hypothesis.

[38] Blust offers Proto Central Malayo-Polynesian reconstructions. We take this to be a convenient fiction to
     accommodate the reconstruction of etyma that are reflected only in CMP languages, similar in status to
     PWOc and PSOc reconstructions in the present work (§1.4.4.3).

                                                                                       Introduction 41


    Kamholz and Grimes & Edwards indirectly prompt a further look at two POc-related
questions:

(a) Are the SHWNG languages the closest relatives of Oceanic?
(b) How are SHWNG and Oceanic related to CMP groups?

Our answer to (a) is, no, the SHWNG languages are probably not the closest relatives of
Oceanic. Our answer to (b) is that SHWNG appears more closely related to some of the
CMP groups than to Oceanic, while the relationship of Oceanic to CMP languages is
ambiguous, implying that it may have branched off the Austronesian tree separately from
CMP, perhaps at a node from which various CMP groups branched, or perhaps at a higher
node. We can only give a summary of findings here (for more detail see Ross, in prep.).

   One other answer to the question, “Where did Proto Oceanic come from?” is implicit
in the literature, and it would be remiss of us not to mention it. Bellwood (2011)
suggests that Lapita pottery displays a likeness to contemporaneous pottery from the
Marianas Islands in Micronesia. As far as we know, the only language then spoken in the
Marianas was an earlier form of Chamorro, which originated in the northern Philippines
(Blust 2000a). Bellwood’s hypothesis might imply a flow of early Chamorro speakers
into the Bismarck archipelago, but there is no linguistic indication of such a presence in
POc or its descendants.[39]


1.9.1 Blust (1978) on PEMP

Much of Blust (1978), the seminal work on PEMP, is devoted to demonstrating the
integrity of SHWNG. Kamholz’s (2014) analysis agrees. A smaller part of Blust’s paper
is devoted to PEMP, i.e. to innovations shared by SHWNG and POc. Blust offers 53
shared lexical innovations, but no shared phonological or morphosyntactic innovation

   Claiming an exclusively shared lexical innovation carries with it an inherent risk.
Might not the next dictionary of a non-EMP language include a cognate that renders the
innovation non-exclusive and thereby non-probative? Of the 53 innovations, Ross (in
prep.) rejects 32, or 60%, for the following reasons:

__block__
•     Eight are also found in one of the CMP groups to the west and south of SHWNG.
      The groups are, in Grimes & Edwards’ terminology, Seram-Tanimbar-Bomberai (6
      innovations), Ambon-Seram (2), and Sula-Buru (1) (Map 1.6).[40]
•     Seven have cognates in WMP languages.
•     For 14, Ross was unable to verify the supporting data. Their PMP reconstructions
      are absent from the ACD, implying that Blust later abandoned them.
•     One, *ma- ‘directional particle’, is likely to be the result of drift, i.e. independent
      parallel innovation.
•     One, *dui ‘dugong’, is interpreted as an idiosyncratic innovation in the word form, but
      it is the outcome of regular phonological changes.
•     One, *mawa ‘enclosed space’, appears to be a chance resemblance.

[39] The archaeology of Bellwood’s hypothesis is called into question by Clark & Winter (2019).

[40] One innovation, *sakaRu ‘reef’, is found in Ambon-Seram and in Chamorro.

42 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

Map 1.6: Grimes & Edwards’ Wallacean groups mentioned in the text


1.9.2 Phonological innovations in Oceanic and Wallacean languages

It is convenient to refer to CMP and SHWNG languages together as the Austronesian
languages of “linguistic Wallacea” (Schapper 2016), or, more simply in the present context,
as Wallacean.

    Table 1.8 shows innovations in consonants in the protolanguages of Oceanic and various
Wallacean subgroups including SHWNG and others clustered close to it.[41] The table makes
no reference to innovations that occur in smaller subgroups within those shown. Often one
or more of the innovations listed in the table does not occur in a subgroup’s parent language
but does occur in lower-order subgroup(s) within it. This is part and parcel of the Wallacean
pattern of shared innovations whereby isoglosses intersect, forming possible linkages.
However, close inspection of the innovations shows that they affect certain PMP
consonants across two or more Wallacean groups, suggesting that drift resulting from
pressures on similar consonant systems is as likely a cause as shared inheritance.

[41] Many of these innovations are identified by Kamholz (2014) for SHWNG and by Grimes & Edwards
     (in prep.) for CMP languages. Four of the latter’s eight subgroups are shown. The others are the large
     and internally diverse Flores-Lembata and Timor-Babar subgroups with few shared innovations, the tiny
     Central Timor group, and their Taliabo group, related to languages of mainland Sulawesi either
     genealogically or through contact.

                                                                                  Introduction 43

: Table 1.8. Consonant innovations in the parent languages of Oceanic and Wallacean subgroups (key beneath table)

__table__
             PMP >            |    Oc    |    SHWNG    |        AS |       STB |       Aru |     SuBu
             *p > *f          |          |     yes     |    yes    |    yes    |   init    |
             *p > *f > *h     |          |             |           |           |   med     |
             *p > *b          |    some  |             |           |           |           |
             *b > *p|*β       |    some  |      yes    |           |    yes    |    yes    |
             *t > *s/_*i      |          |      yes    |           |           |           |
             *mp/*mb > *ᵐb    |    some  |      yes    |           |    yes    |     ?     |
             *mp/*mb > *ᵐp    |          |             |    yes    |           |           |
             *nt/*nd > *ⁿd    |          |      yes    |    yes    |    yes    |    yes    |
             *d > *d-r-       |    some  |      yes    |    yes    |           |           |
             *d > *r          |    some  |             |           |    yes    |    yes    |   yes
             *d > *dr [ⁿr]    |    some  |             |           |           |           |
             *d/*z > *d       |          |             |    yes    |           |           |
             *d/*z > *r       |          |             |    yes    |           |           |
             *d/*l > *r       |          |      yes    |           |           |           |
             *-j-/*s > *s     |          |      yes    |           |           |           |
             *-j-/*s > *j [ɟ] |    some  |             |           |           |           |
             *-j-/*l > *l     |          |             |    yes    |           |           |  some
             *-j- > 0̸         |          |             |           |           |           | some
             *-j-/*R > *R      |          |             |   yes     |           |   yes     |
             *z/*s > *s        |    yes   |             |           |           |           |
             *z/*y merge       |          |             |           |           |   yes     |
             *ŋ > *n           |          |             |   yes     |           |           |
             *q > *0̸          |          |     yes     |  some     |           |   yes     |  yes
             *qa- etc lost     |          |     yes     |  some     |           |   yes     |  yes

__block__
• Oc = Oceanic; AS = Ambon-Seram; STB = Seram-Tanimbar-Bomberai; SuBu = Sula-Buru.
• ‘some’ indicates that the change unpredictably applies to some etyma but not others;
• an empty cell means ‘no’.

   The innovation listed as ‘*qa- etc lost’ in the bottom row of Table 1.8 needs an
explanation. It refers to the fact that words of three or more syllables of which the first PMP
syllable was *qa- or *ha- regularly lose that syllable in most Wallacean languages. This
loss is probably associated with the loss of *q- or *h-, which is almost universal in
Wallacean languages. Just one language, Watubela of the Seram-Tanimbar-Bomberai
group, clearly retains *q as k, meaning that its retention must be reconstructed to Proto
Seram-Tanimbar-Bomberai. Thus, for example, PMP *qateluR ‘egg’ is regularly reflected
as POc *qatoluR (vol.4:278–279) and Watubela katlu, but as PSHWNG *tolo (Taba tolo,
Mayá tól, Umar tor), Uyir tuli (Aru), Maswiang tolin (STB), Paulohi terur (AS).

44 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   What mainly concerns us in Table 1.8 is not the details of the innovations but their
patterning and particularly the considerable differences between Oceanic and the Wallacean
groups. It is immediately clear that SHWNG innovations pattern more closely with those of
other Wallacean subgroups, and barely at all with Oceanic.

   As for the innovations of Oceanic, only one, the merger of PMP *s and *z as POc *s, is
shared with a Wallacean group, Central Timor, far away from Oceanic. This is presumably
a case of independent parallel innovation.

   An obvious feature of POc in Table 1.8 is the number of cells containing ‘some’,
indicating that the change applied to only some etyma. These refer to the obstruent splits
noted in Table 1.6 and the associated discussion in §1.8.2.1 and §1.8.2.3.

   Their significance here is that the merger-then-split pattern that gave rise to POc
obstruent pairs has not occurred in the history of any Wallacean group. Table 1.9 shows
PMP obstruents along with their PSHWNG and POc reflexes. The PSHWNG column
shows one reflex for each PMP obstruent and for each PMP pair of nasal + obstruent
clusters. This organisation is representative of all Wallacean groups as Grimes & Edwards
(in prep.) reconstruct their histories. The POc column, however, shows the pairs of reflexes
discussed earlier.

   As an example, Figure 1.7 sets out the changes in PMP *p and *b, as they are reflected
in PSHWNG and in POc. The PSHWNG changes are simple, and are similar to those in
other Wallacean languages. The POc changes are more complex. Both PSHWNG and
ePOc have three labial consonants, but they have developed along different routes.[42]

: Table 1.9. PMP obstruents and their PSHWNG and POc reflexes

__table__
                               |    PMP           |     PSHWNG  |         POc
                    Bilabial   |    *p            |     *f      |         *p/*b
                               |    *b            |     *p      |         *p/*b
                               |    *-Np-/*-Nb-   |     *b      |         *p/*ᵐb
                    Dental     |    *t            |     *t      |         *t
                               |    *-Nt-         |      *d     |          *ⁿd
                    Alveolar   |    *d            |     *r      |         *r/*dr
                               |    *-Nd-         |      *d     |         *dr
                    Alveolar   |    *s            |     *s      |         *s/*j
                               |    *z            |     *z      |         *s/*j
                               |    *-Ns-/*-Nz-   |     ?       |         *s/*ñj ?
                    Velar      |    *k            |     *k      |         *k/*g ?
                               |    *g            |     ?       |         *k
                               |    -Nk-/*-Ng-    |     *g      |          *ᵑg


[42] The term “various” in Figure 1.7 refers to the fact that phonemes reflecting PMP nasal + obstruent
     clusters have at various times in their various Wallacean and their Oceanic histories acquired new
     members by various processes, for example by abbreviating the PMP stative prefix *ma- to *m- or by
     reduplication of a syllable with a final nasal (§1.8.2.2).

                                                                            Introduction 45

Figure 1.7: The phonological histories of PSHWNG and POc reflexes of PMP *p and *b

1.9.3 Conclusion: so where did Proto Oceanic come from?

Where then did Proto Oceanic come from? The phonological history that gave rise to the
patterns in Table 1.9 is unlike that of the Wallacean languages and significantly more
complicated. No Wallacean language—and as far as we know, no WMP language—
underwent a set of obstruent mergers like those that gave rise to Proto X, followed by the
set of splits that gave rise to the POc. Wallacean languages other than the Sula-Buru group,
however, display a merger, of PMP *-Nt- and *-Nd-, where POc has no merger. This
implies that the ancestor of POc was separate from the ancestor(s) of the Wallacean
languages when the Wallacean merger occurred.

   These differences, along with those in Table 1.8, indicate that POc has a history that
is markedly different from those of the Wallacean languages, including SHWNG, and
that Blust’s PEMP hypothesis is not valid, even though it was perfectly reasonable when
it was proposed forty-five years ago. The question is, what do we replace it with? It is
now obvious that it is not a Wallacean offshoot, so where did it come from,
genealogically? We don’t know.

Figure 1.8: Schematic diagram showing the implications of our analysis for the genealogy of the Austronesian family.

46 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


   Figure 1.8 shows our dilemma. Do the Wallacean languages and POc have a common
ancestor? There is some lexical evidence that they do, in the shape of the PCEMP etyma
in the ACD and the 1978 PEMP etyma that are now known to have Wallacean cognates
(§1.9.1), but, as we have observed, using lexical data in this way has disadvantages.
These are matters for future research.

   Meanwhile, we can say that using the lexical reconstructions in volumes 1–5 as
sources for phonological history has proven to be a fitting conclusion to the present
work.



2 Kinship terms

2.1 Introduction[1]

Kinship terms are terms used to address or refer to one’s relatives, e.g. ‘mother’, ‘son’,
‘grandfather’ and the like. Unlike the lexical items discussed elsewhere in these volumes, a
language’s kinship terms form a more or less closed system. The system determines what
distinctions its terms encode, and the definitions of terms are largely constrained by the
system they belong to—‘largely’ because a system’s terms sometimes overlap in meaning.
The goal of this chapter is to reconstruct early Oceanic kinship terms and to hypothesise the
system to which they belonged.

    A number of linguists and anthropologists have treated kinship terms as a window into the
social organisation of present and past kinship systems. Works that reconstruct Oceanic social
organisation in this way include Rivers (1914), Blust (1981a), Pawley & Green (1984),
Hage (1999, 2001a, ch.3 of this volume) and Turner (2007). Moving further back in time, early
Austronesian kinship systems are reconstructed by Blust (1980a, 1980b, 1994).

    In this chapter we touch on the reconstruction of social organisation only as it relates to
lexical reconstruction. A kinship terminology and the social organisation of its users are often
not in a one-to-one relationship. A terminology may retain terms that reflect past social
conditions. For example, a number of Oceanic kinship terminologies indicate that their
communities once practised a form of cross-cousin marriage whereby a man’s preferred
potential wife was his mother’s brother’s daughter. (§2.4.1.2.5). Some communities still
practised it at first contact with Europeans. Others apparently did not, yet the terms implying
it still persisted, perhaps because the terminology continues to enshrine what members of the
community regard as an ideal (McKinley 1971). A paper on the matrilineality of early
Oceanic social structure by the late Per Hage, an anthropologist with linguistic interests, is
reprinted as chapter 3 of this volume.

[1] We thank James J. Fox for sharing his collection of Oceanic kinship terminologies with us, the late
    John Lynch for access to Southern Oceanic data and reconstructions, and Raymond Johnston and John
    Brownie for sharing with us their firsthand knowledge of Nakanai and Mussau kinship respectively.
    Any errors are, of course, our own.

48 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


    This chapter builds on earlier attempts to reconstruct a POc kinship terminology.
Wilhelm Milke’s 1938 paper on POc sibling terms built on a collection of data remarkable at the time,
and was expanded twenty years later (Milke 1958a) into a full reconstruction of the POc
terminology. He further added to it in later papers (Milke 1965:345–346; 1968:158–161, 167).
Pawley (1981) and Pawley & Green (1984) provide a listing of POc kinship terms
which largely follows Milke’s. Chowning (1991) includes a critique of previous
reconstructions and presents a modified version of the POc terminology. The present chapter
is based on a fresh analysis of a larger database that digitisation makes possible, with the
consequence that its results sometimes differ from its predecessors.[2]

    Qualitatively, the data collected for this chapter fall into three rough categories. In the first
category are the reasonably comprehensive accounts of kinship terminologies and associated
practices that are found in some ethnographies. The second category comprises incomplete
terminologies constructed from lists of kinship terms in some ethnographic writings and a
few ethnographically informed dictionaries and grammars. In the third category are
individual terms collected from dictionaries and wordlists. These are often glossed only
vaguely, e.g., ‘uncle’, ambiguous because Oceanic languages tend to label a paternal uncle
(father’s brother) and a maternal uncle (mother’s brother) differently. The sources of the first
two data categories are listed in an appendix at the end of the chapter. The sources of the third
kind of data are those used in chapters throughout these volumes, listed in Appendix A
towards the back of the volume.

    This chapter falls into four parts. The introduction continues in §2.2 with a description of
two Oceanic terminologies, Nakanai and NE Ambae, providing a framework for what
follows. The second (§2.3) is a typological overview of Oceanic kinship terminologies, based
as far as possible on comprehensive terminologies. This leads to §2.3.5, describing the
probable structure of the POc kinship terminology and the forms of its terms. The last and
longest part (§2.4) reconstructs POc kinship terms themselves.

2.2 Introducing Oceanic kinship terminologies

   This section examines the terminology in Nakanai,[3] a MM language of New Britain, as an
example of the distinctions often encoded in Oceanic terminologies. Figure 2.1 shows the
Nakanai terms for blood relatives, Figure 2.2 for in-laws.

   Before turning to Nakanai, two matters need an explanation. First, as explained in vol.1:32
and in vol.5:75-76, most Oceanic languages outside Polynesian[4] reflect a POc grammatical
distinction between directly and indirectly possessed nouns (Lichtenberk 1985). A directly
possessed POc noun took a possessor suffix, marked here with a following hyphen (e.g.
_*tama-_ ‘father’: _*tama-gu_ ‘my father’, _*tama-mu_ ‘your (singular) father’, _*tama-ña_ ‘his/her
father’ etc), whereas an indirectly possessed noun required no suffix. Directly possessed
nouns are inalienable; that is, they are items that usually do not exist without a possessor.

[2] Marshall (1984) brings together plenty of data, but he reconstructs the history of Oceanic kinship from
    the structure of terminologies, ignoring kinship terms except as indicators of synchronic structure.
    Bender, Blust, Chowning, and Clark all mention this flaw in the comments that follow the paper.

[3] The data are drawn from Chowning & Goodenough (2016) and were checked by Ray Johnston.

[4] On Pn reflexes of direct possession, see §2.4.

                                                  Kinship terms 49


Figure 2.1: Terms for blood relations in Nakanai

50 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

Figure 2.2: Terms for in-laws in Nakanai

                                                                                       Kinship terms 51


They include many kinship terms. But the converse is not true: not all kinship terms are
directly possessed.

   Secondly, in the middle of the figures is a person labelled ‘EGO’. EGO (Latin ‘I, me’) is ‘the
speaker’, i.e. the person in relation to whom some other person, ALTER (Latin ‘other’), is
labelled. Thus if I am EGO, my father is an ALTER labelled in relation to me. If he is defined in
relation to some other EGO, he might then be my brother, my son, my grandson, and so on.

2.2.1 Attributes encoded in a kinship terminology

    Figure 2.1 shows that a male EGO distinguishes between brothers who are older than him
(tua-) and those who are younger (tari-), whereas English has no term with a meaning that
depends on the age of ALTER relative to EGO.

    Figures 2.1 and 2.2 show Nakanai terms from the perspectives of both a male and a
female EGO.5 The differences between them take two forms. First, a male EGO refers to his
brother as tua- or tari-, whereas a female EGO uses tua- or tari- for her sister. That is, Nakanai
tua- and tari- must be glossed ‘sibling of same sex as EGO’ (usually abbreviated ‘same-sex
sibling’ or ‘s.s. sibling’), not ‘brother’ or ‘sister’. The sex of tua- or tari- depends on EGO’s
sex. Second, a male EGO labels his opposite-sex sibling hatavile-, but a female EGO refers to
her opposite-sex sibling as hatamale-. We prefix the conventional ‘female’ and ‘male’
symbols to a gloss to indicate who uses it: thus hatavile- ‘♂sister’ and hatamale- ‘♀brother’.
In English, however, no distinction between terms depends on EGO’s sex. The distinction
between English wife and husband encodes ALTER’s sex, not EGO’s. Indeed, ALTER’s sex plays
a significant role in the English terminology, with six basic pairs: mother/father, aunt/uncle,
sister/brother, daughter/son, niece/nephew and wife/husband. Nakanai has only one: tila-/
tama ‘mother/father’. Note, too, that EGO distinguishes among s.s. siblings by age relative to
EGO, but labels o.s. siblings by their (ALTER’s) own sex.

    In the figures and elsewhere, generations are indicated with, e.g., G0 ‘EGO’s generation’,
G+1 ‘one generation above EGO’, G–2 ‘two generations below EGO’, and so on. In Figure 2.1,
tubu- appears against G+2, indicating that all members of G+2 are tubu- in Nakanai. It also
exemplifies the classificatory nature of Oceanic kinship terms. The term tubu- labels all
members of G+2. Most kinship terminologies include classifying terms. English has some too:
uncle labels EGO’s father’s brothers, father’s sisters’ husbands, mother’s brothers and mother’s
sisters’ husbands. Aunt and cousin are also classifying. Nakanai and English classify siblings-
in-law in the same way: English brother-in-law refers to EGO’s wife’s brother and to EGO’s
sister’s husband, and Nakanai iva- does the same.

    Some kinship terms in Oceanic languages are used reciprocally. A Nakanai EGO refers to
his/her mother’s brother as hala- and, when EGO is a child’s hala-, he refers to his sister’s
child as hala-. That is, the term is reciprocal across generations. Figure 2.1 also shows that
some grandparents and grandchildren refer to each other reciprocally as tubu-.

    The Nakanai terminology classifies blood relatives of G+1 in a particular way. EGO’s
father’s brother is labelled with the same term as EGO’s father, and EGO’s mother’s sister with
the same term as EGO’s mother. This has two consequences. One is that father’s brother’s
descendants have the same labels as father’s descendants, and mother’s sister’s descendants
the same labels as mother’s. The other consequence is that what in English would be cousins
fall into two Nakanai categories. Father’s brother’s and mother’s sister’s children are labelled
as if they were EGO’s siblings, but father’s sister’s and mother’s brother’s children have a
different label, lavo-. In the kinship literature the former are labelled ‘parallel cousins’, the latter
‘cross-cousins’. ‘Cross’ here refers to the fact that cross-cousins are related to EGO via opposite-
sex parents. The classifying attribute of Oceanic kinship terms is discussed further in §2.2.3.

[5] Many available terminologies, especially older ones, are unfortunately restricted to a male ego.

52 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

    The last few paragraphs have touched on various attributes of kinship terminologies in
general. Their presence or absence in Nakanai and English is summed up in Table 2.1.
Presence is shown by a tick. A particular attribute may or may not be reflected in a
terminology.[6] For example, English has no terms that depend on sex relative to EGO.

    ‘Sex of linking relative’ refers to the contrast between, e.g. ‘father’s brother’ and
‘mother’s brother’.

: Table 2.1 Attributes and values of Nakanai and English terms

__table__
           Attribute                       |    Nakanai  |   English  |   values of terms
           generations distinguished       |     ✔       |     ✔      |    –2, –1, 0, +1, +2 etc
           sex of ALTER                    |     ✔       |     ✔      |    male, female, either
           sex relative to EGO             |     ✔       |            |    same, opposite, either
           sex of linking relative         |     ✔       |            |    same, male, female
           seniority within generation     |     ✔       |            |    elder, younger, none
           reciprocity across generations  |     ✔       |            |    yes, no
           affinity                        |     ✔       |     ✔      |    blood relative, in-law


2.2.2 ‘Parallel’, ‘cross’ and kinship notation

As noted above, ethnographers use the terms ‘parallel cousin’ for cousins related to EGO via
mother’s sister or father’s brother and ‘cross-cousin’ for those related to EGO via mother’s
brother or father’s sister.[7] Similar terms are sometimes used of siblings, such that a ‘s.s.
sibling’ is a sibling of the same sex as EGO and a ‘cross-sibling’ or ‘cross-sex sibling’ is of the
opposite sex to EGO. This usage is inconsistent, as ‘parallel cousin’ and ‘cross-cousin’ refer to
their parent’s sex, not their own, and the latter sometimes needs to be stipulated as in ‘same-
sex cross-cousin’ or ‘opposite-sex cross-cousin’. For consistency’s sake, we follow Murdock
1949, 1968a). replacing ‘cross-sibling’ by ‘opposite-sex sibling’ (‘o.s. sibling’).

: Table 2.2 Abbreviating kinship terms

__tablenh__
 M  |  mother |        (NB not ‘Male’)
 F  |  father | (NB not ‘Female’)
 P  |  parent |

__tablenh__
 Z  |   sister  |    (Z, as S is reserved for ‘son’)
 B  |  brother  |
 G  |   sibling | (Latin germāna, germānus)

__tablenh__
 W  |  wife    |
 H  |  husband | (French épouse, époux)
 E  |  spouse  |

__tablenh__
 D  |             daughter
 S  |             son
 C  |             child


[6] Kroeber (1909) proposed the original list of attributes, put to use with small
    modifications in Murdock’s (1949) monumental survey of kinship terminologies.

[7] The term ‘cross-cousin’ was introduced by Rivers (1914, vol.1:13), based on Tylor’s (1889:263)
    neologism ‘cross-cousin marriage’. The origin of ‘parallel cousin’ is unknown to us. The earliest use we
    have found is in Kirchhoff (1931).

                                                                               Kinship terms 53


    In the interests of space, glosses in cognate sets (§2.4) and figures employ a version of the
conventional ethnographic abbreviations for kinship terms. Its basic building blocks are
shown in Table 2.2. In each of the four sub-table, the third abbreviation, an
innovation borrowed from Hage (2001b), embraces the two categories above it. These
capture Oceanic categories and reduce abbreviations so that, for example, ‘parent’s sibling’ is
expressed as ‘PG’, instead of the more conventional ‘FB, MB, FZ, MZ’. The syntax of these
terms is straightforward, e.g. MZ ‘mother’s sister’, EGC ‘spouse’s sibling’s child’, and so on.

    There are four modifiers, each abbreviated as a lower-case letter preceding one of the
letters in Table 2.2. They are:

__tablenh__
    s | same sex as EGO
    o | opposite sex to EGO
    y | younger than EGO within EGO’s generation
    e | elder than EGO within EGO’s generation

Thus oC ‘opposite sex child’; ysG ‘younger same-sex sibling’.

   Relative sex is reckoned relative to EGO in order to avoid ambiguity. Hence EGsC
‘spouse’s sibling’s child of EGO’s sex’, not ‘spouse’s siblings’s child of spouse’s sibling’s sex’.
However, there are terms that encode sex relative to someone other than EGO, and in these
cases curly brackets are used, e.g. {PsG}C ‘child of parent’s same-sex sibling’,[8] i.e. ‘parallel
cousin’, as opposed to PsGC ‘child of parent’s sibling of EGO’s sex’.

2.2.3 Nakanai terms and their definition

Like a good many other societies in Oceania, Nakanai society has divisions based on descent
(Chowning 1965 calls them ‘sibs’). Some societies, like Tolai (Fingleton 1986), have just two
divisions or ‘moieties’. Others, like Nakanai, have several divisions. In many Oceanic
societies descent is matrilineal (see ch 3). In other words, a child belongs to its mother’s
lineage. Since marriages are between members of different divisions, this means that a
father’s children belong to his wife’s division. Among EGO’s closer relatives the only
members of EGO’s generation who are of another division are cross-cousins. Being of a
different division from EGO, they are possible marriage candidates.

    Nakanai kin terms for members of EGO’s generation are shown in Table 2.4. The values
of the four relevant attributes (see Table 2.1) are shown in the four rightmost columns. Each
term is defined by a unique set of values. The cross-cousin term _lavo-_ encodes neither
referent’s sex nor relative sex. Its salient feature is a social one: a _lavo-_ can be married by
EGO.

    The terms for members of G+1 and G–1 are shown in Table 2.4. Of the seven terms, four
are reciprocal, giving two entries, ‘+1’ and ‘–1’ in the ‘Generation’ column.’ Notably the
terms in Table 2.3 are defined by a different set of attributes from those in Table 2.4, i.e.
they make different distinctions.

    Terms at G+1 in Figure 2.3 and at G–1 in Figure 2.4 follow a rule. The wife of any _tama-_
is a _tila-_ and vice versa. The wife of any _hala-_ is an _isa-_ and vice versa. This accounts, for
example, for the fact that in Figure 2.3 father’s sister’s husband is labelled _hala-_ and
mother’s sister’s husband _tama-_.

[8] In conventional notation, FBS, FBD, MZS, MZD.

54 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


Table 2.3 Nakanai kinship terms of EGO’s generation

Table 2.4 Nakanai kinship terms of EGO’s generation

                                                                                 Kinship terms 55


    In Figure 2.1 there is just one reciprocal term for members of G+2 and G–2. This is _tubu-_
‘grandparent/grandchild’. However, at G–2 _tubu-_ is restricted to the grandchildren of EGO’s
s.s. siblings and s.s. parallel cousins, whilst the grandchildren of o.s. siblings and o.s. parallel
cousins are labelled _lavo-_. This also seems to be rule-governed. Because Nakanai society is
matrilineal and EGO’s spouse is of a different division from ego, male EGO’s _latu-_ ‘children’
are not of his lineage or division, but his sister’s children, _hala-_, are. The situation is reversed
if EGO is female: _latu-_ are of her division, but _isa-_ are not. The rule then stipulates one uses
_tubu-_ for the child of one’s _latu-_, but _lavo-_ for the child of one’s _hala-_ or _isa-_.

    The application of _tubu-_ to the children of one’s cross-cousins, i.e. relatives of the same
generation as one’s children, not one’s grandchildren, is obscure, but is touched on in §2.3.3.

    In many Oceanic cultures the mother’s oldest living brother has the greatest authority
within his matriline to instruct his sister’s children on societal matters and to make decisions
about matters such as their marriages. The way in which this authority relates to that of the
father, who does not belong to his children’s division, varies from society to society. The role
of the mother’s oldest brother means that there is typically a dedicated term for mother’s
brothers. In Nakanai this is _hala-_. The fact that in many Oceanic cultures mother’s oldest
brother had or has significant responsibilities towards his sister’s children (♂ZC) is enshrined
in a special term that a male EGO uses to refer to those children. It also captures the fact that in
a matrilineal society a man’s sister’s son is his heir. The special term for sister’s son/sister’s
child is sometimes the term for MB, used reciprocally, as it is in Nakanai (see further
§2.3.2.2).

    Figures 2.1 and 2.2 and Tables 2.3 and 2.4 are unavoidably limited in scope, and the
classificatory senses of the terms are not presented fully. Classifying terms are wide in scope.
Indeed, most cover a theoretically unbounded set of relationships. How can one capture the
sets that these glosses represent? For _tama-_, for example, an exhaustive definition might be:

__block__
• male blood relative of EGO’s father’s generation, related to EGO through EGO’s father’s
     male ancestors and their male descendants; and
• husband of female blood relative of EGO’s mother’s generation; the female relative is
     related to EGO through EGO’s mother’s female ancestors and their female descendants.

   This definition includes ‘father’ and ‘father’s brother’ as primary referents. Both are
grandfather’s sons, or FFS. They and grandfather’s brother’s son are great-grandfather’s
grandsons—and so on. Tracking back through ego’s ancestry using the first part of the
definition gives a set of glosses for _tama-_: FFS, FFFSS, FFFFSSS and so on, abbreviated as
FnFSn, where the two instances of n are equal. Doing the same with the second part gives
MnMDnH. Glosses of this kind, not used elsewhere in this chapter, serve to show that
classifying terms denote theoretically unbounded but definable classes in many Oceanic
languages, and are in this respect fundamentally different from English. The Tolai (MM), for
example, who number in the tens of thousands, see themselves as all related[9] and as members
of one of the two Tolai divisions (moieties), and therefore as having a kin relationship with
every other Tolai (Epstein 1969:122; Fingleton 1986:304).

[9] As do the Takia and Waskia of Karkar Island (Ross, fieldnotes), the hill peoples of NE Guadalcanal
    (Hogbin 1937:67), the peoples of the northern Vanuatu islands (Torres and Banks Islands, Maewo,
    Ambae and north Pentecost; Codrington 1891:24; Allen 1964a:321), the inhabitants of Tanna (S
    Vanuatu; Lindstrom 1981:37), all Fijians (Sahlins 1962:154–155), and the Micronesian clans of
    Ponape, Mokil, Ngatik, and Pingelap, plus some in the Mortlocks and Chuuk (Riesenberg 1968:7).

56 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   Ethnographers argue over whether a term like Nakanai _tama-_ has one meaning or more
than one.[10] Those who argue for two or more meanings (polysemy) distinguish between a
narrow sense, ‘father’, and a classificatory sense, FnFSn (Malinowski 1929:442, 495–96, 513, 527;
Lounsbury 1965; Scheffler 2003; Shapiro 2018). Those who argue for one meaning
(monosemy) regard something like the definitions above as the appropriate gloss of _tama-_
(Leach 1958, attacking Malinowski; Schneider 1984). The question for a linguist is, What
would a dictionary definition look like, and why? Pawley & Sayaba’s draft dictionary of
Wayan Fijian has the following (edited and reordered):

__blockquote__
     _tama-_ 1. Father.
     2. Classificatory father, one who is brother or classificatory brother to one’s father.
     3. Uncle, specifically the husband of one’s mother's sister or classificatory sister.

This is clearly a polysemous definition. It is perhaps a linguistic universal that speakers often
use a term with a narrow sense for a larger class of which the narrow-sense referent is
perceived as the most salient member. How this occurs in folk classifications of plants and
animals is discussed by Evans (2008) and Pawley (2011b) respectively. The definition above
is an example of this broad phenomenon in the context of a kinship terminology.

    Ethnographic accounts indicate that, for example, ‘father’ in the narrow sense typically
has a relationship with his offspring that is closer to them than that of his brothers and other
classificatory ‘fathers’, and that speakers certainly understand and act on a difference between
the two senses (Codrington 1891:36–37; Humphreys 1926:34; Malinowski 1929:442–443;
Powdermaker 1933:137–138; Mead 1934:220; Blackwood 1935:59–60; Fischer 1966:117;
Hogbin 1964a:17; Scheffler 1965:75–76; Wagner 1986: xvi, 62).

    This issue leads into another ethnographic question. Are definitions of kinship terms
cognitively real? Do they reflect speakers’ concepts? Goodenough (1956, 1965) answered
‘yes’; Burling (1964) vigorously ‘no’. A dictionary-maker would argue that dictionary
definitions should be a good approximation of cognitive reality, otherwise speakers cannot
agree (or disagree) with them.


2.3 The typology of Oceanic kinship terminologies

The typology of Oceanic kinship terminologies briefly presented here is based on 139 cases
where a complete or near-complete terminology is available covering ego’s parents and their
siblings and the parents’ and siblings’ children. Ideally each terminology should also include
all their children, but many otherwise detailed ethnographies omit terms for the children of
some or all of ego’s cousins. The terminologies also cover members of the grandparent and
grandchild generations. Sources are in the appendix to this chapter.

    These 139 languages are referred to below as ‘the sample’, but they are not a sample
chosen for statistical purposes. They are simply the languages for which relevant data are
available. NCV is under-represented, New Caledonia and Fiji over-represented. Nonetheless,
they are distributed throughout Oceanic.

    The typological investigation in §2.3.1–4 does not cover in-law terms.

[10] The collection of papers in Shapiro (ed., 2018) is devoted to the topic.

                                                                           Kinship terms 57


2.3.1 Bifurcate merging and its modifications

The Nakanai terminology in §2.2.3 exemplifies the fact that a terminology’s semantic
structure determines the meaning of each term. Conversely, each term covers one or more
kinship slots, e.g. tama- covers F, FB and MZH (and more). If the slots covered by each term
laterally as far as and including ego’s parents’ siblings are diagrammed, we have a visual
representation of a terminology’s structure, as in Figures 2.3 and 2.4.

    Lowie (1928) categorised kinship terminologies, based on how they treat G+1. He called
terminologies like Nakanai ‘__bifurcate merging__’—‘bifurcate’, because the terms for ‘mother’
and ‘father’ are distinct, and ‘merging’ because each parent and her/his s.s. siblings are
merged terminologically (called by the same term), but o.s. siblings are labelled differently
(§2.2.3).

    Lowie’s ‘__generational__’ category, where all uncles and aunts are treated as parents, turns
up in a sprinkling of Oceanic languages (see later in this section).


Figure 2.3: Structure of the Nakanai terminology, showing bifurcate merging terms

Figure 2.4: Structure of English terminology, showing lineal terms

58 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck



    English, on the other hand, Lowie classed as ‘__lineal__’ because terms for ego’s ancestors and
descendants (‘lineal kin’), as well as siblings, are distinct from those for uncles, aunts and
cousins (‘collateral kin’), which are all categorised by generation. There are no Oceanic lineal
terminologies.[11]

   Murdock (1949) extends Lowie’s definitions by including G0 as well as G+1. Thus a
bifurcate merging terminology is one which is

__block__
1. bifurcate: there are distinct terms for ‘mother’ and ‘father’ (M ≠ F);
2. merging:
     a.   EGO’s father and father’s brother are both called ‘father’ and EGO’s mother and
          mother’s sister are both called ‘mother’ (FB = F, MZ = M);
     b.   EGO’s father’s brother’s and mother’s sisters children, EGO’s parallel cousins, are
          called by the same terms as EGO’s siblings (FBC = MZC = G).
3. laterally restricted:
     a.   EGO’s mother’s brother is called by a term other than ‘father’ and EGO’s mother’s
        sister by a term other than ‘mother’ (MB ≠ F, FZ ≠ M);
     b. EGO’s mother’s brother’s and father’s sisters children, ego’s cross-cousins, are called
        by terms other than those for ego’s siblings (MBC ≠ G, FZC ≠ G).

The grey rectangle in Figure 2.3 encloses the part of the terminology that is ‘merged’.

    A working definition of ‘merging’ is needed here. Sources sometimes give binomials
(terms consisting of two lexical items), like Sye (SV) drinme- pelaɣ ‘mother’s sister’, where
drinme- is ‘mother’ and pelaɣ apparently means ‘removed’, ‘apart’ or, with kinship terms,
‘adoptive’ (there is no pelaɣ entry in Crowley 2000). Because the second, modifying, part of
many binomials is omitted in daily use, a kinship binomial like drinme- pelaɣ is counted for
analytic purposes as ‘the same’ as drinme- ‘mother’, i.e., as merged.

    Of the 139 sample languages, 65 (47%) are bifurcate merging in accordance with the
definition above.

    At the core of a bifurcate merging structure are the mergers in (2) above and, remarkably,
they are found in 137 of the 139 sample languages. One language, Sye, lacks one of the
mergers in (2a), and two, Sye and Nadrau Fijian, lack (2b).12 However, whereas the mergers
in (2) are near-universal in Oceanic, there are numerous languages that do not conform to the
definitions in (3), because at least one term for a merged category is extended to include a G+1
or G0 term outside the rectangle. In some languages the restriction in (3a) is breached, in
others the restriction in (3b), and in yet others both restrictions in (3). The languages in which
each breach occurs are shown in Table 2.5.

[11] Lowie’s was a four-way categorisation. The fourth category, ‘bifurcate collateral’, is not found in
     Oceanic,. Lowie’s terms are used here, rather than Iroquois, Crow, Hawaiian etc (Murdock 1949) and
     Dravidian (Lounsbury 1964b), because popular presentations imply that every kinship terminology has
     one of these structures. However, some terminologies are at best transitional between two types. In any
     case, Iroquois, Dravidian and Crow are all bifurcate merging. The first two are distinguished by
     relationships that lie beyond the scope of our diagrams. Crow is the topic of §2.3.3.

[12] Sye etme- F and itviroɣ FB display no merger, but viroɣ ‘small’ suggests that itviroɣ once realised a
     common pattern whereby FB was ‘small father’. The languages that lack (2b) both use a term for
     ‘child’, Sye alwo-, Nadrau luve-, for ego’s parallel cousins (Capell & Lester 1945:191; Crowley 2000).

                                                                             Kinship terms 59

: Table 2.5    Oceanic terminologies with bifurcate merging and breaches thereof

__table__
           |   Bifurcate merging       |  FZ = M   |  FZ = M and MB = F    | PGC = G
Adm        | Mussau, Sori, Lele, Pak, Baluan, Lou |         Yapese     |         —      |         —
SJ and NNG |  Yabem, Bukawa, Middle Watut   | Sobei, Wogeo,  Mapos Buang |       —      | o.s: _Takia_, _Adzera_, _Mapos Buang_
PT         | Kilivila, Muyuw, Dobu, Galea, Sudest  |  Kalauna, Tubetube  | N Mekeo  | Bwaidoga, Sinaugoro (Saroa), Motu, Roro, N Mekeo
MM         | Nakanai, W Kara, Lakurumau, Nalik, Lihir, Notsi, Lamusong, Lelet, Usen Barok, Sursurunga, Patpatar, Tolai (both) |     Nehan, Petats, Hahon, Mono-Alu, Nduke, Roviana, Marovo, Varisi |  Simbo     |         _Vitu_ (o.s.), Mono-Alu, Varisi, Simbo, Nduke, Roviana
SES        | NWGR,a Baegu, E Arosi   | Bugotu, Gela, Lengo, Birao, Longgu, Kwaio, Sa'a, Fagani, W  Arosi, Owa | — | W Guadalcanal (Gae), Lengo, To'aba'ita, Kwaio, Fagani, W Arosi, Owa
NCV        | Araki, Raga, Big Nambas, N Ambrym, Nguna  | Loh, Mota, Akei, NE Ambae, Nduindui, Vao, Ninde, Sinesip | — | Loh
SV         | Kwamera          |              Anejom        |      —        |       —
NCal       | Belep, Nyelâyu, Yuanga, Kumak, Fwai, Pwaamei, Bwatoo, Wahmwaang, Cèmuhî, Paicî, Arhâ, Ajië, Xârâcùù, Xaragure, Numèè, Kwenyii | — | — | Nengone, Drehu, Iaai
Mic        | — | Nauruan, Marshallese, Satawalese | Chuukese | _Marshallese_ (s.s.), Satawalese, Chuukese, Lamotrek
Fij        | Wayan, Vuda, NW Viti Levu, Deuba, Kadavu, Bauan, Nadrau, Tokatoka, Moala, Matailobau, Lakeba | Cakaudrove, Macuata | — | Tavua, MacuataTokatoka
Pn exc EPn |  Ifira-Mele, W Futunan | Rennellese, Takuu, Luangiua, Sikaiana  | Pukapuka | Tongan, Tokelau, E Futunan, _Rennellese_ (s.s.), Anuta, Tikopia, Pileni, Luangiua, Sikaiana
EPn         |   —         |               —     | Tahitian, Māori, Rapa, Hawaiian | Rapa, Maori, Tahitian, Marquesan, Hawaiian

a. NWGR = Rivers’ (1914) Northwest ‘Guadalcanar’.

60 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


     Taking (3a) first, two breaches occur:

__block__
i.  EGO’s father’s sister is called by the term for mother/mother’s sister (FZ = M: 44 cases);
ii. EGO’s father’s sister and mother’s brother are called respectively by the terms for
    mother/mother’s sister and father/father’s brother (FZ = M, MB = F: 8 cases);

   The case numbers tells us that FZ = M occurs far more often than MB = F. Furthermore,
there is an implicational relationship such that MB = F only occurs where FZ = M occurs,
but never vice versa. The distinctiveness of the ‘mother’s brother’ category is almost as
durable as the mergers in (2), whereas the ‘father’s sister’ category is readily lost.

   However, the loss of an FZ term has perhaps not occurred as frequently as Table 2.5
might imply. The MM languages split into two groupings. Those listed under ‘Bifurcate
merging’ are all located in New Britain and New Ireland. Apart from Vitu, those listed in
the other three columns are all members of the well established NW Solomonic subgroup
(Ross 1988, chapter 7), and the innovation extending POc *tina- ‘mother’ to MZ probably
happened in Proto NW Solomonic and was inherited by its member languages.

   Turning to (3b), three breaches occur:

__block__
iii. EGO’s cross-cousin is called by a term for sibling/parallel cousin (MBC = FBC = FZC = MZC = G, i.e. PGC = G); this may apply to
     • only s.s. cross-cousins (2 cases);
     • only o.s. cross-cousins (4 cases);
     • all cross-cousins (40 cases).

Terminologies in which the breach applies only to s.s. or only to o.s. cross-cousins are
shown in italics in the rightmost column of Table 2.5.13

    Each of these breaches brings a system nearer to Lowie’s generational category. The
outcome of (i) above is that all female members of G+1 are called ‘mother’, of (ii) that all
members of G+1 are called ‘mother’, ‘father’ or ‘parent’. The outcome of (iii), when it
applies to all cross-cousins, is that all members of G0 are called by sibling terms. Note that
(i), (ii) and (iii) do not affect distinctions of sex (absolute or relative-to-ego) or relative age
that a terminology may make.

    Table 2.6 shows the terminologies with tendencies toward a generational structure.
Column 4 adds (1), M = F, i.e. a uninomial term for ‘parent’, with ‘mother’/‘father’
distinction. A terminology that lacks this distinction is not bifurcate. There is no
implicational relationship between the breaches in (2) and (3) above, but there is a strong
tendency that if in a language FZ = M & MB = F, then PGC = G (Table 2.5). The converse
is not true.

    Of the 46 languages where PGC = G (Table 2.5, rightmost column), 22 have no other
tendency toward a generational structure (Table 2.6, column 1).

[13] It is possible that Middle Watut also belongs here rather than under ‘Bifurcate merging’: o.s. cross-
     cousin terms are missing.

                                                                                 Kinship terms 61

: Table 2.6 Oceanic kinship terminologies that tend toward Lowie’s generational structure

__table__
             | 1            |  2                      |  3                              |   4
             | Only PGC = G | Only PGC = G and FZ = M | PGC = G and FZ = M and MB = F   | PGC = G and FZ = M and MB  F and M = F
  Adm        | —            |          —              |    —                            | —
  SJ and NNG | _Takia_, _Adzera_ (o.s.) | _Mapos Buang_ (o.s.) | —                      | —
  PT         | Bwaidoga, Sinaugoro (Saroa), Motu, Roro | — | N Mekeo                    | —
  MM         | _Vitu_ (o.s.) | Mono-Alu, Nduke, Roviana, Varisi | Simbo                 | —
  SES        | W Guadalcanal (Gae), To'aba'ita | Lengo, Kwaio, Fagani, W Arosi, Owa | — | —
  NCV        | Loh          | Loh                     | —                               | —
  SV         | —            | —                       | —                               | —
  NCal       | Nengone, Drehu, Iaai | —               | —                               | —
  Mic        | Lamotrek     | _Marshallese_ (s.s.), Satawalese | Chuukese               | —
  Fij        | Tavua        | Macuata, Koroalau       | —                               | —
  Pn exc EPn | Tongan, Tokelau, E Futunan, Anuta, Tikopia, Pileni | — | _Rennellese_ (s.s.), W Futunan, Takuu, Luangiua, Sikaiana  | Pukapuka
  EPn        | Marquesan    |      —                  |   Rapa, Maori                   | Tahitian, Hawaiian

   Two groups in Table 2.6 deserve comment. The first of these is the Central Papuan
subgroup of PT. Sinaugoro, Motu, Roro and North Mekeo are the Central Papuan
languages in the sample. The Roro structure is shown in Figure 2.5. Sinaugoro, Motu and
Roro retain bifurcate merging in the parental generation but have generational terminology
in ego’s generation, i.e. all ego’s siblings and cousins are identically labelled, according to
seniority. This was probably the situation in Proto Central Papuan. North Mekeo, however,
adds generational terminology at G+1, shown in Figure 2.6. This is almost a full-blown
generational terminology, as are the others listed in column 3 of Table 2.6.

   The other group in need of comment is Polynesian. Only Ifira-Mele and West Futuna (=
Futuna-Aniwa) are listed in Table 2.5 as bifurcate merging. There is good reason to infer
that the structure of the Ifira-Mele terminology is the result of contact with NCV languages
of Nguna (§2.3.3). The same may be true of West Futuna, which has had contact with the
languages of Tanna (SV).(Lynch & Fakamuria 1994). It is probable that PPn had a
terminology like that of Tongan and similar to Roro (Figure 2.5), in which all blood-relatives
of ego’s generation were labelled in the same way as ego’s siblings, but the parental
generation had dedicated terms for FZ and MB (Marck 1996). Loss of FZ and MB terms in
various of the outliers and in Proto Eastern Polynesian resulted in structures like that in North Mekeo. However,
Pukapuka, Tahitian and Hawaiian have also replaced PPn *tina- ‘mother’ (§2.4.1.2.1) and
*tama-‘father’ (§2.4.1.2.1) with a reflex of *matuqa- ‘parent’ (§2.4.1.2.3). The elimination of
the sex distinction in the parental generation has resulted in a purely generational structure in
Lowie’s (1928) sense, leading to the adoption of ‘Hawaiian’ as the term for a generational
structure in Murdock’s (1949) classification of kinship terminologies.

62 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

Figure 2.5: Structure of the Roro terminology, showing bifurcate merging terms

Figure 2.6: Structure of the N Mekeo terminology

                                                                                       Kinship terms 63


2.3.2 Other structural features involving ego’s blood relatives

2.3.2.1 EGO’s siblings and parallel cousins

Bifurcate merging means that in almost every Oceanic terminology, EGO’s parallel cousins,
i.e. EGO’s father’s brother’s and mother’s sister’s children, are labelled with the same terms as
EGO’s siblings (§2.3.1). However, there is considerable variation in this labelling. For
example, there may be a terminological distinction between s.s. and o.s. siblings/parallel
cousins; or a seniority distinction among siblings/parallel cousins.[14]

    These distinctions are structurally independent of bifurcate merging. The most frequently
found distinction is between s.s. and o.s. siblings/parallel cousins. Following this pattern,
speakers of earlier New Guinea Pidgin took the terms susa and brata from English sister and
brother but used them in an Oceanic manner. If I was female, my brata was my sister (s.s.
sibling) and my susa was my brother (o.s. sibling). These two categories are further
subdivided in many Oceanic terminologies. A common pattern is illustrated by Nakanai
(§2.2.3; Figure 2.3), where s.s. siblings are divided into those elder (tua-) or younger (tari-)
than EGO, but o.s. siblings are divided into female (hatavile-) and male (hatamale-).

    There are thus three sibling distinctions in Oceanic languages:

__block__
•    relative sex: same sex as EGO vs opposite sex from EGO (SG VS OG)
•    seniority: younger than EGO vs elder than EGO (yG vs eG)
•    ALTER’s sex (Z vs B)

Eleven configurations of these distinctions occur in Oceanic languages, and Table 2.7
shows the number of times each configuration occurs in the sample.[15] Column 1 shows whether
a terminology makes the relative sex distinction (y[es] or n[o]). If it does, then there are
entries in columns 2 to 5. Columns 2 and 4 show whether the seniority distinction is applied
respectively to s.s. and o.s. siblings. Columns 3 and 5 do the same for ALTER’s sex. But if
column 1 shows that a terminology lacks the relative sex distinction, then columns 4 and 5
are blank, because o.s. siblings are referred to by the same terms as s.s. siblings. For example,
Nakanai makes the s.s./o.s. distinction (column 1), the seniority distinction for s.s. siblings
(column 2), and uses different o.s. terms according to ALTER’s sex (column 5). It is thus one of
the 17 languages with the configuration in row 6. The column totals show that only four
terminologies distinguish ALTER’s sex in the terms for s.s. siblings, and that only three
distinguish seniority of o.s. siblings. The four configurations that include one of these
distinctions are shown in grey and are presumably the outcomes of local accidents.[16]
Theoretically, 20 configurations are possible, but only 11 occur in Table 2.7—or more
properly ten, as row 9 contains question marks for unknown values.[17] Whilst one can
speculate about the reasons for the absence or near-absence of certain configurations, it is
clear that they reflect absences from the POc terminology (§2.3.5). Table 2.8 shows the
languages in the six most attested categories in Table 2.7.

: Table 2.7 Distributions of sibling distinctions across Oceanic languages

__table__
                        |   1     |      2     |        3    |        4      |       5  |
              config.   | sG/oG   |   ysG/esG  |      sZ/sB  |     yoG/eoG   |    oZ/oB | Totals
                    1   |   y     |      n     |        n    |        n      |       n  |     42
                    2   |   y     |      n     |        n    |        n      |       y  |      9
                    3   |   y     |      n     |        n    |        y      |       n  |      2
                    4   |   y     |      n     |        y    |        n      |       n  |      3
                    5   |   y     |      y     |        n    |        n      |       n  |     38
                    6   |   y     |      y     |        n    |        n      |       y  |     17
                    7   |   y     |      y     |        n    |        y      |       n  |      1
                    8   |   y     |      y     |        y    |        n      |       y  |      1
                    9   |   y     |      y     |        n    |        ?      |       ?  |      8
                  10    |   n     |      n     |        n    |        —      |      —   |      5
                  11    |   n     |      y     |        n    |        —      |      —   |     12
              Total y   |  121    |      77    |         4   |          3    |      27  |
              Total n   |   17    |      61    |       134   |        110    |      86  |
                        |         |            |             |               | Grand total: | 138

[14] As shown in Table 2.5 some languages extend the terms used for siblings and parallel cousins to
cross-cousins, but this is discussed in §2.3.1.

[15] The sample has 138 languages rather than 139, as sibling data for Akei are inadequate.

64 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

: Table 2.8 Terminologies according to the better represented configurations in Table 2.7

__table__
        Config 1           Config 2     Config 5        Config 6     Config 10   Config 11
Adm     Sori, Lele                      Pak             Baluan, Lou  Yapese      Mussau
SJ and Takia, Adzera        Mapos Buang, Wogeo, Yabem,
NNG                         Lakurumau, Middle Watut
                            Roviana,
                            Marovo, Big
                            Nambas,
                            Anejom
PT     Dobu,  Galea,                     Kilivila,                            Motu, Roro, N
       Tubetube, Sudest                  Muyuw,                               Mekeo
                                         Kalauna,
                                         Bwaidoga,
                                         Sinaugoro
MM Vitu, W Kara,            Lakurumau, Varisi, Nduke, Nakanai
       Nalik, Lihir, Notsi, Roviana,     Simbo
       Lamusong, Madak, Marovo
       Barok, Sursurunga,
       Nehan, Petats,
       Hahon, Mono-Alu
SES    Gae, Lengo, Sa’a,                 Bugotu, Gela,              NWGR      Kwaio,
       W Arosi, E Arosi                  Birao, Longgu,                       Fagani, Owa
                                         To’aba’ita,
                                         Baegu
NCV Loh, Araki,             Big Nambas Mota, NE         Sinesip
       Nduindui, N                       Ambae, Raga,
       Ambrym, Nguna                     Vao, Ninde
SV                          Anejom                      Kwamera
NCal                                     Drehu,  Iaai   Kumak,      Belep,    Nyelâyu,
                                                        Ajië,       Jawe      Cèmuhî, Paicî
                                                        Xârâcùù,
                                                        Nengone
Mic    Satawalese,          Chuukese                    Marshallese Nauruan
       Lamotrek
Fij    Moala                             most Fijian                          Matailobau,
                                         languages                            Koroalau
Pn exc E Futunan, Anuta, Tokelau,        Pukapuka,      Tongan,
EPn    Tikopia, Ifira-Mele, Rennellese                  Pileni,
       W Futunan, Takuu,
       Luangiua, Sikaiana
EPn                                                     Rapa,
                                                        Maori,
                                                        Tahitian,
                                                        Marquesan,
                                                        Hawaiian

                                                                                     Kinship terms 65

   In the vast majority of Oceanic languages, terms for parallel cousins are identical to those
for siblings, but there is a dimension that is not represented here. In some languages, as one
might expect, terms for EGO’s younger and elder siblings are applied to EGO’s younger and
elder parallel cousins. In other languages, however, the terms make reference not to EGO’s
seniority but to seniority of the cousin’s parent relative to EGO’s parent. For example, if the
parallel cousin is EGO’s mother’s sister’s child, the choice of the ‘younger’ or ‘elder’ term
depends on whether the cousin’s mother is younger or elder than EGO’s mother. This matter is
not pursued here, as the data often do not allow us to determine who seniority refers to in a
given terminology.

2.3.2.2 Children

Strangely, perhaps, discussion of terms for children is necessarily preceded by a short return
to terms for father’s sister and mother’s brother, a topic in the discussion of bifurcate merging
(§2.3.1). Their relevance here is that ‘mother’s brother’ and ‘sister’s child’ are the same
(reciprocal) term in some languages. In other scattered languages, ‘mother’s brother’ is the
same term as ‘father’s sister’.[18] However, these two categories almost never overlap: that is,
there is no language in the sample in which ‘mother’s brother’, ‘father’s sister’ and ‘sister’s
child’ are all the same term. Two exceptions are the Fijian dialects Moala and Lakeba, where
FZ, MB and ♂ZC are all _vuŋo-_.

[16] They are Sye (SV) and Nakoroka Fijian (config. 3), Patpatar and both Tolai dialects (MM, config. 4),
     Sobei (SJ, config. 7) and Bukawa (NNG, config 8).

[17] The eight languages to which row 9 refers are all from New Caledonia. Wedoye (1989) only gives
     terminologies for a male speaker, and uses address terms, which are known sometimes to be distributed
     differently in NCal languages from the corresponding reference terms.

[18] The languages are Yabem, Bukawa (NNG), Rivers’ Northwest ‘Guadalcanar’ and To’aba’ita (SES),
     Ajië (NCal), Tavua and Deuba (Fij), and Marquesan (EPn). It can be assumed that in each case FZ and
     MB have come (independently) to be perceived as the mirror-images of each other in the kinship
     system.

66 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


    The role of mother’s brother and his relationship with his sister’s children are discussed
briefly at the end of §2.2.3. In 52 terminologies each refers to the other by the same dedicated
dedicated term (column 1 of Table 2.9). In 55 others, there is a separate term for each
relationship (column 2). In yet others, there is no dedicated term for ‘sister’s child’ and the
latter is not distinguished from other children. It is either referred to simply as a ‘child’ or by
another kinship term, the narrow meaning of which is shown in parentheses (column 3).
Among the items in column 2, in Simbo (MM), Pukapuka, Rapa and Māori (EPn) the MB
term is the term for ‘father’.

    An odd phenomenon, commented on several times in the literature, occurs in certain SES
languages. In Bugotu, Gela, Lengo and Owa, the MB term reflects POc *tubu- ‘grandfather’
but does not retain this meaning. It is also used reciprocally for ♂ZC.

    In a few WOc languages an apparent mirror-image of the MB/♂ZC relationship is
enshrined in the terminology: FZ and ♀BC are referred to by the same term. These languages
are Muyuw, Galea, and Motu (PT), and Vitu and Nakanai (MM). However, terms used only by

: Table 2.9 Terms for male EGO’s sister’s child

__table__
            1                                 2                                 3
            MB = ♂ZC                          MB, ♂ZC                           MB, ♂ZC = C
 Adm        Yapese, Mussau, Lele, Pak,       Baluan, Lou                        Sori (sG)
 SJ and     Sobei, Wogeo, Takia, Mapos Buang Yabem, Bukawa, Middle Watut
 NNG
 PT         Kilivila, Muyuw, Kalauna, Dobu,      Tubetube                      Bwaidoga, N
            Galea, Sinaugoro, Motu, Roro                                       Mekeo
 MM         Vitu, Nakanai, W Kara, Lakurumau, Patpatar, Petats, Simbo          Lihir (oGC)
            Nalik, Lamusong, Barok,                                            Notsi (oGC), Varisi
            Sursurunga, Trivett’s Tolai, Matupit                               (CC), Roviana
            Tolai, Nehan, Hahon, Mono-Alu,
            Nduke, Marovo
 SES        NWGR, Birao, Longgu, To’aba’ita,
            Kwaio, Sa’a, Fagani, W Arosi,
            E Arosi
 NCV        Loh , Araki, Vao                     Mota, Raga, N Ambrym, Akei,
                                                 NE Ambae, Nduindui, Big
                                                 Nambas, Ninde, Sinesip, Nguna
 SV                                              Sye, Kwamera                  Anejom
 NCal       Nyelâyu , Kumak, Fwai, Pwaamei, Yuanga, Bwatoo, Arhâ, Ajië,        Kwenyii
            Wahmwaang, Cèmuhî                    Paicî, Xârâcùù, Xaragure,
                                                 Nengone, Drehu
 Mic        Nauruan                              Marshallese, Satawalese,      Chuukese
                                                 Lamotrek
 Fij        Bauan                                Vuda, Wayan, Nadrau,          Koroalau (CC),
                                                 Tokatoka, Matailobau, Tavua, Macuata
                                                 Deuba, Nakoroka, Cakaudrove ,
                                                 Moala, Lakeba, Lau,
 Pn exc                                          Tongan, Tokelau, E Futunan,
 EPn                                             Anuta, Tikopia, Ifira-Mele, W
                                                 Futunan
 EPn        Marquesan                            Pukapuka                      Tahitian, Hawaiian
                                                 Rapa
                                                 Maori

                                                                            Kinship terms 67


a female ego and terms for children other than ego’s child and ego’s sister’s child are often
not recorded, so we do not know how widespread this reciprocal usage is.

    In a scattering of languages the children of EGO’s male blood relatives and those of female
blood relatives are referred to by different terms. In these languages the term for the children
of females is usually the term used for ♂ZC. Our data are in this respect too incomplete for a
listing of languages to be meaningful.

    In a relatively small number of languages a sex distinction is made among children. There
are dedicated kinship terms for female and male children in Pak, Baluan and Lou (Adm),
Lihir, Notsi, Lamusong, Barok and Patpatar (MM, New Ireland), N Ambrym (NCV) and
Tongan, Tokelau, E Futuna and Rennellese (Pn).

2.3.2.3 Grandparents and grandchildren

Some Oceanic languages have a dedicated term for mother’s mother’s brother (e.g. Tolai
kaku-; see also §2.3.3), but a majority encode all grandparents and members of EGO’s
grandparents’ generation with a single term (often a reflex of POc *tubu-; §2.4.1.4.1). Other
languages do make a distinction between female and male members of the grandparent
generation. Our data are incomplete in this regard, but these languages include: Notsi,
Sursurunga and Mono-Alu (MM); Bugotu, Sa’a, W Arosi and Fagani (SES); Akei, Big
Nambas, Ninde and Nguna (NCV); almost all NCal languages (exceptions are Belep in the
north, Kwenyii in the south, and the languages of the Loyalties); Marshallese, and Lamotrek
(Mic), numerous and scattered Fijian languages, and Ifira-Mele (Pn).

   Owa (SES) has a general term pʷāpʷā for members of the grandparent generation as well
as wauwa- ‘grandfather’ and tura- ‘grandmother’. It is quite possible that there are other
languages with a similar configuration that do not show up in the sample. Sori and Pak
(Adm) are recorded with separate terms for PF, MM, FM. On the other hand, a few languages
have no ‘grandparent’ terms, instead using ‘mother’ and ‘father’ for both parents and
grandparents. They are Simbo, Nduke and Roviana (MM), Numèè (NCal) and Satawalese
and Chuukese (Mic).

   Data on ‘grandchild’ terms are more complete, and fall into two categories:

__block__
•   a ‘grandparent’ term is used reciprocally of both grandparents and grandchildren;
•   there is a dedicated ‘grandchild’ term.

These categories mostly follow genealogical boundaries. A ‘grandparent’ term is used
reciprocally to refer to grandchildren in Mussau, NNG, PT, MM, SES and Marshallese (Mic).
A dedicated grandchild term is used in Yapese, Adm, NCal including the Loyalties, and
throughout Fiji and Polynesia. NCV languages in the sample are divided. Most have a
‘grandchild’ term, but the northern languages Loh, Mota and Araki use ‘grandparent’
reciprocally.

   Languages that also use ‘mother’ and ‘father’ for grandparents are exceptions to these
generalisations. Roviana uses ‘father’ reciprocally for a grandchild, Nduke has ‘child’s child’,
and Numèè (along with Kwenyii), Satawalese and Chuukese use ‘child’ for grandchildren as
well as children.

68 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

Figure 2.7: Structure of the NE Ambae terminology, with bifurcate merging terms


2.3.3 Generational skewing

    A small number of languages in the sample have ‘cross’ terms with extended meanings
that are mostly quite unlike those in Nakanai. These are exemplified by NE Ambae, a north
Vanuatu language (Figure 2.7).[19]

    Within the merged portion of the terminology, the structure of NE Ambae (Figure 2.7)
differs from Nakanai (Figure 2.3) only in the unusual addition of tue- ‘s.s. sibling’ as a cover
term for both tehi- ‘younger s.s. sibling’ and toka- ‘elder s.s. sibling’.

    It is the ‘cross’ portion of the NE Ambae terminology in Figure 2.7 that is of particular
interest. On the left-hand side of the figure, father’s sister is also called ratahi- ‘mother’, and
so are the female descendants in her matriline, i.e. FZD, FZDD, FZDDD. Their brothers
(FZS, FZDS, FZDDS) are all called tama- ‘father’. The children of each tama- are labelled in
the same way as the children of the three tama- in the merged portion of the figure.

    The right-hand ‘cross’ portion of the terminology is different. The children of EGO’s
mother’s brother are called natu- ‘child’, and their children vaɣabui- ‘grandchild’.

    The technical term for this phenomenon is ‘__generational skewing__’. On the left of the
figure, ‘mother’, ‘father’ and the two sibling terms are used of women a generation or more
below EGO’s mother. On the right of the figure, ‘child’ and ‘grandchild’ are used of
individuals a generation above EGO’s child and grandchild. Skewing is also found in various
locations outside the Austronesian family (see Lounsbury 1964a and the contributions to
Trautmann & Whiteley 2012).

[19] NE Ambae data are drawn mainly from Allen (1964a) and Lovell (1980), for the Lobaha and Longana
     dialects respectively.

                                                                             Kinship terms 69

Figure 2.8: The structures of the two states of the Dobu kinship terminology

   There is a plentiful literature on generationally skewed terminologies, asking how they
come into being and what function they serve. However, a few things seem reasonably clear.
There are two varieties of generational skewing. One is like NE Ambae, in Murdock’s terms
a ‘Crow’ terminology. Its mirror-image, ‘Omaha’, is not represented in Oceanic. Kohler
(1897) found that ‘Crow’ terminologies were correlated with matrilineal societies, ‘Omaha’
with patrilineal. This correlation stands as a high probability, but not an absolute, as examples
of patrilineal Crow and matrilineal Omaha have since been found. The converse does not
hold, i.e. unilineal (matri- or patrilineal) descent is not a good predictor of generational
skewing. For example, Nakanai society is matrilineal but its terminology is not skewed.

   The witness of speakers of languages with a skewed terminology gives us some indication
of how skewing happens. Deacon’s ‘best’ informant for Semiang (= Sinesip, NCV)
volunteered the information that if a male EGO’s mother’s brother died, by custom EGO would
marry the MB’s widow, thereby becoming ‘father’ to MB’s children, and calling them ‘child’,
accounting for the right-hand side of Figure 2.7. Conversely, if EGO is among the children of
the deceased, then their cross-cousin becomes their ‘father’, accounting for the left-hand side
(Deacon 1934:77-78). It seems that these uses in this circumstance have become entrenched,
resulting in the skewed terminology.

   Fortune’s (1932) description of Dobu (PT) kinship is significant in two ways. The Dobu
terminology has two states, A and B in Figure 2.8.. State A resembles the Nakanai structure of
Figure 2.3. There are dedicated terms for mother’s brother and father’s sister, and a single
term for cross-cousins. After father’s death, state B becomes the norm, with generational
skewing on the father’s side. FZD inherits her mother’s label, and her husband receives the
label ‘father’. Fortune (1932:37–38) provides the reason for this. The father’s place in the
matriline is taken by his heir. The heir is the father’s sister’s son, so he assumes the title
‘father’, and his sister becomes ‘father’s sister’. Fortune’s consultants’ explanation of the
generationally skewed state B closely resembles that of Deacon’s Sinesip consultant. As their
locations are 1950 km apart as the crow flies, they are clearly independent pieces of evidence
as to the reason for generational skewing.

70 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


    This explains how generational skewing arises. But the fact that two terminological states
coexist(ed) in Dobu society also explains how Oceanic comes to have terminologies like state
A alongside terminologies like state B, not to mention terminologies with fossil fragments of
state B (see below). No other Oceanic terminologies with two states are known to us, but we
infer that they must exist or have existed in order for the transition between the two states to
take place.

    Kronenfeld (2012) describes a two-state terminology in the Fanti language of Ghana. The
situation is similar to that in Dobu. Kronenfeld takes issue with the concept of a ‘Crow’
terminology, viewing it as a generally skewed overlay on an existing bifurcate merging
(‘Iroquois’) terminology. The Fanti two-state terminology can be taken as corroborating
Fortune’s account of Dobu and its historical role.

    To ‘qualify’ as a fully skewed system the changes illustrated by NE Ambae in Figure 2.7
are expected:

__block__
1. on the father’s side
     a. father’s sister’s matrilineal female descendants (FZD, FZDD, FZDDD) are referred
        to with the same term as FZ;
     b. father’s sister’s matrilineal male descendants (FZS, FZDS, FZDDS) are called
        ‘father’;
     c. the children of father’s sister’s matrilineal male descendants (FZSC, FZDSC,
        FZDDSC) are called by the same terms as EGO’s siblings (i.e. as the children of a
        ‘father’)
2. on the mother’s side
     a. mother’s brother’s child is called by the term for EGO’s child’;
     b. mother’s brother’s grandchild is called by the term for EGO’s grandchild.

   Twenty-one languages in the sample show signs of generational skewing, but only three,
Mota, NE Ambae and Nguna (all NCV) qualify fully. The evidence is set out schematically in
Table 2.10.20 The abbreviations in the first row are relationships in a genealogical tree. The
abbreviations beneath them represent the narrow sense of the term that is used for that
relationship. In NE Ambae, for example, the relationship of father’s sister (FZ) is referred to
by the term for mother (M), the relationship of father’s sister’s son (FZS) by the term for
father (F), and so on. Terms that do not reflect generational skewing are omitted for
readability’s sake.

[20] The languages listed in the table are only those included in the sample. It seems that almost all
     languages of Malakula have skewed terminologies. Data supporting this generalisation are from Uripiv,
     Malua Bay, Big Nambas, Larëvat, Neve’ei, Naman, Avava (Niviar dialect), Ninde, Sinesip and
     Naha’ai. The only Malakula terminology that is not obviously skewed is that of Vao. Skewed systems
     are also reported by Fischer (1966:117-120) in the eastern Carolines, but he offers neither data nor
     references.

                                                                            Kinship terms 71

: Table 2.10 Oceanic languages reflecting generational skewing

__table__
       gloss           FZ     FZS FZD FZSC FZDS FZDD MBS MBD MBSC MBDC
       Yapese          M      F       M      G      G             C       C        CC
       Sori            FZ     F       FZ                                  C
       Lele            FZ1 F          FZ                   FZ             D
       Pak             FZ     FZS FZ         G      FZS FZ                D     CC
       Kilivila        PP     F       PP            FZ     FZ     C       C
       Dobu state B FZ        F       FZ
       Sudest          FZ                                         C2      C2
       Nakanai                               PP     PP                          PP PP
       Notsi                                 PP     *PP3                        PP *PP3
       Lamusong        FZ                    G      FZ                          G  FZ
       Usen Barok                            G                                  G
       Trivett’s Tolai PP             PP                   PP             F        PP
       Mota            M      F       M      G      F      M      C       C     PP PP
       Akei            M      F       M                           C       C     CC
       NE Ambae M             F       M      G      F      M      C       C     CC CC
       Nduindui        M      F       M      G      G             C       C     CC CC
       Raga            FZ     F       FZ            F      FZ     C       C        CC
       Ninde           FZ     F       FZ     G      G             C                CC
       Sinesip         M      F       M                           C       C
       Nguna           FZ     F       FZ     G      F      FZ     C       C     G  G
       Ifira-Mele      FZ     F       FZ                          C       C

       1
         Father’s mother is also called by the FZ term.
       2
         Alternates with the term for cross-cousin.
       3
         The term is tubo-, reflecting POc *tubu PP, not reflected as PP in Notsi.

    The backbone of the skewed system is the terms for the matrilineal female, FZ, FZD and
FZDD, shown in grey. The observation here is that whatever term is used for FZ is also used
for FZD, FZDD and FZDDD (FZDDD is not shown; cf Figure 2.7). In some languages, e.g.
Lele (Adm), the same term is projected upwards, i.e. used for FM. The matrilineal female’s
brother (FZS, FZDS) is labelled as ‘father’ (F). In Pak (Adm) a special term is used for FZS,
which is then also used for FZDS.

    Abbreviations in italics represent terms that have evidently been copied from elsewhere in
the paradigm. For example, Nduindui terms are almost identical to those of its neighbour, NE
Ambae, but the term used for FZDS is not the expected term ‘father’ but ‘sibling’, copied
from FZSC. In Nduindui matrilineal moieties have been replaced by patrilineal sections.
The Nduindui terms for father’s sister’s children retain the old nomenclature, but it is lost in
the following generations (Allen 1964a).

    Nakanai and Notsi (both MM) show only a fragment of an assumed formerly skewed
system. In a terminology with skewing on the mother’s side, mother’s brother’s children
(MBS and MBD) are called ‘child’ (C), and their children (MBSC and MBDC) are called
‘grandchild’. The latter are, however, of the same generation as EGO’s children. Nakanai and
Notsi retain only this peculiarity of a skewed system, and have copied the ‘grandchild’ term
to the children of the paternal cross-cousins.

    The sample languages include two Tolai dialects, Matupit Tolai and an unlocated dialect
described by Trevitt (1940). This pair is interesting in that Matupit Tolai is unskewed, whereas
‘Trevitt’s Tolai’ (labelled thus in Table 2.10) shows signs of skewing. Both dialects are shown
in Figure 2.9. Assuming the hypothesis that unskewed and skewed versions of a terminology
initially coexist, Matupit Tolai represents the unskewed version, Trevitt’s Tolai a frozen
skewed version. Trevitt’s Tolai uses the term tubu- ‘grandparent’ for FZ, FZD and FZDD,
presumably because, working upward, FM is tubu-.21 FZS and FZDS are not called by the
expected term ‘father’, but instead nauva- FZS is extended to FZDS. A peculiarity of
Trevitt’s Tolai is that it uses tama- reciprocally of ‘father’ and ‘child’, and this is then
predictably extended to mother’s brother’s daughter (but not son), whose daughter is then
labelled tubu- ‘grandchild’.

72 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

Figure 2.9: Two dialects of Tolai

   The only Pn language with skewing is Ifira-Mele, and we attribute this to contact with
neighbouring Nguna on the island of Efate.

2.3.4 The geography of typology

A review of Tables 2.5 to 2.10 reveals that typology rarely follows geographic or genealogical
boundaries closely. This is scarcely surprising, as changes in terminological structure are
likely to occur independently in different places. Without the terms themselves, changes do
not provide a secure basis for determining shared innovations, as some of the comments
published with Marshall (1984) explain. But this does not mean that the typological
investigation above is irrelevant to the reconstruction of POc and the subsequent history of
Oceanic languages.

   The distribution of birfurcate merging (Table 2.5) is significant. It is strong in the
Admiralties, in the New Britain/New Ireland area of MM, in New Caledonia other than the
Loyalties, and in most of Fiji. This distribution, coupled with the fact that it is easier to derive
other structures from bifurcate merging than vice versa, suggests that the POc terminology
had bifurcate merging. However, it was lost among the small islands of Micronesia and
eastern Polynesia.

[21] The Kilivila cognate tabu- behaves identically.

                                                                          Kinship terms 73

: Table 2.11 Reconstructed POc kinship terms

__table__
Gloss                                                 Reference terms        Address terms
‘father, father’s brother, mother’s sister’s husband’ *tama-         *ama *mama
‘mother, mother’s sister, father’s brother’s wife’    *tina-, *kina- *ina    *(ñ,n)ana, *nai
‘mother’s brother’                                    *matuqa-               *wawa
‘child of ego, s.s. sibling or parallel cousin’       *natu-, *tu-
‘♂sister’s child’                                     *[qa]lawa
‘♂sister’s child’ (?)                                 *pa(s,c)u, *pa(s,c)ua-
‘kin of grandparent and grandchild generations’       *tubu-         *ubu    *bubu, *[bu]bui
                                                      *tabu-         *abu[a]
                                                      *wawa[-]               *tete
‘kin of grandchild generation’                        *makubu-
‘great-great-grandparent, great-great-grandchild’ *bawa[-]                   *sese-
‘younger s.s. sibling, younger s.s. parallel cousin’ *taci-, *kaci-
‘elder s.s. sibling, elder s.s. parallel cousin’      *tua-, *tuaka-         *kaka
‘♂sister’, ♂female parallel cousin’                   *papine-
‘♀brother’, ♀male parallel cousin’                    *mʷaqane-
‘friend, companion; relative of ego’s generation’ *tuRaŋ
‘spouse’                                              *qasawa-
‘woman, wife’                                         *pine
‘s.s. sibling-in-law’                                 *ipaR/*ipa-
‘o.s. sibling-in-law, younger than ego’               *taci-
‘o.s. sibling-in-law, older than ego’                 *tua-
‘parent- or child-in-law’                             *rawa


   The data supporting generational skewing are admittedly found in only a small minority of
Oceanic languages, but their presence in quite widely distributed languages of the
Admiralties, PT, the New Britain/New Ireland area of MM, and NCV points to the presence
of skewing in POc.

   The relabelling of father’s sister as ‘mother’ was seemingly a shared innovation in Proto
NW Solomonic (MM). It is an areal tendency in SES (Table 2.5). On the other hand the
naming of all siblings and cousins, including cross-cousins, by the same terms seems to be a
broad tendency that operates sporadically everywhere except SV and mainland New
Caledonia. Change towards a generational structure went furthest in eastern Polynesia (Table
2.6).

74 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

Figure 2.: Reconstructed POc kinship terms

                                                                             Kinship terms 75


2.3.5 Reconstructing the Proto Oceanic kinship terminology

The POc kinship terms reconstructed in the subsections of §2.4.1 (blood relatives) and §2.4.2
(in-laws) are listed in Table 2.11 and plotted as a tree diagram in Figure 2. First,
POc kinship terms in §2.4 were reconstructed. Then the terminology was assembled from the
terms and their reconstructed glosses, but with an eye on the typology of terminologies
presented in §2.3. On the division of terms into reference and address terms, and the division
of certain reference terms into *t-initial and *t-less, see §2.4.1.1.

    The glosses of the terms for ‘father’ and ‘mother’, based on glosses of their reflexes,
support the typological evidence above that POc terminology was bifurcate merging (§2.3.1).
The s.s. sibling terms distinguished *taci- ‘younger s.s. sibling’ from *tua- or *tuaka- ‘ elder
s.s. sibling’. The o.s. sibling terms differentiated between the directly possessed terms
*papine- ‘♂o.s. (female) sibling’ and *mʷaqane- ‘♀o.s. (male) sibling’. These were also the
POc terms for ‘wife’ and ‘husband’ (vol.5:50–55), but when they referred to spouses they
were indirectly possessed. Putative *lopu- ‘o.s. sibling’ is omitted from both the figure and
the table as its POc status is uncertain (§2.4.1.5.3).

    There is broad agreement that early Oceanic society was matrilineal. In his survey of
earlier findings of Oceanic matrilineality Blust (1981a:70–72) notes that Codrington
(1891:30), Deacon (1934:705), and Capell and Lester (1945-46, part 4:315) had all suggested
that at least in some parts of Melanesia, where societies with moieties are interspersed with
societies that lack them, moieties are a retention, a view that Blust endorses. In his 1994 paper
he shows that POc matrilineality was inherited from PMP, and points to Murdock’s (1968a)
survey of sibling terminologies, which finds that the same-sex/opposite-sex opposition is
correlated with the presence of descent groups and especially with matrilineality. More
recently Hage (1999; this volume), Hage & Marck (2003) and Marck (2008) have also
argued vigorously in favour of POc matrilineality, partly on genetic grounds.

    If POc was indeed matrilineal, then it presumably had two moieties like those of Tolai, NE
Ambae and a number of other Oceanic languages (§2.2.3). Symptomatic of this is the
presence of two terms for ‘child’. POc *[qa]lawa- denoted in its narrow sense ‘sister’s
child’ (i.e. the one to whom EGO was mother’s brother) and in its classificatory sense ‘female
parallel cousin’s child’. The default term was *natu-, the only term that, as in Tolai, switches
moiety according to EGO’s sex: opposite moiety to EGO if EGO is male, same moiety as EGO if
EGO is female.

    The existence of a dedicated term, *matuqa, for EGO’s mother’s brother (literally ‘the old
one’) reflects his role among his kin (§2.2.3) and is further evidence of matrineality. If the
society were patrilineal, the leading male among his relatives would be his father.

2.3.6 Generational skewing in Proto Oceanic

    Previous reconstructions of POc kinship terms seem to have assumed that there must
have been a separate term for EGO’s father’s sister. Perhaps there was, but one cannot
reconstruct it (§2.4.1.2.6). Given that most other terms for blood relatives are easily
reconstructable, this blank in the terminology demands an explanation, and a fairly
straightforward one emerges from the discussion of generational skewing in §2.3.3. Like
Dobu, POc apparently had two states, a state A in which there were dedicated terms for
father’s sister and for cross-cousins and their children, and a state B in which these terms
were replaced by generationally skewed terms. Assuming that early Oceanic speakers lived
in small hamlets with perhaps one or two extended families scattered along coastlines (vol.
1:62), it is possible that children rarely heard the state A terms, rendering them liable to the
replacement which is visible in the data. The few generationally skewed terminologies that
exist today reflect a freezing of all or parts of state B (Table 2.10, plus others not included
in the sample), but most Oceanic terminologies reflect state A, with variations resulting
from a past two-state situation.

76 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

    In the POc terminology in Figure 2 the slots with terms in square brackets are essentially
gaps. No distinct terms can be reconstructed for them. They are in the lineages that involve
cross-cousins: father’s sister and her descendants and mother’s brother’s descendants. The
terms in the brackets are the generationally skewed terms that would have been used in
state B, with the exception of ‘father’s sister’. This is shown as [*FZ] because the POc
term is unknown. It was perhaps *tina- ‘mother’ or *tubu- ‘grandparent’, both discussed
below.

    The evidence of the languages listed in Table 2.10, like NE Ambae (Figure 2.7) and
Trevitt’s Tolai (Figure 2.9), leads us to expect that EGO’s mothers’ brother’s children will be
called ‘child’, despite the fact that they are of EGO’s generation. This extract from the data for
‘child’ in §2.4.1.3.1 confirms this. Glosses not relevant to generational skewing have been
removed. A majority of the reflexes are from NCV languages. This is not surprising, as
generational skewing, at least in the north of the region, is mentioned in the ethnographic
literature. The presence of reflexes from the Admiralties, PT, MM (western Solomons), the
Loyalties and Micronesia makes it likely that the sense ‘mother’s brother’s child’ is of POc
antiquity.

<
POc *natu- ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child, parallel cousin’s child, mother’s brother’s child’
 Adm: Pak              naro-                ‘child’, ♀MBC
 PT:  Kilivila         latu-                ‘child’, ♂MBC
 MM: Tolai             tama-                ‘father, child’, MBC (Trevitt 1940)
 MM: Marovo            tu-                  ‘child’, MBC
 NCV: Mota             natu-                ‘child’, MBC
 NCV: Raga             nitu-                ‘child’, MBC
 NCV: Akei             natu-                ‘child’, BC, MBC
 NCV: Daakaka          natɛ-                ‘♂child’, MBC
 NCV: Ninde            nitu-                ‘child’, ♂BC, ♂MBC
 NCV: Naman            netu-                ‘child’, MBC (Deacon 1934:104–106)
 NCV: Uripiv           natu-                ‘child’, MBC
 NCV: Neve’ei          natu-                ‘child’, MBC
 NCV: Nguna            natu                 ‘child’, MBC (Facey 1989)
 NCal: Iaai            noko-                ‘child’, MBC (Ray 1917)
 Mic: Puluwatese       nawɨ-                ‘child’, MBC
>

    One would also expect that the children of EGO’s MBC would be called by the same term
as ‘grandchild’, and the data give some support to this notion. POc apparently used two terms
for ‘grandchild’. POc *tubu- ‘grandparent’ was used reciprocally of ‘grandchild’. POc
*makubu- was not reciprocal and meant ‘grandchild; kin two generations below ego’. The
terms in the set below reflect a variety of ‘grandchild’ terms, but have in common the fact that
they are also used for mother’s brother’s grandchild, who was of EGO’s child’s generation, not
EGO’s grandchild’s.

                                                                           Kinship terms 77

<
POc *tubu- ‘grandparent, grandchild’
POc *makubu- ‘grandchild; kin two generations below ego’
 Adm: Yapese              tuŋin            ‘grandchild’, BCC, MBDC
 Adm: Pak                 makapu-          ‘grandchild’, sGCC, MBSC
 MM: Tolai                tubu-            ‘grandchild’, FZ, FZD, FZDD, MBDS (Trevitt 1940)
 MM: Babatana             bazu-            ‘grandchild’, ♂MBDC
 NCV: Akei                mabʷi-           ‘grandchild’, BCC, MBSC
 NCV: Mota                tupu-            ‘grandparent, grandchild’, MBCC, FZCC
 NCV: Naman               nābu-            ‘grandchild’, MBSS
 NCV: Neve'ei             nābu-            ‘grandchild’, MBSS
 NCV: Nguna               sūli             ‘grandchild’, BCC, ♀MBCC
 NCV: Ninde               neiʙü-           ‘grandchild’, MBDS, ♂MBSS
 Fij:   Lautoka           viaŋo-           ‘grandchild’, WZC, MBCC
 Fij:   Tavuki            makubu           ‘grandchild’, BCC, MBCC
>

   NE Ambae and Trevitt’s Tolai also suggest that father’s mother, father’s sister (FZ), FZD,
FZDD and so on, i.e. father’s maternal line, were either labelled ‘mother’ or ‘grandparent’ in
POc. The evidence for this is less than the set above, but the strength of the ‘mother’ set
below (from §2.4.1.2.2) is reinforced by the Nduindui and Chuukese glosses, which include
both FZD and FZDD. The POc term was presumably the well supported *tina- ‘mother’,
despite the fact that Lele, Mota and Nduindui all have another term for ‘mother’. The
evidence for POc *tubu- in this role is thinner but the glosses are convincing.

__formgroup__
  Adm: Yapese           ci-tini(ŋo)-       ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW, FZ, FZD
  Adm: Lele             nane-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZD
  NCV: Mota             veve-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW, FZD (Codrington 1891)
  NCV: Nduindui         re-tahi-           ‘mother’, PZ, FZD, FZDD
  NCV: Akei             tina-              ‘mother’, PZ, FZD
  Mic: Puluwatese       yīn                ‘mother’, PZ, FZD
  Mic: Chuukese         yine-y             ‘mother’, PZ, PM, FZD, FZDD
  PT:  Kilivila         tabu-              ‘grandparent’, FZ, FZD, FZDD (Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury 1965)
  MM:  Tolai            tubu-              ‘grandparent’, FZ, FZD, FZDD (Trevitt 1940)

   In NE Ambae the brother of the father’s lineal female is called _*tama-_ ‘father’, i.e. FMB, F
(and FB), FZS, FZDS and FZDDS are all _*tama-_. Again there is respectable evidence for this
among the data in §2.4.1.2.1

<
POc *tama- ‘father, father’s mother, mother’s sister’s husband, father’s sister’s son, father’s sister’s daughter’s son, father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter’s son’
 Adm: Yapese          ci-timo(ŋo)-      ‘father’, FB, MZH, FZS
 Adm: Pak             dramo-, tamo-     ‘father’, FB, ♀FZS (Mead 1934:347–349)
 Adm: Bipi            tama              ‘father’, FB, ♀FZS (Mead 1934:350–351)
 PT:  Kilivila        tama-             ‘father’, FB, PZH, FZS (Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury 1965)
 NCV: Mota            tama-             ‘father’, FB, MZH, FZS
 NCV: Lombaha         tama-             ‘father’, FB, FZS
 NCV: Longana         tama-             ‘father’, FB, FZS
 NCV: Akei            tama-             ‘father’, FB, FBS, FZS
 NCV: Daakaka         timya-            ‘father’, FB, FZS
 NCV: Ninde           tama-             ‘father’, FB, MZH, FZS
 NCV: Nguna           mama              ‘father’, MZH, FZS, FZDS, FZDDS
 Mic: Chuukese        seme-             ‘father’, PB, FZS, FZDS
>

78 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   Collectively, the evidence above is respectable support for the hypothesis that the gaps in
the POc tree are there because POc has a stage B. Some of the bracketed terms in Figure 2 are
reconstructed not by the comparative method but by local inference. For example, if mother’s
brother’s child was labelled _*natu-_, otherwise ‘child’, then mother’s brother’s child’s child
was probably labelled *makubu-, otherwise ‘grandchild’.

2.4 Reconstructing Proto Oceanic kinship terms

    In this section POc terms are presented with supporting evidence. Among other things, we
were interested in ascertaining whether a reconstructed term was a POc innovation or an
inheritance from an earlier Austronesian interstage. As in other chapters of these volumes, we
often rely on others’ reconstructions of PAn, PMP or PEMP terms as evidence of inheritance.
Where a relevant reconstruction has not been made, however, we have explored SHWNG
languages to see whether a term is reconstructable to PEMP—and therefore inherited into
POc—and have cited relevant SHWNG data. SHWNG languages fall into four subgroups:
South Halmahera (SH), Raja Ampat (RA), Bomberai (Bom) and Cenderawasih Bay (CB).

    Some PPn kin terms are shown with two forms, like _*tina-_ and _*tinana_ ‘mother’
(Pawley 1967:262–263; Wilson 1982:35–60, 96-99). The first term of the pair, like other items ending
in a hyphen, retained POc direct possession of kin terms whereby the possessor suffix was
added directly to the stem (vol.1:32; vol.5:75–76), but this occurred only with a singular
possessor.[22] With a non-singular possessor and optionally with a singular possessor an indirect
possession construction was used, e.g. PPn _*t-o-tā tama-na_ [ART-PCL-P:1PL father-P:3SG] ‘our
father’ (Wilson 1982:97). In the indirect construction the possessed noun retained a fossil
reflex of the POc _*-ña_ P:3SG, giving the second term of the pair.

[22] The PPn suffixes were _*-ku_ P:1SG, _*-u_ P:2SG and _*-na_ P:3SG, reflecting POc _*-gu_, _*-mu_ and _*-ña_.
     Loss of POc _*-m_ in the PPn P:2SG form is irregular. All Pn languages retain PPn _*-na_ P:3SG in the
     terms under discussion, at least as a fossil. PPn _*-u_ P:2SG is reflected in the Pn Outlier languages
     Rennellese, Mae, Tikopia, Pileni, Ifira-Mele and W Futunan. The last three also reflect _*-ku_ P:1SG. In
     vol 5:75 Ross writes, ‘Most Oceanic languages outside Polynesia make a grammatical distinction
     between directly and indirectly possessed nouns….’ This implies that Pn languages do not make this
     distinction, but this discussion shows that some do, albeit within narrow bounds.

                                                                             Kinship terms 79

    There are several pitfalls associated with the glossing of kinship terms. At one end of the
continuum, a term is glossed with a single term, e.g. ‘father’, yet, given that Oceanic kinship
terminologies are classificatory, it is almost certain that a ‘father’ term has wider reference
that includes ‘father’s brother’ and ‘mother’s sister’s husband’. However, defining the ‘father’
term as denoting F, FB and MZH in many cases does not cover the term’s actual denotation,
which may well be potentially boundless (see §2.2.3). A few publications, e.g. Fingleton (1986)
on Tolai, offer definitions of this kind. The usual ethnographic gloss, however, is a
long string of relatives, like Elbert & Monberg’s (1965:13) gloss of Rennellese _tama-_/_tamana_:
F, FB, FZH, FFBDH, FFBS, FMZS, MH, FMZDH, MZH, MMZDH, HF, WF. A string of this
kind is sometimes difficult to interpret, as it omits a relationship that is implied if the term
denotes a boundless class. Does this mean that the authors have omitted a possible gloss? We
cannot tell, as ethnographers do not always explicate the structure of the kinship system, but
instead focus on the behaviours of various kin towards each other. In any case, the
interpretation of a gloss list like the one for Rennellese ‘father’ is dependent on an
understanding of the structure of the kinship system.

    Often when the long-list glosses in a cognate set are compared, we find that perhaps only
the first three items on the list agree across cognates. Beyond these it is impossible to draw
any conclusion about the larger category denoted by the reconstruction.

    In light of these considerations and to save space, long lists of glosses are generally not
given in the definitions below. These can sometimes be found in the ethnographies listed in
the appendix to this chapter. Instead, we restrict ourselves to the most straightforward glosses,
like ‘father, father’s brother,’ FZH. In the interests of readability the first gloss (or two) is
given in plain English and subsequent glosses as abbreviations. On occasion, a definition of
the whole category is provided, like the one above (‘Father or any male blood relative…’).

    To avoid too much clutter in the cognate sets below, we have not given the source of most
cognates. As with other chapters and volumes, the lexical source(s) for most languages are
listed in Appendix A. The present chapter also draws on the ethnographic sources listed at the
end of the chapter. The source of a cognate is given only where (a) we have consulted two or
more works for that language; (b) the source is itself a comparative work dealing with a
number of languages; or (c) only one item in the chapter is drawn from that source.

    In some Oceanic languages, there are two terms for the same ALTER, a reference term used
in talking about that ALTER, e.g. ‘my father’ or ‘your child’, and an address (or vocative) term
used to indicate whom one is talking to, e.g. ‘Dad, may I go outside?’ Address terms are
marked with the abbreviation ADDR. However, there are languages in which this distinction is
not made, i.e. one says, ‘My father, may I go outside?’ Diachronically, it is quite common to
find a reference term that reflects an early address term.

2.4.1 Blood relatives (consanguineal kin)

2.4.1.1 Origins


80 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

: Table 2.12     POc variant terms for close blood relatives

__table__
                           | 1       |        2            | 3           |         4       |
 ‘father’                  | *ama    |        *tama-       | (*kama)     |         *mama   |     (§2.4.1.2.1)
 ‘mother’                  | *ina    |        *tina-       | *kina       |         *nana   |     (§2.4.1.2.2)
                           | *ubu    |        *tubu-       | *kubu       |                 |
 ‘grandparent, grandchild’ | —       |        *tibu-       | —           |         *bubu   |     (§2.4.1.4.1)
                           | *abu    |        *tabu-       | —           |                 |
 ‘younger s.s. sibling’    | *aci    |        *taci-       | *kaci       |         —       |     (§2.4.1.5.1)
 ‘elder s.s. sibling’      | —       |        *tua-,*tuaka-| —           |         *kaka   |     (§2.4.1.5.2)


: Table 2.13 Distribution by Oceanic subgroups/regions of POc variant terms for close blood relatives

__table__
column: | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 16 | 17 | 18 | 19 | 20 | 21
SHWNG   | y | y | y | y | y | y |   | y | y | y  | y  | y  |    | y  | y  | y  |    |    |    |    |
POc | *ama | *tama- | *kama | *mama | *ina | *tina | *kina | *ñaña | *ubu | *kubu- | *tubu- | *bubu | *tibu- | *abu | *tabu- | *aci | *taci- | *kasi- | *tua- | *tuaka- | *kaka
Mussau  |   | y |   |   |   |   | y |   |   |    | y  |    |    |    |    |    | y  |    | y  |    |
Adm     |   | y |   |   | y | y |   | y |   |    | y  | y  |    | y  | y  |    | y  |    |    |    |
NNG     | y | y | y | y | y | y | y | y | y |    | y  | y  | y  | y  | y  | y  | y  |    | y  | y  | y
PT      | y | y | y | y | y | y |   |   |   | y  | y  | y  |    |    |    |    | y  |    | y  | y  |
Kb      |   | y |   |   | y | y | y | y |   |    | y  |    |    | y  |    |    | y  |    | y  | y  |
MM      |   | y |   | y | y | y |   | y |   |    | y  | y  | y  |    |    |    | y  | y  | y  | y  |
NWS     |   | y |   | y |   | y |   |   | y |    | y  | y  | y  |    |    | y  | y  | y  |    | y  | y
SES     |   | y |   | y |   | y |   | y |   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | y  | y  | y  | y  | y
NCV     |   | y |   | y | y | y |   | y | y |    | y  | y  | y  | y  | y  |    | y  |    | y  | y  |
SV      |   | y |   | y |   | y |   |   |   |    | y  |    |    |    |    |    | y  |    | y  |    |
NCal    |   | y |   | y |   | y |   | y |   |    | y  |    |    | y  |    |    | y  |    | y  | y  |
Mic     |   | y |   |   |   | y |   |   |   |    | y  |    |    |    |    |    | y  |    |    |    |
Fij     |   | y |   |   |   | y |   | y |   |    | y  | y  |    |    |    |    | y  |    | y  | y  |
Pn      |   | y |   |   |   | y |   | y | y |    | y  | y  |    |    |    |    | y  |    |    | y  |

‘y’ means ‘yes, there are reflexes of the item at the head of the column’.

                                                                                       Kinship terms 81


POc forms denoting certain close blood relatives appear to form a (defective) paradigm,
shown in Table 2.12. The distribution of their reflexes across Oceanic subgroups is shown in
Table 2.13. The most widely reflected forms are those with *t- (column 2 of Table 2.12).
They were evidently reference forms and usually took a possessor suffix (§2.2). The forms in
column 4 were address forms, apart from *kaka, which has a long history as both an address
and a reference form. In some Oceanic languages reflexes of the other items in column 4 are
also reference forms, and it is quite likely that this extension of function had already begun in
POc. However, it is impossible to identify a functional difference between the forms in
column 2 and the less widely reflected forms in column 1 or the rarely reflected forms in
column 3 (Table 2.13).[23]

   The relationships among the forms in Table 2.12 are obvious, but gaps and irregularities,
absences of functional contrasts between forms, and three rows of ‘grandparent/grandchild’
forms instead of one all suggest that this is not entirely a paradigm in the usual morphological
sense, but in part a set of relationships (re)created by analogical innovations.

   This hypothesis is reinforced when the POc reconstructions are compared with their PMP
ancestors in Table 2.14. POc forms in *k- (column 3 of Table 2.12) are missing from Table
2.14, because no PMP forms in *k- are reconstructed. The only *k- form for which there is
non-Oceanic evidence is *kama ‘father’, and this can be reconstructed only to PEMP.24 On
the other hand, Blust (1979, ACD) shows that ‘basic’ forms like *ama and *t- forms like
*tama did form a paradigm in PMP, resulting from the prefixation of PAn *ta- to basic forms,
the latter becoming POc reference terms. Blust (1979) also proposes that PMP created
address forms by shifting stress to the final syllable of the basic form. Hence, e.g., PMP *áma
(reference) vs *amá (address).25 He suggests that this led to initial-vowel loss, giving *ma and
reduplicated *mama, the PMP address term reflected in Oceanic.

   Blust’s reduplication hypothesis certainly appears to explain *mama, *nana and *bubu,
but

: Table 2.14 PMP and POc variant terms for close blood relatives

__table__
                          | PMP             | POc     | PMP             | POc           | PMP      |   POc
‘father’                  | *ama            | *ama    | *tama           | *tama-        | *mama    |   *mama
‘mother’                  | *ina            | *ina    | *tina-          | *tina-        | *nana a  |   *nana
                          | *umpu           | *ubu    | *tumpu          | *tubu-        |          |
‘grandparent, grandchild’ | (*impu)         | —       | (*timpu)        | *tibu-        | *bubu    |   *bubu
                          | *ampu           | *abu    | —  b            | *tabu-        |          |
‘younger s.s. sibling’    | *huaji, *haji c | (*aci)  | *tuaji, *taji c | *taci-        | —        |   —
‘elder s.s. sibling’      | *aka            | —       | (*teka)         | *tua-, *tuaka | *kaka    |   *kaka

Note: Parentheses indicate that a form is very weakly attested, i.e. 2-3 WMP reflexes in ACD.
Bolding indicates that a PAn form can be reconstructed.

a
  ACD: Proto Philippine *nana ‘term of address for older female relative’.
b,
   *tampu is reconstructed only as far back as PEMP (ACD).
c
  Under the ACD entry for PAn *Suaji is a note thaty irregular reflexes leave open the possibility
that we should reconstruct both *Suaji and *Saji’. The reconstructions shown here follow from this.

[23] Blust (1979:217–218) notes that the Formosan language Paiwan has t- and k-initial nouns, the former
     treated as proper names (‘Dad’ etc) and the latter as common nouns as in, e.g., ‘your father’.

[24] The historical evidence indicates a high probability that *kaka belongs in column 4 of Table 2.14, even
     though it is a form that might also be expected in column 3 (see §2.4.1.5.2).

[25] Blust (1979) also reconstructs the PMP variants *amáŋ, *amáq and *amáy, all ‘father’, as address
     terms (along with parallel variants for ‘mother’ etc), but these did not survive into Oceanic.

82 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


it doesn’t work for *kaka (and Blust doesn’t suggest that it does). The latter is of PAn
antiquity, yet the corresponding reference form *tuaka is apparently a POc innovation, so
*kaka cannot be derived from it.

    The origin of *tuaka is puzzling. It consists of *tua- and *-ka, and seems to be an
analogical creation to fill the previously empty slot in column 2 of Table 2.12 with a *t- form.
The second element,*-ka, is an obvious abbreviation of *kaka. The first element, *tua-,
perhaps already existed. It is reflected in many Oceanic languages with a possessor suffix. Its
origin is not clear. Milke’s (1958a) reconstruction of *tuqaka with *-q- implies he thought
*tuqa- was POc *tuqa ‘old’ (vol.2:204–205; vol.5:68; see §2.4.1.5.2). He had toyed with this
thought in his 1938 paper, but in 1958a, with more data and better reconstructions, he
explicitly denies it in a footnote, but leaves *-q- in place.[26]

    An alternative hypothesis—that *tuaka reflects PMP *teka and its POc continuation
*toka, both in the ACD—is beset with difficulties. First, PMP *teka is supported by only one
non-Oceanic reflex (Bintulu təka ‘elder sibling’) and, as noted in the ACD entry, no
corresponding basic PMP form †*eka can be reconstructed. The ACD lists several reflexes of
putative POc *toka (see §2.4.1.5.2 for data). However, deriving *tuaka from *toka implies an
otherwise unknown change *-o- > -ua-. As the converse change, *-ua- > -o-, vowel
coalescence in unstressed syllables, is far more natural, the many apparent reflexes of
putative *toka can more economically be explained as reflexes of POc *tuaka, and this is
how they are treated in §2.4.1.5.2).

    The use of ‘appears to’, ’seems to’ and ‘apparently’ in the foregoing paragraphs indicates
that we are dangerously close to speculation, and the evidence points only to probable
conclusions. Pages could be spent speculating about matters raised by Tables 2.13 and 2.14,
but we restrict ourselves here to just one further question: Why are there apparently three
rows for ‘grandparent, grandchild’?

    According to the ACD, PMP had basic forms with the three vowels *u-, *i- and *a- (Table
2.12).27 However, the distribution of reflexes of the *i- row reconstructions suggests that the
latter are an artefact of the comparative method. There are no known Oceanic reflexes of
PMP *impu. Table 2.13 shows that Oceanic forms apparently reflecting POc *tibu- only
occur in subgroups where POc *tubu- is also reflected. This suggests that these forms are
actually reflexes of POc *tubu- in which *-u- has become -i- in the unstressed first syllable,
e.g. *tubú-gu > *tibú-gu ‘my grandparent’. For this reason, in §2.4.1.4.1 POc *tubu- and
*tibu- are treated as a single cognate set. We lack the data to comment on non-Oceanic forms,
but note that the PMP forms in the *i- row are poorly supported in the ACD, *impu with two
WMP and one CMP reflex and *timpu with one western MP and the Oceanic reflexes
mentioned above.

    This leaves a contrast between the forms in the *u- row and the *a- row. There is no
functional distinction between them, and both are well attested in Oceanic (Table 2.13).

    Table 2.14 shows that PMP *bubu is of PAn antiquity and had a different labial consonant
from the *-mp- of forms in the other columns of the ‘grandparent/grandchild’ rows. However,
if Blust’s reduplication hypothesis applies here, it will have generated POc forms
indistinguishable from those descended from PMP *bubu.

[26] Thus we do not know why Milke (1958a) reconstructs this term with *-q-.

[27] It also had forms in *e-, not reflected in Oceanic.

                                                                            Kinship terms 83


2.4.1.2 Parent and child generations

2.4.1.2.1   Father, father’s brother

The three terms for ‘father’ shown in Table 2.14, *tama-, *ama and *mama, are presented first.
These are followed by a further term, *tata, that is either an address term or derived from one.
There are numerous reflexes of an apparent *papa in the data, but it is impossible to determine
in many cases whether these are loans from European colonial languages or not, and they are
omitted here.

   The POc reference term for ‘father’ was *tama-. Many glosses reflect the fact that POc
kinship terminology was bifurcate merging (see §2.3.1), i.e. terms for ‘father’ also denoted
father’s brothers (FB). A common third gloss is ‘mother’s sister’s husband’ (MZH). In a
bifurcate merging terminology a mother’s sister is also a ‘mother’, and the husband of any
‘mother’ is a ‘father’.

<
PAn *ta-amax ‘father’ (ACD)
PMP *t-ama ‘father, father’s brother’ (Blust 1980a)
POc *tama- ‘father, father’s brother, mother’s sister’s husband’ (Milke 1958a; ACD)
  Adm:  Yapese         ci-timo(ŋo)-    ‘father’, FB, MZH, FZH, FZS
  Adm:  Mussau         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  Adm:  Baluan         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FFBS
  Adm:  Lele           tam-            ‘father, father’s brother’
  Adm:  Drehet         teme            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH, PGC, FGSC, ♀ZH
  SJ:   Sobei          tema-           ‘father, father’s younger brother’
  NNG:  Tuam           tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’
  NNG:  Mangap         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’
  NNG:  Lukep (Pono)   tama-           ‘father’
  NNG:  Mengen         tama-           ‘father’
  NNG:  Takia          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FFBS, MZH etc
  NNG:  Wogeo          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, PZH
  NNG:  Manam          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, EF, FBS
  NNG:  Yabem          tama-           ‘father’
  NNG:  Adzera         rama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  NNG:  Mapos Buang    ama-            ‘father, father’s brother’, GF
  NNG:  Patep          ma              ‘father, father’s brother’
  PT:   Sudest         rama-           ‘father’
  PT:   Kilivila       tama-           ‘father’, FB, FZS, PZH (Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury 1965)
  PT:   Dobu           tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, etc, MZH etc
  PT:   Yamalele       tama            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  PT:   Sinaugoro      tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  PT:   W Mekeo        ama             ‘father, parent’s brother’, ZH
  MM:   Vitu           tama-           ‘father, parent’s brother’, MH
  MM:   Nakanai        tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, HB, MZH, FEB, MEZH
  MM:   E Kara         tama-           ‘father’
  MM:   Lamusong       tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH, FFF, MMF
  MM:   Tolai          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, ♂MZH (Fingleton 1986)
  MM:   Nehan          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, etc (Nachman 1978)
  MM:   Hahon          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH
  MM:   Banoni         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, F{PsG}S, MZH
  MM:   Varisi         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH, MZH
  MM:   Marovo         tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH, FZS
  MM:   Maringe        kma-            ‘father, father’s brother’
  SES:  Bugotu         tama-           ‘father’, PB (Bogesi 1948)
  SES:  To’aba’ita     (θa)ama-        ‘father’
  SES:  Kwara’ae       ama-            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH (nearly obsolete)
  SES:  Sa’a           ama-            ‘father’, FZH
  SES:  Bauro          (w)ama          ‘father, father’s brother’, etc (wa- MASC)
PNCV *tama- ‘father, father’s brother’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV:  Mota           tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH, FZS, FZDS, FMB, BS (Needham 1960; Vienne 1984)
  NCV:  Lombaha        tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FZS, BS (Allen 1964a)
  NCV:  Raga           tama-           ‘father’, FZS, FZDS, ZDH, ♀DH
  NCV:  Akei           tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, FGS, FGSS, FZSS, FZH, MZH (Guiart 1958)
  NCV:  Araki          rann̼a-          ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  NCV:  SE Ambrym      tamo            ‘father’ (Lynch 1996)
  NCV:  Neve’ei        teme-           ‘father’, FB, FZS
  NCV:  Namakir        tama-           ‘father’
PSV *e-tme- ‘father, father’s brother’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV:   Sye            e-tme-          ‘father, father’s brother’
  SV:   Lenakel        rəmə-           ‘father, father’s brother’
  SV:   Anejom         e-tma-          ‘father’, FB, FZH
Proto New Caledonia *tama- ‘father, father’s brother’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Belep          cama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  NCal: Nêlêmwa        kã̄mã           ‘father, father’s brother’
  NCal: Drubea         tẽ̄-             ‘father, father’s brother’
  NCal: Iaai           kame-           ‘father, father’s brother’
PMic *tama ‘father, father’s brother’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Mic:  Kiribati       tama            ‘father, father’s brother’, ♂EF (Lambert 1981)
  Mic:  Marshallese    cema-           ‘father, father’s brother’, ♂EF, ♂EFB (Spoehr 1949a)
  Mic:  Puluwatese     hām, hæmæ-      ‘father, father’s brother’, FZS
  Mic:  Woleaian       tama-           ‘father’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Mic:  Chuukese       seme-           ‘father, parent’s brother’, PF, FZS, FZDS, EF, EPB, EPF, EPMH, PMH, PZH, MH (Goodenough 1951)
  Fij:  Wayan          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
  Fij:  Bauan          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’
  Fij:  Moala          tama-           ‘father, father’s brother’, P{PsG}S, FMZS, MH, WMB
PPn *tama-, *tama-na ‘father, father’s brother’ (Pawley 1981:284; Marck 1996)
  Pn:   Tongan         tama(i)         ‘father, father’s brother’ (Völkel 2015)
  Pn:   Samoan         tamā            ‘father, father’s brother’, etc (Holmes 1957)
  Pn:   Rennellese     tama-, tamana   ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH, FFBDH, F{PsG}S, MH, MZH, EF
  Pn:   Pileni         tamo            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
>

84 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


                                                                            Kinship terms 85


   Reflexes of *ama ‘father, father’s brother’ are few and restricted to PNGOc. It is only the
presence of non-Oceanic reflexes that allows us to reconstruct this term to POc.

<
PAn *amax ‘father’ (ACD)
PMP *ama ‘father, father’s brother’ (Blust 1994)
POc *ama ‘father, father’s brother’
  NNG: Tuam                ama               ‘father’
  NNG: Tami                ama(ʔ)            ‘father’
  NNG: Medebur             ama               ‘father’ (Z’graggen 1974a)
  NNG: Labu                ama               ‘father’
  PT:   Tawala             ama-              ‘father’
>

   POc _*mama_ either was an address term or was descended from one, as the ACD gloss
notes. Chowning (1991) also thinks that POc *mama was an address term, as it has this
function all along the north coast of Papua New Guinea.

   It seems that the denotation of *mama changed in Proto New Caledonian to ‘elder s.s.
sibling’. Indeed, the change may have been earlier, as this is also its meaning in Neve’ei. This
appears to be an extension of seniority status to elder s.s. siblings which also affects _*tata_
below.

<
PAn *mamah ‘father, father’s brother’(ACD: ‘father’s brother’)
PMP *mama ‘father, father’s brother’ (ACD: ‘a young child’s term of address for his father, vocative of *ama, parent’s younger sibling, junior uncle’)
POc *mama ‘father, father’s brother’ (Chowning 1991; ACD)
 SJ:   Sobei           mam               ‘father, father-in-law’ (ADDR) (Sterner 1992)
 NNG:  Gitua           mama              ‘father’
 NNG:  Sio             mama              ‘father’
 NNG:  Mindiri         mamə              ‘father’
 NNG:  Wogeo           mam               ‘father, father’s brother’
 NNG:  Kairiru         mam               ‘father’
 NNG:  Yabem           mama              ‘father’
 NNG:  Numbami         mama              ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
 NNG:  Silisili        mama              ‘father’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa       mama(i)           ‘father’
 PT:   W Motu          mama              ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH (Lister-Turner & Clark 1954)
 MM:   Lavongai        mama(i)           ‘father’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
 MM:   Nalik           mama-             ‘father’ (Volker 2020)
 MM:   Usen Barok      mama              ‘father, father’s brother’
 MM:   Patpatar        məma-             ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH, FZ
 MM:   Varisi          mamae             ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH, MZH
 MM:   Roviana         mama              ‘father’ (Waterhouse 1949)
 MM:   Kokota          mama              ‘father, father’s brother’, PZH
 SES:  Bugotu          mama              ‘father’, PB (ADDR) (Bogesi 1948)
 SES:  Lengo           mama              ‘father, father’s brother’
 SES:  Longgu          mama              ‘father, father’s brother’, PZH
 SES:  Baegu           mā                ‘father, father’s brother’
 SES:  Kwaio           maʔa              ‘father, father’s brother’, FZH, MZH, MH
 SES:  Sa’a            mamaʔa, ma’a ‘father’, FZH
PNCV *mama ‘father’ (Clark 2009; Proto North Vanuatu *mama)
 NCV:  Mota            mama              ‘father’ (REF and ADDR) (§ 1882:67)
 NCV:  Nduindui        mama              ‘father, father’s brother’, FZS, BS, FZH, FZDH
 NCV:  Neve’ei         mameh             ‘♂elder brother’, ♂{FeB}S, {WeZ}♀H
 NCV:  Nguna           mama              ‘father’, FZS, MZH, FMB, FZDS, FZDDS, FZDDDS (Facey 1989)
 NCal: Fwâi            māma              ‘♂elder brother’
 NCal: Kwênyii         mõmʷã             ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Nengone         mama              ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 Mic:  Mokilese        mʷāmʷa            ‘father’
>

86 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

   A more widely distributed POc address term is _*tata_, used for anyone called ‘father’ (F,
FB, MZH etc) and by extension for other senior males, primarily elder s.s. siblings and any
mother’s brother. In some languages this extension has become entrenched. In Notsi, for
example, the term denotes both ‘mother’s brother’ and his reciprocal, ‘♂sister’s child’.

<
POc *tata ‘address term for any male called “father’’ and for other senior males’ (ADDR)
 NNG:  Kove             tata            ‘father, father’s brother’ (ADDR) (Chowning 2009)
 NNG:  Sio              tata            ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 PT:   Yamalele         tata            ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 MM:   Vitu             tata            ‘father’, FG, MH, MB, (ADDR)
 MM:   Notsi            tata            ‘mother’s brother’, ♂ZC, ♂MMZS, ♂WFB, ♂MMBDH, ♀HFZS, ♀HZH
 MM:   Lamusong         tata            ‘mother’s brother’, ♂ZC, MMMB, ♂ZDDC, ♂{PsG}DC
 MM:   Siar             tata            ‘father’ (Frowein 2011)
 MM:   Uruava           tatá-           ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCV:  Raga             tata            ‘father’, FZS, FZDS, ZDH, ♀DH
 NCV:  Araki            ta              ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
 NCV:  Apma             tata            ‘father’
 NCV:  N Ambrym         tāta, teta      ‘father, father’s brother’, ♂S, BS, FFF, FFBS, MFZDS, MFMB, MH, MZH (Franjieh 2012)
 NCV:  S Paamese        tātā            ‘father’
 NCV:  Big Nambas       tatei           ‘father, father’s brother’
 NCV:  Neve’ei          tate            ‘father, father’s sister’s son’
 NCV: South Efate       tata            ‘father’ (Lynch 2004)
 SV:   Ura              dera            ‘father, father’s brother’ (ADDR)
 SV:   Lenakel          tata            ‘father, father’s brother’ (ADDR)
 NCal: Belep            caca            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH
 NCal: Fwâi             tāra, tāru      ‘father, father’s brother’
 NCal: Drehu            kakā            ‘father, father’s brother’
 Mic:  Carolinian       tāta            ‘father, father’s brother’, EF
 Fij:  Tavuki           tata            ‘father, father’s brother’
 Pn:   Samoan           tā              ‘father, father’s brother’ (Milner 1966)
 Pn:   Aniwa            tata            ‘father, father’s brother’, MZH (Guiart 1961)
>

                                                                             Kinship terms 87


2.4.1.2.2   Mother, mother’s sister

The first four terms below are those shown in Table 2.14: POc _*tina-_, _*ina_, _*kina-_ and _*(ñ,n)ana_.
These are followed by two address terms, POc _*nai_ and _*nene_, and finally PPn _*faqe(e)_.

   Lynch (1996) provides commentary on the fact that POc *tina- is more frequently
replaced by another lexical item than POc *tama- ‘father’. This is especially so in EOc
languages.

<
PAn *ta-ina ‘mother’ (ACD)
PMP *tina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (ACD, Blust 1980a)
POc *tina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Milke 1958a: ‘mother’)
  Adm:  Baluan           tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MFBD, etc
  Adm:  Pak              hi-rino-           ‘mother’, PZ, FZD, FZDD, FFBD, FFBDD
  Adm:  Bipi             tine               ‘mother, mother’s sister’, ♀MFZSD, ♂ZW
  Adm:  Nyindrou         tine-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  SJ:   Sobei            tina-              ‘mother, mother’s younger sister’
  NNG:  Tuam             tina-              ‘mother’
  NNG:  Sio              tino-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, etc (Groves 1934b)
  NNG:  Lukep (Pono)     tina-              ‘mother’
  NNG:  Aria             tna-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’, F{PsG}D
  NNG:  Takia            tna-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’, etc
  NNG:  Wogeo            tina-              ‘mother’, PZ, PBW, WZ, ♂BW
  NNG:  Yabem            tɪna-              ‘mother’
  NNG:  Adzera           rina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
  PT:   Sudest           təna-              ‘mother’
  PT:   Yamalele         ina                ‘mother’
  PT:   Sinaugoro        sina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
  PT:   W Mekeo          ina-               ‘mother’, PZ, BW
  MM:   Vitu             tina-              ‘mother’
  MM:   Nalik            dina               ‘mother’
  MM:   Patpatar         e-tna-             ‘mother’
  MM:   Tolai            tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Trevitt 1940)
  MM:   Nehan            tina-              ‘mother’ (Glennon & Glennon 2006)
  MM:   Hahon            cina-              ‘mother’, PZ, FBW
  MM:   Banoni           cinna              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, M{PsG}D, FW, FBW
  MM:   Varisi           sina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MBW, FZ, FBW
  MM:   Marovo           tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, BW
  SES:  Gela             tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZ
  SES:  Lengo            tina-              ‘mother’
  SES:  To’aba’ita       θa-ina-            ‘mother’
  SES:  E Arosi          ina-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’, etc
  SES:  Bauro            ka-ina-            ‘mother’ (ka- FEM)
PNCV *tina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Clark 2009)
PNCV *ra-tina- ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCV:  Vurës            re-tna-            ‘mother’
  NCV:  Nokuku           tina-              ‘mother’
  NCV:  Araki            ra-rna-            ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
  NCV:  Lonwolwol        i-rña-             ‘father’s sister’
  NCV:  S Paamese        la-tino-           ‘mother’
  NCV:  Neve’ei          sena-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZSW
PSV *ri-(t,c)inV- ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV:   Sye              n-rin(me)-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  SV:   Kwamera          ri-nn̥u-            ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FW, FBW, EFZ, FFZD
  SV:   Anejom           ri-si-             ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MBW
Proto New Caledonia *tina- ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Nemi             tne-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCal: Fwâi             tʰẽ-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCal: Drubea           ñā                 ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCal: Iaai             hiñe               ‘mother, mother’s sister’
PMic *tina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic:  Kiribati         tina-              ‘mother’ (Groves et al. 1985)
  Mic:  Marshallese      cine-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MBW, ♂EM, ♂EMZ, ♀HZ (Spoehr 1949a)
  Mic:  Puluwatese       yīn, yina-         ‘mother’ , PZ, FZD (Elbert 1974)
  Mic:  Woleaian         sila-              ‘mother’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Fij:  Tokatoka         tina-              ‘mother’, FZ, M{PsG}oG
  Fij:  Bauan            tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  Fij:  Moala            tina-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, M{PsG}D, MM{PsG}DD, MFF{PsG}D, F{PsG}D, HFZ, HF{PsG}D, F{PsG}SW, FF{PsG}SSW
PPn *tina-, *tinana
  Pn:   Samoan           tinā-              ‘mother’ (Milner 1966)
  Pn:   Rennellese       tina-u, tinana     ‘mother’, PZ, MBW, P{PsG}D, F{PsG}SW, FBW, EM
  Pn:   Pileni           hina-              ‘mother’
  Pn:   Rarotongan       tīnana             ‘mother’
>

88 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


  Reflexes of *ina are somewhat thinly spread, but their distribution indicates that the term
was present in POc. It is not clear how this might have differed from *tina-.

                                                                           Kinship terms 89

<
PAn *ina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (ACD)
PMP *ina ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (ACD)
POc *ina ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 Adm: Titan            ina          ‘mother’
 NNG: Sengseng         ina          ‘mother’ (ADDR) (Chowning 1991)
 PT:  Bwaidoga         ina-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZ
 PT:  W Motu           ina          ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW (Lister-Turner & Clark 1954)
 MM:  Maututu Nakanai  ila          ‘mother’ (Goodenough 1997)
 MM:  Meramera         ina          ‘mother’ (Goodenough 1997)
 MM:  W Kara           ina          ‘mother’
 SES: Gela             ino          ‘mother’, PZ
PNCV *ina ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 NCV: N Ambrym         ina          ‘father’s sister’, BD, MFM, {PsG}SD, FFFZ, BSSD, ZSDD, MFZDD, {PoG}ZDDD, MBW, FFMBW, ZDSW, SSD, EMM, ♂D, ♂DSSW, ♂SWBW, ♀SDD, ♀DSW, HZD (Franjieh 2012:226, 371)
 NCV: Port Sandwich    ina          ‘mother’
 SV:  Lenakel          inə-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’
>

   Only three Oceanic reflexes of *kina- occur in the available data, but their distribution
points to their presence in POc. Again, there is no obvious functional difference from *tina-.

<
POc *kina- ‘mother’
 Adm: Mussau         kina-             ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
 NNG: Rauto          kina              ‘mother’ (Ross, fieldnotes)
 MM: Bola            kina-             ‘mother’
>

   Chowning (1991) reconstructs _*(ñ,n)ana_ as an address term. Although few of our
examples are explicitly glossed as addressed terms, she is very probably right. Several Fijian
and Pn languages reflect _*nau_ ‘mother’, an apparent Proto Central Pacific innovation

<
PMP *nana ‘mother’ (ACD: Proto Philippine *nana ‘term of address for older female relative’)
POc *ñaña ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Chowning 1991)
 Adm:  Lele             nane-             ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZD
 NNG:  Gitua            nana              ‘mother’
 NNG:  Sio              nana              ‘mother’
 NNG:  Megiar           naŋ               ‘mother’ (Z’graggen 1974a)
 NNG:  Bam              nan               ‘mother’ (Z’graggen 1974b)
 NNG:  Ali              ñan               ‘mother’ (Z’graggen 1974b)
 MM:   Bola             nana              ‘mother’ (Goodenough 1997)
 MM:   E Kara           nina-             ‘mother’
 MM:   Nalik            nana              ‘mother’ (Volker 1998)
 MM:   Sursurunga       nana              ‘mother’
 MM:   Siar             nana              ‘mother’, MB (Frowein 2011)
 MM:   Hahon            na                ‘mother’, PZ, FBW
 MM:   Banoni           nana              ‘mother’
 MM:   Kubokota         ñaña              ‘mother’
 SES:  Tolo             nana-             ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 SES:  Owa              nana              ‘mother’
 NCV:  Neve’ei          nane, na-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZSW
 NCal: Nêlêmwa          ñaña, ñāña        ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 NCal: Fwâi             ñaña              ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 NCal: Kwênyii          ñã̄                ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 NCal: Drehu            nenæ              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, (ADDR)
 NCal: Nengone          ne-               ‘mother’, (ADDR) (Ray 1917)
 Mic:  Carolinian       nāna              ‘mother’
PCP *nana, *nau ‘mother, mother’s sister’, (ADDR) (Chowning 1991)
 Fij:  Vuda             nana              ‘mother’
 Fij:  Tavuki           nau               ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 Fij:  Tokatoka         nana              ‘mother’
 Fij:  Bauan            nana              ‘mother’ (Capell 1941)
 Fij:  Moala            |nana, na, nau|   ‘mother’, etc
 Pn:   Anuta            nau               ‘mother-in-law’, SW
 Pn:   Tikopia          nana, nau         ‘mother’
 Pn:   Pileni           nana              ‘mother’
>

90 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   Blust (1979) reconstructs a set of PMP address terms in _*-y_, continued as POc _*-i_, whence
POc _*inai_. Normally, PMP _*-ay_ becomes POc _*-e_ (Table 1.4 in §1.8.1), but this is apparently
a case where an often-used address term does not undergo a regular phonological change (cf
de Carvalho 2020).

<
PMP *ina-y ‘mother (ADDR)’ (Blust 1979)
PEMP *nai ‘mother (ADDR)’
  CB:  Warembori         nai            ‘mother’
POc *nai ‘mother (ADDR)’
  NNG: Dami              nai            ‘mother’
  NNG: Takia             nei            ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
  PT:  Sudest            noi            ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW (Lepowsky 1981)
  MM:  Babatana          nai            ‘mother’
>

PEMP/POc _*nene_ below may reflect reduplication(s) of _*nai_ above.

<
PEMP *nene (ADDR) ‘mother’
  SH:   Sawai           nene          ‘mother’ (Whisler 1996)
  RA:   Ambel           nén           ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
POc *nene ‘mother’
  NNG:  Mindiri         nen           ‘mother’
  NNG:  Kaiep (Terebu)  nen           ‘mother’
  SJ:   Sobei           nen           ‘mother’
  MM:   Usen Barok      nene-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCal: Kwênyii         nènè-         ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NCal: Nengone         nene          ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  Fij:  Nadi            nēnē          ‘mother’
>

                                                                                         Kinship terms 91


   In a number of forms in the _*tina-_ and _*(ñ,n)ana_ cognate sets above the term for ‘mother’
is preceded by a proclitic or prefix that reflects putative POc _*drV-_ (Lynch 1996).[28] These
forms are repeated together below. In Lavongai and Tigak, at least, this morpheme is still
productive, and precedes any noun that denotes a mother, e.g. Lavongai _ri təsi-m_
[HON parallel.sibling-P:2SG] ‘your sister’ (speaker is female, and her sister is a mother) (Fast 1990).
Beaumont (1979) shows that Tigak _ri-_ also precedes a mother’s proper name. Fast and
Beaumont both gloss it as a prefix denoting respect for a mother. Lynch (1996) notes, on the
other hand, that the SV reflexes are only found on the noun ‘mother’.

__formgroup__
     Adm: Pak             hi-rino-             ‘mother’
     MM: Lavongai         ri-nnə               ‘mother’ (Fast 1990)
     MM: Tigak            ri-na-               ‘mother’
     NCV: Vurës           re-tna-              ‘mother’
     NCV: Lolsiwoi        ri-si-               ‘mother’ (Lynch 1996)
     NCV: Araki           ra-rna-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FBW
     NCV: S Paamese       la-tino-             ‘mother’
     SV: Kwamera          ri-nn̥u-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FW, FBW, EFZ, FFZD
     SV: Anejom           ri-si-               ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MBW

Reflexes of this same morpheme are also in north Vanuatu, prefixed to other terms referring
to a mother.

__formgroup__
     NCV: Mota             ra-veve-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’, FZD, FBW
     NCV: Mota             r-asoa-               ‘wife (who is a mother)’ (Vienne 1984)
     NCV: Merei            ra-ᵐbui-              ‘mother’ (ADDR) (Lynch 1996)
     NCV: Marino           ra-veve-              ‘mother’ (Lynch 1996)
     NCV: Baetora          ra-ve                 ‘mother’ (Lynch 1996)
     NCV: Lombaha          ra-tahi-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’
     NCV: Lolovoli         re-tahi-              ‘mother, mother’s sister’
     NCV: Raga             ra-tahi               ‘mother’, MMM, ZDDD

Presumably the three last examples, from the Lombaha and Lolovoli dialects of NE Ambae
and from Raga, use reflexes of POc _*taci-_ ‘younger s.s. sibling’ originally made reference to
a mother’s sibling.

   In a number of Pn languages _*tina-_ is replaced by a reflex of PPn _*faqe(e)_. The second list
of terms below, extracted from POLLEX, suggests that it may derived from PPn _*faqele_
‘woman who is pregnant or has recently given birth’.

<
PPn *faqe(e) ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  Pn: Tongan          faʔē                 ‘mother, mother’s sister’ (Völkel 2015)
  Pn: Tongan          |faʔē taŋata|        ‘mother’s brother’ (lit. ‘male mother’)
  Pn: E Uvean         faʔe                 ‘mother, MZ’
  Pn: Anuta           pae                  ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MPGD
  Pn: Māori           ϕaea                 ‘mother’
>

[28]  The one reflex that does not fit this consonant correspondence is Paamese _la-_, for †_ra-_.

92 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
PPn *faqele ‘woman who is pregnant or has recently given birth’
  Pn: Samoan         failele            ‘mother with newborn child’
  Pn: E Futuna       faʔele-ʔele        ‘woman who has had first child’
  Pn: Māori          ϕaere-ere          ‘mother of one’s children, dam’
>

2.4.1.2.3    Parent
As far as we can tell, POc did not have a dedicated term for ‘parent’. PPn _*matuqa_ meant
‘parent’ but, as a number of the glosses below show, it also retained its earlier sense ‘old,
mature (of a person)’ (vol.4:68). There is just one clue that reflexes of _*matuqa_ may have
meant ‘parent’ earlier than PPn. This is Gapapaiwa (PT) _*madua_ ‘mother’.

   Further below are reflexes of the distinct PPn form _*mātuqa_ ‘parents’.

<
PPn *matuqa ‘parent’ (Marck 1996)
Proto Tongic *motuqa ‘parent, parent’s sibling; old, mature (of a person)’
  Pn: Tongan          motuʔa              ‘parent; old (of people); old person’
  Pn: Niue            matua               ‘parent, uncles and aunts’ (apparently a non-Tongic loan)
PNPn *matuqa ‘parent, parent’s sibling; old, mature (of a person)’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Samoan          matua               ‘parent, old person’ (Williamson 1924, vol 2)
  Pn: E Futunan       matua               ‘parent’ (sometimes); ‘old’ (generally)
  Pn: Rennellese      matuʔa              ‘husband’
  Pn: Tikopia         matua [29]          ‘parent’
  Pn: Pukapuka        matua               ‘parent; adult’
Proto Eastern Polynesian *matuqa ‘parent, parent’s sibling’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Rapanui         matuʔa              ‘father, mother, parents’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Māori           matua               ‘parent; parent’s sibling’
  Pn: Tahitian        metua               ‘parent; parent’s sibling’
  Pn: Marquesan       motua               ‘father, father’s brother, father’s male cousin’
  Pn: Hawaiian        makua               ‘parent’
>

   PPn _*mātuqa_ ‘parents’ was the plural form of _*matuqa_ ‘parent’, as widespread reflexes
demonstrate. In some languages *mātuqa has lost the plural feature and become ‘parent[s]’,
presumably to distinguish the ‘parent’ meaning from other meanings of _*matuqa_: Tuvalu and
Nukuoro ‘old’, Rennellese ‘husband’.

<
PPn *mātuqa ‘parents’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tongan          mātuʔa         ‘parents; old people’ (Völkel 2015)
PPn *mātuqa ‘parents’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Samoan          ātua           ‘parents’
  Pn: Tokelau         mātua          ‘parents, mother, mother’s sister, older sister any senior female kin’ (Huntsman 1971)
  Pn: Tuvalu          mātua          ‘mother’, PZ, PPGC
  Pn: E Uvean         mātuʔa         ‘parents’
  Pn: Rennellese      mātuʔa         ‘parent, spouse’s parent’
  Pn: Anuta           mātua          ‘parents’
  Pn: Takuu           mātua          ‘parent; clan head’
  Pn: Luangiua        mākua          ‘parents’
  Pn: Māori           mātua          ‘parents, relatives of parent’s generation’
>

[29] Firth has _matūa_. This is an error (A. Pawley, pers. comm.)

                                                                             Kinship terms 93


EPn languages have replaced dedicated terms for ‘father’ and ‘mother’ with a reflex of POc
_*matuqa_ plus a term meaning ‘male’ or ‘female’, as shown here.

__formgroup__
  Pn: Rapa               |metūa vahine|   ‘mother’
  Pn: Rapa               |metūa tāne  |   ‘father’, FB
  Pn: Tahitian           |metua vahine|   ‘mother’
  Pn: Tahitian           |metua tane  |   ‘father’
  Pn: Hawaiian           makua-hine     ‘mother’
  Pn: Hawaiian           makua-kāne     ‘father’

Niue and Pukapuka appear to have acquired their terms from an EPn languages. The Niue
term _matua_ is EPn in form, not Tongic.

__formgroup__
  Pn: Niue               |matua fifine|   ‘mother’
  Pn: Niue               |matua tāne  |   ‘father’
  Pn: Pukapuka           |matua wawine|   ‘mother’
  Pn: Pukapuka           |matua tāne|     ‘father’

2.4.1.2.4   Parent’s sibling

A number of apparent reflexes of PEMP/POc _*kaka_ ‘elder s.s. sibling (ADDR)’ (§2.4.1.5.2) are
used of a father’s or mother’s sibling. It is not clear whether there was a PEMP or POc term
with this meaning, or whether an extension of the term to a parent’s sibling occurred
independently in various languages.

   Curiously, no SHWNG language reflects _*kaka_ ‘elder s.s. sibling’, but both _*kaka_ terms
are reflected in Oceanic languages, although not in the same language.

   The listing of definitions of the Kwamera term below from Lindstrom (1981) has been
somewhat abbreviated. Lindstrom (1986) defines it as ‘person of first ascending generation,
opposite marital moiety: uncle, aunt’.

<
PEMP *ŋkaŋka ‘parent’s sibling’ (?)
  RA: Ambel               kak                 ‘mother’s brother’
POc *kaka ‘parent’s sibling’ (?)
  MM: Lavongai            kakai               ‘mother’s brother’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
  MM: Sursurunga          kəkə-               ‘father, father’s brother’
  SES: Tolo               kaka                ‘father, father’s brother’
  SES: Kwara’ae           ʔaʔai               ‘father’s sister’, ♀BC, MBW, ♀HZC
  SV: Kwamera             kaka                ‘parent’s o.s. sibling’, {PoG}E, P{PoG}SC, EP, GEP
>

94 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


2.4.1.2.5    Mother’s brother

Because the role of the mother’s eldest living brother is an important one in many matrilineal
Oceanic-speaking communities (§2.2.3), and sometimes in communities that are no longer
matrilineal, there is often a dedicated term for ‘mother’s brother’ (MB). Sometimes this term is
also used for ♂sister’s son (♂ZS) or ♂sister’s child (♂ZC). That is, the term is used reciprocally.

    Sometimes, the MB term is the one used by a man of his wife’s father (WF) or by any EGO
of her/his spouse’s father (EF) (Blust 1980a, 1994). This seems odd until one recognises that
in some communities—and evidently many more in the past—a man’s preferred marriage
partner was his female cross-cousin, i.e. his MB’s daughter, so that after marriage his MB was
his father-in-law (WF). This is/was the arrangement when cross-cousin marriage was
asymmetric. In other communities, cross-cousin marriage was symmetric. One of the
preferred marriage partners for both a woman or a man was a MB’s child, so after marriage
the MB was also the father-in-law (EF).

    On occasion, MB seems to be or to have been grouped with other relations, so that in
various locations the term for MB is the same as the term for some other relationship(s).
These terms are listed as members of cognate sets in the relevant subsections.

    In a number of SE Solomonic languages the term for MB and ♂ZC reflects POc *tubu-
‘grandparent, grandchild’ (§2.4.1.4.1). In Lele (Adm) the _*tubu-_ reflex is used of MB, MF
and MMB; in Malalamai (NNG) of MB; and in Drubea (NCal) of MB and EF. Since this
term is often used for all members of the grandparent generation, it seems that MB has been
promoted by a generation.

    In a few languages a reflex of _*tama-_ or _*tata_ ‘father’ (§2.4.1.2.1) is applied to all blood
relations of father’s generation, including MB. Instances of _*tama-_ used in this way are Iduna
and W Mekeo (both PT) and of _*tata_ Vitu (MM). There are also languages where a _*tata_
reflex specifically denotes MB. In Notsi and Lamusong (MM) it denotes MB and ♂ZC, in
Vurës (NCV) MB and FZH.

    In Chuukic (Mic) languages, reflexes of POc _*mʷaqane_ ‘♀brother’ have lost the o.s.
sibling sense, but are combined with the term for ‘big’ in a compound literally meaning ‘big
brother (of female)’ but actually denoting MB (§2.4.1.5.3). Ali (NNG) _məne-_, Kwara’ae
(SES) _wai_ and Tavuki (Fij) _ŋane_, all ‘mother’s brother’, are also reflexes of _*mʷaqane_, and
one may speculate that they too once co-occurred with a term for ‘big’. Conversely the terms
for MB in two languages of the New Ireland region, Lavongai lavə and Ramoaaina ləba, both
reflect POc _*lapʷat_ ‘big’, and perhaps reflect a similar compound but with loss of the
*mʷaqane element.

    Although few, there are also MB terms that seem once to have more literally meant
‘brother of mother’. In the Loyalty Islands (NCal) we find Iaai _ma-hiñe-_ and Drehu _mā-θin_,
both ‘MB’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000), where _hiñe-_ and _θin_ respectively mean ‘mother’. PPn
_*tuqa-tina_ is presumably derived from POc _*tuqa_ ‘mature, full-grown, ripe, old’ (vol.5:67–68)[30]
and _*tina-_ ‘mother’ (§2.4.1.2.2). Note that PPn _*tuqa-_ here is not the same element as
_*tua-_ (< POc _*tuRaŋ_) in PPn o.s. sibling terms (§2.4.1.5.3). It is, however, the root of PPn
_*ma-tuqa_ below.

<
PPn *tuqa-tina ‘mother’s brother’ (Pawley 1981:284)
  Pn: Tongan           tuʔasina          ‘mother’s brother’ (Douaire-Marsaudon 2015)
  Pn: Tuvalu           tuātina           ‘mother’s brother’, MPGS etc
  Pn: East Uvean       tuʔasina          ‘mother’s brother’
  Pn: Rennellese       tuʔātina          ‘mother’s brother’, M{PsG}S
  Pn: Tikopia          tiatina           ‘mother’s brother’
>

[30] A less probable source is PPn *tuqa ‘back, outer side’ (vol.5:86).
                                                                             Kinship terms 95


    Blust (1980b) argues that _*matuqa_ was the PMP term for ‘mother’s brother, wife’s father’.
Blust (1994) extends the definition to include any parent-in-law. The Oceanic evidence for
this extension is not substantial. Instead, MM and SES reflexes of POc _*matu(q)a-_ more
often reflect the reciprocal extension to ♂ZC. However, as many data are given a simple gloss
without an expansion, one cannot put much weight on this fact.

    PPn _*matuqa-_ was the term for ‘parent’ (§2.4.1.2.3). Probably this is not derived from
POc _*matu(q)a_ ‘mother’s brother’. Rather, both terms ultimately reflect ‘old, mature (of a
person)’ (vol.4:68).

<
PMP *matuqa ‘mother’s brother, mother’s brother’s wife, wife’s parent’ (Blust 1980b, 1994)
PEMP *[ma]tuqa ‘mother’s brother’ (Blust 1980b)
  SH:  Sawai             tua                ‘mother’s brother’ (CAD)
POc *[ma]tuqa- ‘mother’s brother’ (Milke 1958a)
  MM:  Usen Barok        marua-             ‘mother’s brother, sister’s child’
  MM:  Patpatar          matuə              ‘mother’s brother’, FZH
  MM:  Tolai             matua-             ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’ (Fingleton 1986)
  MM:  Halia (Hanahan)   tua-               ‘♂mother’s brother’
  MM:  Hahon             coa                ‘mother’s brother’
  MM:  Varisi            tueta-             ‘mother’s brother’, MFBS, MFZS
  SES: E Arosi           mau                ‘mother’s brother, sister’s child’
  SES: Bauro             ma-māu             ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’
  SES: Owa               maua-              ‘mother’s brother, MMB, ♂sister’s child’
PNCV *matu(q)a- ‘mother’s brother’ (Lynch 2001b)
  NCV: Araki             nn̼ara-            ‘mother’s brother’
  NCV: Apma              mitue-             ‘mother’s brother’
  NCV: Lonwolwol         misʸo-             ‘mother’s brother’
  NCV: S Paamese         matuo-             ‘mother’s brother’
  NCV: Ninde             mitua-             ‘mother’s brother’
  NCV: Rano              metuo-             ‘mother’s brother’ (ACD)
  NCV: Bieria            metua              ‘mother’s brother’ (Lynch 2004)
PSV *mata- ‘mother’s brother, spouse’s father, parent’s sister’s husband’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV:  Sye               meta-              ‘mother’s brother’, MBW, BW, FZH
  SV:  Kwamera           mare-              ‘mother’s brother’, FZH, EF, P{PoG}S, FFBDH, GEF
  SV:  Anejom            mata               ‘mother’s brother’, MZH, EF
>

   The term _*wawa_ occurs both as grandparent (§2.4.1.4.1) and as MB. The set supporting
_*wawa_ ‘MB’ is considerable. Possibly _*wawa_ ‘grandparent’ and _*wawa_ ‘MB’ were
homophones with separate origins, rather than one being extended to include the other, as the
sets are largely distinct in geographic distribution, and no reflex of _*wawa_ has both senses.
Terms consisting of a reduplicated syllable tend to have originated as address terms derived
from the final syllable of the reference term. In this case the possible source of _*wawa_ is
phonetic rather than phonemic, as _*matua_ was phonetically *[matuwa].

96 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
POc *wawa ‘mother’s brother’ (Milke 1965: PNGOc)
 SJ:  Sobei            wawa              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’, MBW (ADDR)
 NNG: Gitua            wawa              ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Mangap           wo-               ‘mother’s brother, o.s. sibling’s child’
 NNG: Sio              wawa              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s son’
 NNG: Avau             ava               ‘mother’s brother’, MBC
 NNG: Poeng            wowo              ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Mindiri          wau               ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Wogeo            wawa              ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Tumleo           wau, wuoyie       ‘mother’s brother’ (Milke 1965:345)
 NNG: Yabem            wawa              ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Numbami          wowa              ‘mother’s brother’, M{PoG}S
 NNG: Patep            vəwa              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’
 PT:  Dobu             wa                ‘mother’s brother’ (Milke 1965:345)
 PT:  Tawala           au-, auau-        ‘mother’s brother’ (_aua-_ PL)
 PT:  Sinaugoro        ɣwa               ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’, FZH, FZDC
 PT:  Motu             vava              ‘mother’s brother’ (Milke 1965:345)
 MM:  Vitu             vava              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’
 MM:  Bola             ɣa                ‘mother’s brother’
PNCV *vʷavʷa ‘mother’s brother, father’s sister’
 NCV: Raga             vʷavʷa            ‘mother’s brother, father’s sister’
 NCV: Big Nambas       vavei-            ‘father’s sister’
 NCV: Neve’ei          vavʷe             ‘father’s sister’, MBW, FZD
 NCV: Nguna            wāwa              ‘mother’s brother’, FZH (Facey 1989)
cf. also:
 NNG: Tuam             waɣa-             ‘mother’s brother, (♂?)sister’s child’
 PT:  Iduna            ɣau-              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’
 PT:  Sudest           ɣa-               ‘mother’s brother’
>

   Scattered across PT and MM are reflexes of PWOc _*varis_. Its original meaning was
presumably ‘mother’s brother’, which in accordance with cross-cousin marriage
simultaneously meant ‘♂father-in-law’. Its reflexes have undergone various restrictions or
extensions of meaning.

<
PWOc *varis ‘mother’s brother, ♂father-in-law’
 PT: Misima           valehe             ‘mother’s brother’
 PT: Wagawaga         warihi             ‘mother’s sibling’s child’
 MM: Nehan            warihi             ‘♂father- or son-in-law’ (Glennon & Glennon 2006)
 MM: Halia (Hanahan)  halis              ‘♂father- or son-in-law’
 MM: Teop             varihi             ‘wife’s brother’
 MM: Hahon            waris              ‘♂father- or son-in-law’
 MM: Banoni           vanisi             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
>

                                                                              Kinship terms 97


2.4.1.2.6    Father’s sister and POc *aya

Milke (1958a) believed that POc had no term for ‘father’s sister’ (FZ). Blust (1980a) argued
that PMP _*aya_ had this meaning, but this attribution is not supported by any non-Oceanic
reflex glossed ‘father’s sister’. Chowning rejects PMP _*aya_ in her comment on Blust (1980a),
and omits POc _*aya_ ‘father’s sister’ from her list of POc kinship terms in Chowning (1991).
Blust and Chowning both argue their case on anthropological grounds. The case based on
lexical data is presented below and shows that POc *aya seems to have been a respect term
mainly denoting members of the parental generation.

    Blust (1980a, 1994) has argued that PMP _*aya-_ meant ‘FZ, FZH’. However, he admits
that this is less secure than other reconstructions for members of the parental generation, and
the ACD shows as broad a range of meanings. Reflexes in WMP languages have glosses that
include ‘mother’s brother’, ‘father’, ‘mother’, ‘aunt’, ‘uncle’ (the last two without further
specification). CMP glosses include ‘father’, ‘mother’ and ‘uncle’.[31] Oceanic reflexes of POc
_*aya-_ fall into five groups according to their glosses: father’s sister, mother’s brother, mother,
father and grandparent.

    Reconstructing more than one homophonous POc term is not an option, as four of the five
glosses refer to members of the parents’ generation. Blust (1980a:216) points out that if
cross-cousin marriage were symmetrical and *aya meant FZ, then it would have had the
secondary sense ‘spouse’s mother’, but there is no evidence that it did (cf _*matuqa_ ‘MB’ in
§2.4.1.2.5).

    The ACD cites instances from geographically dispersed WMP languages and Kei (CMP)
where a reflex of PMP _*aya_ was a respect term, sometimes a term of great respect:

__tablenh__
Tausug (NW Borneo)     | aya | ‘term of respect for male nobility (sultan, datuq) of the same generation as one’s father (including father)’
Iban (C Borneo)        | ayaʔ | ‘term of address for men of speaker’s father’s generation; term of reference for the hearer’s father’
Malay                  | ayah | ‘father; sire; more respectful than bapaʔ’
Balinese               | ayah | ‘father’ (refined speech)
Dampelas (Sulawesi)    | aya | ‘mother’ (address form)
Makassarese (Sulawesi) | aya | ‘mother’ (for persons of high rank), ‘mother’s younger sister’
Kei                    | yai | ‘father’ (address form used by small children, and in mourning songs)

A reasonable hypothesis is that POc *aya too was a respectful address term used of a member
of EGO’s parents’ generation, and that its application has tended to be narrowed in different
ways in various regions. This leaves one puzzle: why do none of the reflexes embrace, say,
both ‘mother’ and ‘father’, or both FZ and MB?

   Several reflexes have accreted _y-_, but this is as expected for a term with initial _*a-_.

[31] Limited Formosan data suggest that PAn _*aya_ may have meant ‘mother’.

98 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
PMP *aya ‘respect term for a member of ego’s parents’ generation’ (Blust 1980a, 1994: FZ, FZH)
PEMP *aya- ‘father’s sister, mother’
  SH:   Buli              aya, aye       ‘mother’ (Maan 1951)
  SH:   Taba              yoyo           ‘father’s sister’(Collins 1982)
  Bom:  Arguni            yai            ‘mother’ (ACD)
  CB:   Ambai             ai             ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  CB:   Wandamen          yai            ‘father’
  CB:   Biak              yai            ‘father’
  CB:   Serui-Laut        ai             ‘mother’ (Anceaux 1961)
  CB:   Warembori         ai             ‘father’
POc *aya ‘member of EGO’s parents’ generation (respectful address term)’
  Adm:  Lele              yaya-          ‘ancestor’
  Adm:  Titan             yaye-          ‘mother, mother’s sister’, MMyZ, ♀EZ (Mead 1934:218–225)
  Adm:  Loniu             yaya           ‘mother’
  NNG:  Bariai            aia            ‘mother, mother’s sister’
  NNG:  Sio               yaya           ‘mother’s brother’
  NNG:  Sissano           aiyia          ‘mother’
  NNG:  Roinji            yaye           ‘mother’s brother’
  NNG:  Wab               yai            ‘mother’s brother, (♂?)sister’s son’
  NNG:  Patep             yihi           ‘mother’s brother’, FZH
  NNG:  Aria              aia            ‘grandparent’
  NNG:  Avau              aye            ‘father’, FB
  NNG:  Avau              aiyɔ           ‘father’s sister’, FZC
  PT:   Dobu              yaya-          ‘female of the parental generation of one’s father’s village’
  PT:   Ubir              ayo-           ‘mother’ (anonymous Ubir wordlist)
  PT:   Tawala            eya-           ‘father’s sister, ♂brother’s child’
  PT:   Sinaugoro         iaia-          ‘father’s sister’, MBW
  PT:   W Motu            lala-          ‘father’s sister’, MBW, ♀BC, HZC (Groves 1958)
  MM:   E Kara            yəyə           ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  MM:   Nalik             yaya           ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Volker 1998)
  MM:   Siar              yai(nan)       ‘mother’s grandchild’ (Rowe 2005)
  MM:   Babatana          zai            ‘grandmother’ (McClatchey 2007)
  SES:  Lau               aia            ‘father’s sister, ♀brother’s child’ (ADDR)
  SES:  Kwara’ae          ʔaiʔa          ‘father’s sister’ (Deck 1934)
  TM:   Buma              aya            ‘father’ (Tryon and Hackman 1983)
  NCV:  Lewo              aya            ‘mother’
  NCal: Xârâcùù           yāya           ‘grandmother’
  NCal: Kwênyii           yéyé           ‘father’s sister, spouse’s mother’
>

   Only one Oceanic FZ term is well supported, namely PPn *masakitaŋa.

                                                                               Kinship terms 99

<
PPn *masakitaŋa ‘father’s sister’( Marck 1996)
Proto Tongic *mahakitaŋa ‘father’s sister’
  Pn:    Tongan           meheketaŋa        ‘father’s sister; patrilateral female kin at G+1’ (Churchward 1959; Völkel 2015)
  Pn:    Niue             mahakitaŋa        ‘♂sister’
PNPn *masakitaŋa ‘father’s sister’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:    E Uvean          mahikitaŋa        ‘father’s sister’
  Pn:    E Futunan        masaki[taŋa]      ‘father’s sister’
  Pn:    Anuta            makitaŋa          ‘father’s sister, father’s cousins’
  Pn:    Tikopia          masakitaŋa        ‘father’s sister’
  Pn:    Pukapuka         māyakitaŋa        ‘sacred maid; chief’s eldest daughter’
>

2.4.1.3 Children’s generation

2.4.1.3.1 Child

The English term child has two distinct senses: an age-cohort sense indicating a young person’s
approximate age (‘He is a child’) and a kinship sense indicating a person’s relationship to ego
(‘He is my child’). The age-cohort sense is discussed in vol. 5:60–65, along with the POc term
*meRa ‘newborn; young person from birth to onset of adulthood’. Although reflexes of *meRa
have sometimes become kinship terms, for example, in SES languages, they are not further
discussed here.

    POc *natu ‘child, offspring’ is widely reflected, as the cognate set below attests. It applied
to ego’s children and those of s.s. siblings/parallel cousins, but not to a man’s sister’s child, on
which see §2.4.1.3.2. This appears to leave a gap where a term for woman’s brother’s child is
expected, but no dedicated term can be reconstructed.

    POc had no dedicated terms for ‘son’ or ‘daughter’. Many Oceanic languages use the term
for ‘child’ plus a term for ‘male’ or ‘female’ where specification is needed.

<
PEMP *natu ‘child, offspring’ (ACD)
POc *natu- ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child, s.s. parallel cousin’s child’ (Milke 1958a)
  Adm:  Mussau         natu-             ‘child’, sGC
  Adm:  Baluan         naru-             ‘child’, ♂PBS, HMBS (Mead 1934:228–342)
  Adm:  Titan          nat, natú-        ‘child’
  Adm:  Pak            naro-             ‘child’, sGC, ♀BC, ♀MBC
  SJ:   Sobei          natu-             ‘child’, oGC, {PeG}CC, P{PeG}CCC, {HeB}C, H{PeG}SC
  NNG:  Tuam           natu              ‘child’
  NNG:  Sio            natu-             ‘child’
  NNG:  Lukep (Pono)   natu              ‘child’
  NNG:  Mindiri        nalu-             ‘child’
  NNG:  Wogeo          natu-             ‘child’, sGC, {PsG}CC, EG, EGC
  NNG:  Sissano        a-nto-            ‘child’
  NNG:  Numbami        natu              ‘child, son’
  NNG:  Adzera         naru-             ‘child’, sGC, {PsG}CC, {{PoG}SC}C, EoGC
  NNG:  Mangga Buang   natu-             ‘child’ (Ross’ fieldnotes)
  PT:   Misima         natu-             ‘child’
  PT:   Kilivila       latu-             ‘child’, sGC, ♂MBC, ♂ZSC, WBC (Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury 1965; Lawton f.c.)
  PT:   Iduna          natu-             ‘child’, GC, PGCC, EGC
  PT:   Tawala         natu-             ‘child, younger s.s. sibling’
  PT:   W Motu         natu-             ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child’, {EsG}C (Groves 1958)
  MM:   Meramera       natu              ‘child’ (Ross, fieldnotes)
  MM:   Lavongai       nat               ‘child’ (Ross’ fieldnotes)
  MM:   Tabar          natu              ‘child’
  MM:   Sursurunga     natu-             ‘child’
  MM:   Siar           nat, natu-        ‘child’ (Frowein 2011)
  MM:   Tolai          natu-             ‘child’, sGC, ♂ZSC, ♀BSW (Fingleton 1986)
  MM:   Banoni         nacu-             ‘child’, sGC, {PsG}C
  NCV:  Mota           natu-             ‘child’, BC, MBC (Codrington 1891)
  NCV:  Raga           nitu-             ‘child’, DDC, MBC, MBDDD, MMBC, MMBDDC, WM, WMB
  NCV:  Araki          naru-             ‘child’, BC, WBC, {PsG}DD, FBSC, WZC
  NCV:  Apma           natu-             ‘child’
  NCV:  Daakaka        natɛ-             ‘♂child’, BC, ZDC, MBC (von Prince 2012: 112-117; Deacon 1927)
  NCV:  S Paamese      natu-             ‘child’
  NCV:  Ninde          nitu-             ‘child’, ♂BC, ♂MBC, ♀ZC, SSSS, EBS, WZS (Deacon 1934:91–96)
  NCV:  Uripiv         natu-             ‘child’, sGC, ♀BC, MBC, {EoG}C (Deacon 1934:124)
  NCV:  Lewo           nari-             ‘child’
  NCV:  Nguna          natu              ‘child’, sGC, MBC, ♂ZSC, MZCC (Facey 1989)
PSV *natu- ‘child’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV:   Sye            nitu-             ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child’
  SV:   Lenakel        nerə-             ‘child’
POc *natu- ‘child’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Nyelâyu        nae-              ‘child’
  NCal: Cèmuhî         nai-              ‘child’
  NCal: Iaai           noko-             ‘child’, BC, FC, MBC (Ray 1917)
  Mic:  Nauruan        ŋai-              ‘child’, sGC, ♀BC (Wedgwood 1936)
PMic *natu ‘child’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Mic:  Kosraean       nætʌ-             ‘child’
  Mic:  Kiribati       nāti, nati-       ‘child’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic:  Marshallese    næci-             ‘child’, ♀HBC, ♂BC, ♂FGCC, ♂MZSC, ♂MBCC (Spoehr 1949a)
  Mic:  Puluwatese     nawɨ-             ‘child’, {PsG}CC, MBC
  Mic:  Satawalese     nāy, nayɨ-        ‘child’, BC, FGCC, MBCC, CC, ZCC, EGC
cf. also:
  Adm:  Loniu          ñɛtu              ‘child’
  Adm:  Bipi           ñato              ‘child, husband’s brother’
  NNG:  Roinji         nanu-             ‘child’
  NNG:  Takia          nanu-             ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child’
>

100 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


                                                                                Kinship terms 101

The Loniu and Bipi forms above, with initial _ñ-_, are anomalous (see Blust 1978b:48–51).

    There are two variant forms of POc _*natu-_, both probably present in POc. The first is
_*qatu_, the other _*tu_. The latter is readily understood as an abbreviation of _*natú-_, with stress
falling on penultimate _-u-_ when a possessor affix is added. Its Oceanic reflexes are restricted
to WOc.

<
PEMP *qatu ‘child, offspring’
  CB: Wandamen             atu                  ‘child’, GC, EGC
POc *qatu- ‘child: offspring of ego or of s.s. sibling’
  NNG: Bukawa              atu-i                ‘child’ (-i PL)
  MM: Bali                 ɣatu                 ‘child’
  MM: Torau                atu                  ‘child, s.s. sibling’s child’
>

<
PEMP *tu ‘child, offspring’
  SH: Gane                  tu                  ‘child’ (ACD)
POc *tu- ‘child: offspring of ego or of s.s. sibling’
  NNG: Mengen               tu-                 ‘child’
  PT:    Dobu               -tu-                ‘child’, {PsG}C, {PoG}SC
  MM: Vitu                  tu-                 ‘child, sibling’s child’
  MM: Bola                  tu                  ‘child’
  MM: Nehan                 tu-                 ‘child’ (Glennon & Glennon 2006)
  MM: Babatana              tu-                 ‘child’
  MM: Marovo                tu-                 ‘child’, BC, BDC, ♀ZS, {PsG}C, WZ, EoGC
>

   The generic PPn term for ‘child’ was _*tama_. Its reflexes in languages outside EPn indicate
that more specifically it denoted ‘♀child’, and especially ‘♀son’. This implies a dedicated
term for ‘♂son’ or ‘♂child’, and this space was evidently filled by PPn _*fosa_ ‘♂son’ (Marck 1996).

   PPn _*tama_ is identical in form to the root of PPn _*tama-_/_*tamana_ ‘father’ (§2.4.1.2.1).
Since reciprocal uses of terms are frequent in Oceanic—‘grandparent’/‘grandchild’,
‘mother’s brother’/‘sister’s child’—it is reasonable to suppose that in some immediate
ancestor of PPn the reflex of POc *tama came to be used reciprocally, and a distinction arose
between suffixed _*tama-_/_*tamana_ ‘father’ and unsuffixed *tama ‘child’.

<
PPn *tama ‘woman or couple’s child or classificatory child, esp. son’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tongan         tama          ‘woman or couple’s child, esp. son’, ♀ZS, HGC (colloquially ‘fellow, lad, chap, man’)
  Pn: Samoan         tama          ‘♀child, ♀grandchild; child, boy; chief’
  Pn: Tokelau        tama          ‘woman or couple’s child; boy’
  Pn: Rennellese     tama          ‘child, ♀father’
  Pn: Tikopia        tama          ‘child, son; sibling’s children other than irāmutu’
  Pn: Rapanui        tama          ‘child’ (Churchill 1912)
  Pn: Māori          tama          ‘son, nephew; eldest son; child (son or daughter)’
  Pn: Tahitian       tama          ‘child, young people in general’
  Pn: Hawaiian       kama          ‘child, person’
>

102 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


From the kinship term *tama evidently developed the PPn age cohort terms *tama-qiti ‘child
‘and *tama-riki ‘children’ (Marck 1996), the second element of each was the reflex of a POc
term for ‘small’ (vol.2:193–194). Additionally PPn innovated the term *fosa ‘♂son’ (Marck
1996).

<
PPn *fosa ‘♂son, ♂brother’s son’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tongan         foha     ‘♂son’, ♂BS, ♂WGS (Völkel 2015; Marck 1996)
  Pn: E Uvean        foha     ‘♂son’, BS (Tongan loan?) (Burrows 1938)
  Pn: E Futunan      vosā     ‘son’, GS (Burrows 1936)
  Pn: Rennellese     hosa     ‘son’, ♂BS, ♂MBSS, ♂F{PsG}CSS, ♂{PoG}DS, ♂{PsG}CDS
  Pn: Tikopia        fosa     ‘♂child’, ♂BC (some speakers hold that fosa applied only to brother’s child)
>

2.4.1.3.2   ♂︎Sister’s child

POc *[qa]lawa has been regularly offered in the literature as the term for ‘♂sister’s
child’ (♂ZC). A number of its reflexes are glossed ‘mother’s brother’ (MB), whilst three
widely spaced languages—Wogeo, Nakanai and Nauruan—use it reciprocally for both ♂ZC
and MB (the Nakanai form is under ‘cf. also’ because it is not a regular reflex). If extended
senses were recorded for all reflexes, one could be more confident about the gloss of the POc
reconstruction. As things stand, POc *[qa]lawa probably meant ♂ZC, but because ♂ZC/MB
was a recognised relationship from very early Oceanic, one cannot be sure whether it already
also referred to MB in POc.

<
POc *[qa]lawa ‘♂sister’s child, (?) mother’s brother’ (Pawley 1981:284: *(qa)lawa; Milke 1958a: *(a)lava; 1968: *qalawa)
 Adm: Mussau            aloa-            ‘mother’s brother’, FZH, oGC
 SJ:  Sobei             ewo-             ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’, MBW, ♂PGDC, ♂PPGCD, ♀HZC, ♀HPGDC
 NNG: Wogeo             kalawa           ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’, ♂FBDC, ♂MZDC, ♂MBDC, ♂FZDC
 NNG: Manam             elua             ‘mother’s brother’, MBS etc
 PT:  Sudest            loɣai            ‘mother’s brother’ (Lepowsky 1981)
 MM:  Meramera          loa              ‘mother’s brother’ (Ross, fieldnotes)
 MM:  Patpatar          lauə             ‘♂sister’s child’
 MM:  Ririo             aluwa            ‘♂sister’s child’ (Milke 1958a)
PNCV *(q)alawa ‘sister’s child’ (Clark 2009: *alawa)
 NCV: Lombaha           aloa-            ‘♂sister’s child’
 NCV: Raga              aloa             ‘♂sister’s child’
 NCV: Araki             elua-            ‘mother’s brother’, FZW, HMB, FBDS, MZDS
 NCV: Tamambo           alua             ‘sister’s child’
 NCV: Apma              oloa-            ‘sister’s son’
 NCV: Ninde             lowo-            ‘♂sister’s child’
 NCV: Lendamboi         alawa            ‘sister’s child’
 NCV: Nguna             aloa             ‘mother’s brother’, FZH, MZH (Guiart 1964)
PSV *alwə- ‘♂sister’s son’ (?) (Lynch 2001b)
 SV:  Sye               alwo-            ‘cross-cousin’ (Lynch 2001b)
 SV:  Ura               alwi-            ‘nephew’
 Mic: Nauruan           aroe-            ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’ (Wedgwood 1936)
cf. also:
 MM:  Nakanai           hala-            ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’, FZH, ♀HF (ADDR) (for †halaua-)
>

                                                                          Kinship terms 103


   Micronesian and Central Pacific languages share a term reflecting a putative POc
*pa(s,c)u/*pa(s,c)ua- ♂sister’s child—“putative” because there is only one reflex outside Mic
and CP languages, and because there is some evidence that the term refers or referred to the
relationship between MB and ♂ZC rather than to the person of the ♂ZC (Douaire-Marsaudon
2015; Pauwels 2015). The items listed under ‘cf. also’ are not cognate with the set above
them, but are perhaps the result of borrowing.

<
POc *pa(s,c)u, *pa(s,c)ua- ‘♂sister’s child’ (?)
  MM: Hahon                  pasu-             ‘sister’s child’
PMic *fa(s,S)ua ‘o.s. sibling’s child’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Satawalese            fatɨw, fatɨwa-    ‘sister’s child’, MZDC, MMZDDC
  Mic: Woleaian              fatuwe-           ‘sister’s child’ (Burrows & Spiro 1957)
  Mic: Ulithian              faθie             ‘sister’s child’
PCP *vasu ‘♂sister’s child’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Fij:   Tavuki              vasu              ‘sister’s child’
  Fij:   Bauan               vasu              ‘sister’s child’ (Capell 1941)
PPn *fasu ‘♂sister’s child’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Pn:    Tongan              fahu              ‘sister’s child’ (Douaire-Marsaudon 2015)
cf. also:
   Fij:   Wayan            batuvu            ‘sister’s child’
   Fij:   Tavuki           vatuvu            ‘sister’s child’
   Fij:   Tokatoka         vatuvu            ‘sister’s child’
>

   Another regional set consists of reflexes of Proto Central Vanuatu *matailau ‘♂sister’s
child’. The term appears to break down into *mata i lau ‘eye of the sea’, but this makes no
obvious sense.

104 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
Proto Central Vanuatu *matailau ‘♂sister’s child’
  NCV: Apma              metulu             ‘sister’s son’
  NCV: Daakaka           mɛtɔ̄               ‘sister’s child’ (von Prince 2012:112-117; Deacon 1927)
  NCV: Lonwolwol         metelo             ‘♂sister’s son’
  NCV: S Paamese         meteilau           ‘sister’s son’
  NCV: Big Nambas        məriri-            ‘sister’s child’
  NCV: Neve’ei           metelau            ‘sister’s child’, WBC
>

  The PPn term for ‘♂sister’s child’ was *qilāmutu. It has no known non-Pn reflexes , but is
widely reflected in Polynesia. The Tuvalu, Takuu, Nukumanu and Luangiua reflexes also
mean ‘mother’s brother’.

<
PPn *qilāmutu ‘♂sister’s child’ (Marck 1996: *ʔilamutu)
  Pn: Tongan      ʔilamutu    ‘♂sister’s child’ (Völkel 2015)
PNPn *qilāmutu ‘♂sister’s child’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Samoan      ilāmutu     ‘descendants in female line’
  Pn: Tokelau     ilāmutu     ‘♂sister’s child; ♂descendants of sister’s children; any kinsman who is an offspring of a female sibling of any male forebear’ (Huntsman 1971)
  Pn: E Futuna    ilamutu     ‘♂sister’s child’ (Burrows 1936)
  Pn: Rennellese  ʔiŋāmutu    ‘♂sister’s child, ♂father’s parallel cousin’s daughter’s child’
  Pn: Tikopia     iramutu     ‘♂sister’s child’
  Pn: Pileni      ilamutu     ‘♂sister’s child’
  Pn: Takuu       [i]lāmotu   ‘mother’s brother; ♂sister’s child’
  Pn: Luangiua    lamoku      ‘mother’s brother; ♂sister’s child’
Proto Eastern Polynesian *irāmutu ‘sibling’s child’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Māori       irāmutu     ‘sister’s child (traditional sense)’
  Pn: Marquesan   iʔamutu     ‘sibling’s child’
  Pn: Mangareva   iramutu     ‘sibling’s child’ (Hīroa 1938:136)
>

2.4.1.4 Grandparent and grandchild generations and beyond

2.4.1.4.1 Grandparent, grandchild (reciprocal)

The terms reconstructed in this subsection were evidently used reciprocally in POc, as they
are in many modern Oceanic languages. Many of them are glossed ‘grandparent,
grandchild’ (PP, CC), but others have a narrower definition, e.g. ‘mother’s father’. Here one is
again up against the fact that extended senses are often not recorded. It is likely that many
more should have been recorded as ‘grandparent, grandchild’. Many ethnographers indicate
that these terms apply to all (or almost all) members of the grandparent and grandchild
generations, so that a wider definition, ‘kin of the grandparent and grandchild generations’,
would in many cases be appropriate. In some languages the definition is wider still, as the
term applies to ancestors including grandparents and all their forebears (see §2.4.1.4.3).

                                                                         Kinship terms 105


   Members of the grandparent and grandchild generations are not usually differentiated by
gender, but sometimes a modifier is added. This seems to be particularly the case in EPn
languages, e.g., Hawaiian kupuna kane ‘grandfather, grand-uncle’ vs kupuna wahine
‘grandmother, grand-aunt’, and cognate forms in other EPn languages.

   In some languages a grandparent term is used for the mother’s brother, as the glosses
indicate. Blust (1980a:214–215) sees the association as ‘due to the notion of kin-based
sovereignty common to the life-giving clan ancestors (*ampu, etc.) and the life-perpetuating
wife-giving group (*ma[n]tuqa), i.e. a matter of power’.

   Terms apparently reflecting POc †*tibu- are also included here (see discussion in
§2.4.1.1).

<
PMP *tumpu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
POc *tubu- ‘grandparent, grandchild’, MB (?) (ACD; Milke 1958a: ‘grandparent’)
 Adm: Mussau              tuvu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 Adm: Wuvulu              ʔupu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 Adm: Baluan              tupu-              ‘all relatives in the grandparent generation’
 Adm: Lele                tuʙu               ‘mother’s brother’’, MF, MMB (Mead 1934:345–347)
 Adm: Nyindrou            tubu-              ‘grandparent’
 SJ:  Sobei               tapu-              ‘((great-)great-)grandparent’
 NNG: Malalamai           tiᵐbu              ‘mother’s brother’
 NNG: Bariai              tibu-, i-tub       ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (_i-tub_ 3SG)
 NNG: Mangap              tumbu-             ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Sio                 timbu              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono) tibu-                     ‘grandchild’
 NNG: Atui                tivi-              ‘grandparent’
 NNG: Poeng               sivu-              ‘grandchild’
 NNG: Takia               tbu-               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Manam               tubu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Yabem               dɪbu-              ‘parent’s father’, CS, MMZH
 NNG: Yabem               dɪbu-ò             ‘parent’s mother’, CD, FFBW (-ò FEM)
 NNG: Wampar              roᵐpo-             ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Numbami             tubu               ‘grandparent’
 PT:    Sudest            rumbu-             ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 PT:    Dobu              tubu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 PT:    Sinaugoro         tubu-              ‘grandparent, grandparent’s sibling, grandchild’
 PT:    Roro              kupu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 MM: Vitu                 tubu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’, PPP, CCC
 MM: Bola                 tubu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 MM: Lavongai             tivu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
 MM: Siar                 tubu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Frowein 2011)
 MM: Tolai                tubu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’, PPG (Fingleton 1986)
 MM: Nehan                tubu-              ‘grandparent’, PPP, CCC (Nachman 1978; Glennon & Glennon 2006)
 MM: Halia                tubu-              ‘grandparent, ancestor’
  SES: Bugotu             tubu-              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’ (Ivens 1940a)
  SES: Lengo              tubu-              ‘mother’s brother, ♂sister’s child’
  SES: Bauro              wa-upu             ‘mother’s brother’ (wa-‘male’)
PNCV *tubu- ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV: Mota               tupu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Codrington 1891)
  NCV: Lolovoli           tubu-              ‘grandfather’
  NCV: Raga               sibi               ‘mother’s father, sister’s husband’
  NCV: Araki              tapu-              ‘grandfather’
  NCV: Sa                 tibi-              ‘grandfather’
  NCV: N Ambrym           tuvyu-             ‘grandparent, grandchild’, PPE, CE (Franjieh 2012:226, 371; Löffler 1960)
  NCV: S Paamese          tevi-              ‘grandparent’
  NCV: Neve’ei            cube-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  NCV: Lewo               repi-              ‘grandparent’
  NCV: Nguna              topu-              ‘grandfather’
PSV *[e]t(p,b)u- ‘grandparent’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV: Sye                 re-tpo-            ‘wife’
  SV: Lenakel             rəpə-              ‘grandparent’
  SV: Anejom              e-tpo-             ‘grandparent’
Proto New Caledonia *tuᵐbu- ‘grandparent’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Nêlêmwa           kibu-              ‘grandparent’
  NCal: Fwâi              sıũ̃-              ‘grandparent’
  NCal: Kwênyii           tũ̃-               ‘grandparent, mother’s father, spouse’s father’
  NCal: Iaai              kibe-              ‘grandparent’
PMic *tupʷu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Mic: Kiribati           tipu-              ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Groves et al. 1985)
  Mic: Marshallese        cipʷi-             ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Mic: Woleaian           subu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
  Fij:   Wayan            tubu-              ‘grandparent, classificatory grandparent, ancestor’
  Fij:   Tokatoka         tubu-              ‘father’s father’, FFB, FFFBS, FFF etc
PPn *tupu-, *tupuna ‘kin of the second and further ascending generations’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:    Niue             |[matua] tupuna|  ‘ancestor’ (matua ‘parent’; Sperlich 1997)
PNPn *tupu-, *tupuna ‘kin of the second and further ascending generations’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:    Tuvalu           tupuna             ‘grandparent, grand-uncle/-aunt’
  Pn:    Rennellese       tupuna             ‘(great-)grandparent’
  Pn:    Pileni           tʰupu-             ‘grandparent (ADDR)’
  Pn:    Takuu            tipuna, tippuna    ‘relative by blood or marriage two or more ascending generations’ (_tippuna_ PL)
  Pn:    Pukapuka         tupuna, tūpuna     ‘ancestor, grandparent’ (_tūpuna_ PL)
Proto Eastern Polynesian *tupuna ‘kin of two or more ascending generations’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:    Rapanui          tupuna             ‘grandparent’ (Churchill 1912)
  Pn:    Māori            tupuna, tipuna     ‘grandparent, ancestor ’
  Pn:    Tahitian         tupuna             ‘grandparent, ancestor’
  Pn:    Marquesan        tupuna             ‘(great-)grandparent, etc’
  Pn:    Hawaiian         kupuna             ‘grandparent’
>

106 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


                                                                          Kinship terms 107


   It was noted in §2.4.1.1 that there are also the variants *ubu- and *kubu-. The latter has
only two reflexes, both kubu- ‘grandparent, grandchild’, in two closely related PT languages,
Bwaidoga and Iduna. The former is a little more convincingly attested.

<
PMP *umpu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
POc *ubu ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 MM: Torau               up-              ‘grandparent’
 NCV: Neve’ei            vubʷu            ‘grandfather’, FFZS
 Mic: Mortlockese        upʷu(-tiw)       ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
>

   In §2.4.1 forms were noted form reflecting POc *tabu- and *abu. They do not differ in
meaning from *tubu- and *ubu, and no known phonological rule accounts for them. The ACD
records no reconstruction earlier than PEMP.

<
PEMP *tampu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
POc *tabu- ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  Adm: Ponam              tāʙu           ‘grandparent, ancestor’
  Adm: Leipon             jābu           ‘grandparent, ancestor’
  NNG: Tuam               tapu-          ‘father, parent’s brother’, PGS, PPGCS
  NNG: Sissano (Arop)     tapu-          ‘grandparent’
  MM: Tangga              |tabu- -lik|     ‘grandchild’
  MM: Tangga              |tabu- -tamat|   ‘mother’s father’
  NCV: Araki              tapu-          ‘grandparent, grandchild’, SW, SWB, HP
  NCV: Neve’ei            tabu-          ‘grandfather’, FFZS
>

<
PMP *ampu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
POc *abu[a] ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
 Adm: Baluan             apua             ‘members of G+3 and G–3’
 NNG: Tuam               abu              ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Mangap             abu              ‘grandmother, granddaughter’
 NNG: Sio                ābu              ‘grandchild’
 NNG: Amara              avu              ‘mother’
 NNG: Kis                abu              ‘elder o.s. sibling’ (Z’graggen 1974b)
 NNG: Bukawa             abu-ŋgaʔ         ‘grandfather, grandson’
 NNG: Bukawa             abu-wɪ           ‘grandmother, granddaughter’
 NNG: Numbami            abu              ‘grandparent’
PNCV * abu[a] ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NCV: Apma               apu              ‘grandparent’
 NCV: S Paamese          avue             ‘grandparent, spouse’s parent’
 NCV: Uripiv             apu              ‘grandparent’
 NCV: Lewo               apua             ‘grandparent’
 NCV: Nguna              pua              ‘mother’s father’, MFB (Facey 1989)
 NCal: Iaai              ɔ̄bʷi-            ‘grandchild’
 NCal: Nengone           abu-n            ‘grandchild’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
>

108 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   The ancestors of POc *bubu date back to PAn. Historically they have nothing to do with
the forms above, but *bubu now fits into the quasi-paradigm of terms for blood relatives
described in §2.4.1.1 and in some languages serves as an address term.

   Reflexes in languages that have lost final *-u have become *[ᵐbuᵐb] and then lost the final
*[b] giving the forms in Wogeo, Ulau-Suain, Sissano and Avava. Other languages reflect an
abbreviation of *bubu to *bu.

<
PAn *bubu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
PMP *bubu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (ACD)
POc *bubu ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Blust 1980a; Chowning 1991)
  NNG: Sio               mbupu              ‘grandchild’
  NNG: Mindiri           bu-                ‘great-grandparent’
  NNG: Wogeo             bum                ‘grandfather’
  NNG: Sissano           (a)pum             ‘grandfather’
  NNG: Adzera            bu-                ‘spouse’s parent, child’s spouse’
  NNG: Mapos Buang       bu                 ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  PT:   Sudest           bubu               ‘grandparent, father’s brother’
  PT:   Kilivila         bubu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Lawton f.c.)
  PT:   Molima           bubu               ‘grandparent’
  MM: E Kara             bu-                ‘ancestor’
  MM: Petats             bubu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  NCV: Mota              pupu-a             ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  NCV: Lolovoli          bubu               ‘grandparent’
  NCV: Raga              bibi               ‘grandfather’, PFZ, H
  NCV: Apma              bua-               ‘grandparent’
  NCV: Neve’ei           bubu               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  NCal: Iaai             buba-              ‘grandparent’
  Mic: Marshallese       pɨpɨ               ‘child’s term for grandfather’, PGCC (Spoehr 1949a)
  Fij:  Bauan            bu-                ‘grandfather’
  Pn:   W Futuna         pu-a               ‘grandparent’
  Pn:   Pileni           pu-                ‘grandparent, grandparent’s sibling, ancestor’
>

    As noted in §2.4.1.2.2 with regard to *inai ‘mother (ADDR)’, Blust (1979) reconstructs a
set of PMP address terms in *-y, continued as POc *-i. POc *[bu]bui is also one of these, and
it too fails to undergo a regular sound change. Normally, PMP *-uy becomes POc *-i
(§1.3.4.2), but this seems to be another instance of an address term resisting change (cf.
§2.4.1.2.2).

    The reflexes under ‘cf. also’ refer to female kin of the parent generation, and have
presumably come to be applied to them as a matter of respect. The ra- of Merei ra-ᵐbui- is a
respect prefix used on terms for senior women (§2.4.1.2.2).

                                                                         Kinship terms 109

<
PMP *bubu-y ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Blust 1979)
POc *[bu]bui ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG: Takia              bui             ‘grandchild’
 MM: Lavongai            vuvui           ‘grandparent, grandchild’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
 NCV: Nokuku             pui-            ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 Fij:   Moala            bui             ‘grandmother’; ‘wife’ (rarely)
cf. also:
 NCV: Longana            bui             ‘mother, mother’s sister’
 NCV: Wusi               pui             ‘mother’ (Lynch 1996)
 NCV: Merei              ra-ᵐbui-        ‘mother’ (Lynch 1996)
 NCV: Akei               bʷi-            ‘mother’s brother’
>

   POc *wawa[-] ‘grandparent, grandchild’ is of only PEMP antiquity, does not belong to the
paradigm in §2.4.1 and is homophonous with POc *wawa ‘mother’s brother’ (§2.4.1.2.5).
The reduplicated form suggests that it probably originated as an address term.

<
PEMP *wawa ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  CB: Ambai             wawa                 ‘ancestor’
POc *wawa ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  NNG: Singorakai       wau                  ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  PT:   Ubir            wawa-                ‘grandfather’ (Ubir wordlist)
  PT:   Dawawa          waɣa                 ‘(great-)great-grandparent’
  MM: Sursurunga        wowo                 ‘mother’s mother, o.s. sibling’
  MM: Siar              wɔwɔ                 ‘grandmother’ (Frowein 2011)
  MM: Varisi            vavae                ‘grandfather, male of G+2’
  SES: Longgu           vua                  ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  SES: ’Are’are         wauwa-               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  SES: Sa’a             waue[-]              ‘grandfather, grandson’
  SES: Bauro            wa-uwa               ‘grandfather’, ESG, PGESC (wa- MALE)
  SES: Owa              wauwa                ‘grandfather’
  SES: Owa              wauwa-               ‘grandson’
  NCal: Drehu           ww̥aww̥a               ‘grandfather’ (Ray 1917)
>

2.4.1.4.2   Grandchild (non-reciprocal)

Although a grandchild is often referred to by the reciprocal grandparent/grandchild terms
listed in the previous subsection one non-reciprocal term is found, POc *makubu-
‘grandchild’, or more properly ‘kin two generations below ego’. It is not reflected in WOc or
SES, but there are reflexes in Admiralties languages, as well as non-Oceanic cognates, listed
in the notes beneath the ACD’s entry for PMP *empu. These are from three Sulawesi
languages: Bare’e makumpu opu ‘great-grandchild’, Dampelas maʔupu ‘grandchild’ and
Uma kumpu ‘grandchild’, this last described as a ‘foreshortened form’.

110 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

    The ACD’s reconstruction is POc *mo-kobu, ‘with regressive assimilation of the remaining
first syllable vowel’, based on the Pak and Pn forms cited below. There is no doubt that
assimilation occurred, but later and separately in the Admiralties and PPn. The cognate set
below supports POc *ma-kubu- fairly strongly. This form evidently includes as its stem POc
*kubu- (Table 2.12), reflected unprefixed only in the Bwaidoga and Iduna reflexes noted in
the previous subsection.[32]

POc *makubu- ‘grandchild; kin two generations below ego’ (ACD: *mo-kobu)
  Adm: Pak               mo-kopu-          ‘grandchild’
  Adm: Lele              meŋʙu             ‘grandchild’
PNCV *makubu ‘grandchild’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV: Apma              meʙu-             ‘grandchild’
  NCV: N Ambrym          mabœɔ-            ‘great-grandson’ (Guiart 1951)
  NCV: Big Nambas        nn̼ əxitt̼ -      ‘grandchild’
  NCV: Ninde             neiʙü-            ‘grandchild’, MBDS
  NCV: Unua              meɣeʙu-           ‘grandchild’
  NCV: Port Sandwich mexiᵐbü-              ‘grandchild, descendant’
PSV *maɣubʷu- ‘grandchild’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV: Sye                moɣpo-            ‘grandchild’
  SV: Lenakel            mʷipʷə-           ‘grandchild’
  SV: SW Tanna           makupu            ‘grandchild’
  Fij:  Tavuki           makubu            ‘grandchild’, BCC, MBCC, WZCC
  Fij:  Bauan            makubu-           ‘grandchild’
PPn *makupu-na ‘kin of two or more descending generations’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:   Tongan           mokopu-na         ‘grandchild’
  Pn:   Rennellese       makupuna          ‘grand-child/-niece/-nephew’
  Pn:   Pileni           mokupuna          ‘grandchild; member of grandchild generation and lower’
  Pn:   Pukapuka         makopuna          ‘grandchild’
  Pn:   Rapanui          makupuna          ‘grandchild’ (Churchill 1912)
  Pn:   Māori            mokopuna          ‘grand-child/-niece/-nephew’
  Pn:   Marquesan        moupuna           ‘grand-child/-niece/-nephew’
  Pn:   Hawaiian         moʔopuna          ‘grandchild’
cf. also:
  PT:   Bwaidoga         kubu-               ‘grandparent, grandchild’
  PT:   Iduna            kubu-               ‘great-grandparent, great-grandchild’

[32] This reinterpretation of the evidence differs from the ACD’s etymology, PMP *maki-empu.

2.4.1.4.3    Generations beyond grandparent and grandchild

Just one POc term is reconstructable for an ascending generation beyond the grandparent
generation and its reciprocal. This is POc *bawa[-], for which reflexes have been found in only
a few languages.

<
PEMP *bawa ‘great-great-grandparent, great-great-grandchild’
  RA: Ambel             baw                ‘member of G+4 or G–4’
POc *bawa[-] ‘great-great-grandparent, great-great-grandchild’
 Adm: Sori               (ña)bʷau           ‘grandfather’, FFB, MZH (ña-is prefixed to some kin terms)
 Adm: Pak                pʷawa(riu)         ‘great-grandfather’
 PT:    Sinaugoro        bava-              ‘member of G+5’
 MM: Nakanai             bao                ‘member of G+4 or G–4’
>

                                                                         Kinship terms 111


    There are probably a number of reasons why terms for these relations are not found. One
is that in many Oceanic languages reflexes of POc *tubu- (§2.4.1.4.1) also mean ‘ancestors,
descendants’, i.e. not only grandparents and grandchildren but also great-grandparents and
great-grandchildren and the generations beyond.

    If there were once distinct lexical items for generations beyond PPP and CCC, they have
been replaced in various Eastern Oceanic languages by a phrase that allows the precise
generation to be stated, as seen in these examples:

__formgroup__
  SES: Sa’a                |waue haʔa-rua    |      ‘great-grandfather’
  SES: Sa’a                |waue haʔa-olu    |      ‘great-great-grandfather’
  NCV: Araki               |tapu-ku ð̼aha-dua|       ‘my great-grandfather’
  Fij: Wayan               |tubu vaka-tolu   |      ‘member of G+5’
  Fij: Nadrogā             |tai vā-rua       |      ‘great-grandfather, great-grandchild’

The structure consists of the term for ‘grandparent, grandchild’, followed by a multiplicative
numeral formed with a prefix reflecting PEOc *paka- ‘causative’ (§14.5.2). As François
(2002) notes of the Araki form, ‘my great-grandfather’ is labelled ‘my grandfather twice’. A
similar strategy occurs in Pn languages, but without the causative morpheme: thus Tongan
kui-ua, Manihiki-Rakahanga tupuna tua-rua, Hawaiian kupuna kua-lua, all ‘grandparent
[xxx]-two, ‘great-grandparent’, and correspondingly kui-tolu, tupuna tua-teru, kupuna kua-
kolu ‘grandparent [xxx]-three, ‘great-great-grandparent’ (Marck 1996:211).

   In languages close to the New Guinea mainland, however, it seems that there were terms
for distinct generations, but, other than POc *sese- none can be reconstructed beyond a very
local level.

<
POc *sese- ‘great-great-grandparent (?)’
 Adm: Lele              sese-               ‘grandparent’
 NNG: Kove              sese-               ‘member of G+4’ (Chowning 2009)
 PT:  Sinaugoro         sese-               ‘member of G+4’
>

<
PNNG *sasa ‘great-grandparent, great-grandchild’
  NNG: Tuam           sās               ‘member of G+4 or G–4’
  NNG: Bariai         sasa              ‘member of G+4’
  NNG: Mangap         sāza              ‘great-grandparent, great-grandchild’
  NNG: Amara          asasa             ‘great-grandparent, great-grandchild’
  NNG: Lukep (Pono)   sassa             ‘great-grandparent’
  NNG: Aria           sasa              ‘member of G+4’
>

   As noted in §2.4.1.5.1, a great-grandparent is in scattered languages denoted by the term
*taci- ‘younger s.s. sibling’.

112 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


2.4.1.5 Ego’s generation: siblings and cousins

2.4.1.5.1    Same-sex sibling, younger same-sex sibling

POc *taci- ‘younger s.s. sibling’ is reflected throughout Oceanic. It forms a pair with POc
*tua-, *tuaka ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (§2.4.1.5.2), but *taci is what Greenberg (1980) and Hage
(2001b) would call the ‘unmarked’ member of the pair. That is, if a term is needed to denote the
category ‘s.s. sibling’, *taci- will be chosen. This also means diachronically that a reflex of
*taci- sometimes comes to denote ‘s.s. sibling’, but a reflex of *tua-, *tuaka never does.

    Occasionally a kinship terminology loses the distinction between s.s. sibling and o.s.
sibling but retains the distinction between younger and elder. In this case, the terms for ‘s.s.
sibling’ are unmarked, and a reflex of *taci- denotes all younger siblings and a reflex of *tua-,
*tuaka all elder siblings.[33]

    Because of bifurcate merging (§2.3.1) in many languages a reflex of POc *taci- is also
used of a s.s. parallel cousin. In some of these languages, e.g. Yabem, the reflex means that it
is the cousin who is younger than EGO. In other languages, e.g. Tongan, it indicates that the
cousin’s parent is younger than EGO’s parent.

    Another extended meaning is ‘s.s. sibling’s spouse’, or sometimes ‘younger s.s. sibling’s
spouse’, discussed in §2.4.2.2.

<
PMP *taji ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (ACD; see also §2.4.2.2)
POc *taci- ‘younger s.s. sibling, parallel cousin’s younger s.s. child’ (Milke 1958a)
 Adm:  Yapese        teθī-           ‘younger brother’ (Jensen 1977)
 Adm:  Mussau        tasi-           ‘wife’s sister, husband’s brother’, sGE
 Adm:  Pak           tehi-           ‘s.s. sibling’, {PsG}sC, ♂{PoG}SS
 Adm:  Lele          dere            ‘s.s. sibling’
 SJ:   Sobei         tasi-           ‘younger sibling’
 NNG:  Bariai        tadi-           ‘s.s. sibling’, PGsC
 NNG:  Amara         tei-            ‘s.s. sibling’, {PsG}sC
 NNG:  Atui          tei-            ‘s.s. sibling’
 NNG:  Poeng         taitai          ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 NNG:  Wab           tai             ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (Z’graggen 1974a)
 NNG:  Takia         tei-            ‘s.s. sibling’, EoG, sGE
 NNG:  Manam         tari            ‘younger sibling’, PGyC
 NNG:  Kairiru       tei-            ‘sibling, wife’s sibling’
 NNG:  Yabem         lasi-, lasi-ò   ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {PsG}ysC (-ò FEM)
 NNG:  Adzera        rasi-           ‘grandparent, grandchild’
 NNG:  Mapos Buang   ari-            ‘s.s. sibling’
 PT:   Misima        tali-           ‘s.s. sibling’
 PT:   Dobu          tasi-           ‘s.s. sibling’, {PsG}sC, GsE, {PsG}sCE, {PoG}sCE
 PT:   Sinaugoro     tari-           ‘younger sibling’
 PT:   W Motu        tadi-           ‘younger sibling’ (Groves 1958); ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (Lister-Turner & Clark 1954)
 MM:   Vitu          taði-           ‘s.s. sibling’
 MM:   Bola          tari-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 MM:   Lavongai      təsi            ‘brother’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
 MM:   Nalik         dasi-           ‘(?♂)brother’ (Chinnery 1929)
 MM:   Siar          tasi-           ‘sibling, cousin’ (Frowein 2011)
 MM:   Patpatar      təsi-           ‘brother, mother’s sister’s son’
 MM:   Roviana       tasi-           ‘s.s. sibling’ (Capell 1943)
 MM:   Maringe       tahi-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {PsG}yC
 SES:  Bugotu        tahi-           ‘s.s. sibling (younger?)’ (Ivens 1940a)
 SES:  To’aba’ita    θa-asi-         ‘younger sibling’
 SES:  Kwaio         asi-            ‘younger brother, younger male cousin’
 SES:  Bauro         k-asi, w-asi    ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (k-female, w-male)
 NCV:  Mota          tasi-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, MZSC, FBSC (Codrington & Palmer 1896)
 NCV:  Longana       tehi-           ‘younger sibling’, FFC, MMC
 NCV:  Araki         rasi-           ‘younger brother’, WZyH, HyB
 NCV:  Apma          tasi-           ‘younger sibling’
 NCV:  S Paamese     tasi-           ‘younger sibling’
 NCV:  Neve’ei       tasu-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {FyB}sC
 NCV:  Uripiv        tasi-           ‘younger sibling’
 NCV:  Nguna         tai             ‘s.s. sibling’, {PsG}S (Loss of *-s- is unexpected)
 SV:   Lenakel       no-rhə-         ‘younger s.s. sibling’
Proto New Caledonia *tasi- ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 NCal: Nêlêmwa       kāri-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Drubea        tī-             ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Iaai          kei-            ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 Mic:  Kiribati      tari            ‘s.s. sibling’, {PsG}sC (Lambert 1981)
 Fij:  Wayan         taði-           ‘younger s.s. sibling, sibling’, {PysG}C
 Fij:  Deuba         taði-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {PysG}C, CCC
PPn *tahi-, *tahina ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
 Pn:   Tongan        tehina          ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {PysG}sC (Völkel 2015)
 Pn:   Niue          tehina          ‘younger s.s. sibling, parallel cousin’
PNPn *tai-, *taina ‘younger s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
 Pn:   Samoan        tei             ‘younger s.s. sibling, s.s. cousin’ (Williamson 1924)
 Pn:   Tuvalu        taina           ‘s.s. sibling, s.s. cousin’, EoG, EoGE
 Pn:   Rennellese    taina           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, MBysC
 Pn:   Rapanui       teina           ‘younger sibling, younger cousin’ (Churchill 1912)
 Pn:   Tahitian      teina           ‘younger s.s. sibling’, {PyG}C
 Pn:   Marquesan     teina           ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 Pn:   Hawaiian      kai-kaina       ‘younger sibling, younger cousin’
>

[33] Clark (1975) makes a similar set of observations regarding Polynesian reflexes of the sibling terms.

                                                                            Kinship terms 113


   Two further variants are reconstructable, namely POc *aci and *kaci- ( §2.4.1.1). The
former has non-Oceanic reflexes (ACD) but only one known Oceanic reflex, Torau asi-
‘younger s.s. sibling’. POc *kaci- has the reflexes listed below.

<
POc *kaci- ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 PT:    Bwaidoga          kai-            ‘younger sibling’, PyGC
 MM:    Banoni            kasi-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 MM:    Uruava            kái-            ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 MM:    Babatana          kəe-            ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 SES:   Birao             kasi-           ‘younger s.s. sibling’
>

114 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck



2.4.1.5.2   Elder same-sex sibling

As indicated in the overview in §2.3.5, POc had three terms for ‘elder s.s. sibling’. POc *tua-
was a reference term that took a possessor suffix, and *tuaka, perhaps originally an address
term, is also reflected as a reference term in many Oceanic languages. Both were POc
innovations, as no convincing non-Oceanic cognates have been found. The third term, *kaka,
was—at least originally—an address term, of PAn antiquity.

    It follows from bifurcate merging that the terms below also referred to an elder parallel
cousin, but there are also languages (Roro, Neve’ei, Wayan Fijian, Tahitian) in which the
‘elder’ feature belongs not to the cousin but to the cousin’s uncle, i.e. the extended meaning of
the term is not {PsG}eC but {PseG}C, ‘father’s elder brother’s child’.

    Some previous writers have reconstructed *tuaka as *tuqaka (§2.4.1.1). No reflex in our
data supports *-q-. No reflex attesting to both *-q- and *-k- has been found. Instead, the data
reflect *tua- or *tuaka-, listed separately below. Many reflexes of *tuaka- show coalescence
of *-ua- to -o-, giving toka-, and a few show deletion of *-a-, giving tuka-, both probably a
result of stress shifting to the right when a possessor suffix was added, e.g. *tuaká-gu ‘my
…’, perhaps aided by the tendency for POc roots to be disyllabic.

    Why are there two reconstructable forms? A number of Oceanic subgroups have both
forms, suggesting that there is/was a functional distinction between them. Several languages
have reflexes of both forms, the distinction between them varying from language to language,
making it impossible to reconstruct the POc contrast between them.


 Nalik (New Ireland) dua-       REFERENCE        duāk    ADDRESS?      (Chinnery 1929)
 Raga (N Vanuatu) tua- sG                        tuaɣa- eG       (Taylor 2008)
 Ninde (C Vanuatu) tua- REFERENCE                tuaʔa ??        (Clark 2009)
 Wayan (W Fiji)    tutua ADDRESS                 -tuka REFERENCE (Pawley & Sayaba 2022)


<
POc *tua- ‘elder s.s. sibling’, {PsG}esC (Milke 1958a: *tuqa)
 Adm:  Mussau         tue-        ‘elder sibling’, {PsG}eC
 NNG:  Lukep (Pono)   tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NNG:  Mindiri        tua-n       ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NNG:  Ulau-Suain     tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NNG:  Yabem          tɪwa-       ‘♂elder brother’, ♂{PsG}eS, FBeS
 PT:   Kilivila       tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’, MZSeC, eGE (Malinowski 1929)
 PT:   Molima         tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’, {PseG}C
 MM:   Tigak          tua-        ‘eldest brother’
 MM:   Barok          to-         ‘s.s. sibling’, {PoG}sCsC
 MM:   Sursurunga     tua-        ‘s.s. sibling’
 SES:  Baegu          (sa)ua-     ‘elder sibling’, {PsG}eC
 SES:  Bauro          -uwa        ‘♀elder sister’ (ka-uwa eZ, wa-uwa eB)
 NCV:  Mwerlap        tuo-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCV:  Lolovoli       tue-        ‘s.s. sibling’
 NCV:  Raga           tua-        ‘s.s. sibling’
 NCV:  Apma           tua-        ‘elder sibling’
 NCV:  Ninde          tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’, FFF, ♂FMBS, ♂MFMBS
 NCV:  Uripiv         tua-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’, HB
PSV *-tua- ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Lynch 2001b)
 SV:   Kwamera        p-rea-      ‘elder s.s. sibling’, {PsG}eC
 SV:   Anejom         e-twa-      ‘s.s. sibling’, FBsC
Proto New Caledonia *tuka- ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 NCal: Nêlêmwa        kʰia-       ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Fwâi           hie-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Cèmuhî         cuɔ-        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 NCal: Kwênyii        tē-         ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 Fij:  Wayan          tutua       ‘elder s.s. sibling’, eG, FeBC
>

                                                                            Kinship terms 115

<
POc *tuaka- ‘elder s.s. sibling, elder parallel cousin’ (ACD; Milke 1958a: *tuqaka)
  NNG:  Tuam               toɣa-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  NNG:  Bam                tikua          ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (metathesis: POc *tuaka > *takua)
  NNG:  Manam              toʔa           ‘elder sibling’, PGeC
  NNG:  Kis                təkua          ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (metathesis: POc *tuaka > *takua)
  MM:   Bola               tuka-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  MM:   Nalik              duāk           ‘♀sister’ (Chinnery 1929)
  MM:   Varisi             toɣa-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’, PGseC
  SES:  Bugotu             toɣa-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Ivens 1940a)
  SES:  Lengo              toha-          ‘♂elder brother’, ♂{PoG}eS
  SES:  Kwaio              oʔa-           ‘elder brother’
  NCV:  Raga               tuaɣa-         ‘elder sibling’, MP
  NCV:  Araki              roha-          ‘elder brother’, WZeH, HeB
  NCV:  Vao                toɣa-          ‘elder sibling’, {PsG}eC, {HeB}
  NCV:  Big Nambas         tuɣa-          ‘♀elder sister’, ♀FeBD, ♀HeBW
  NCV:  Ninde              tuaʔa-         ‘elder brother’
  NCal: Fwâi               hiohã          ‘♀elder sister’
  NCal: Iaai               tuha-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  NCal: Nengone            tok            ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  Fij:  Wayan              tuka-          ‘elder s.s. sibling’, eG, FeBC
  Fij:  Bauan              tuaka-         ‘elder s.s. sibling’
PPn *tuaka-, *tuakana ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:   Samoan             tuaʔa(a)       ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Pratt 1862)
  Pn:   Rapanui            tuakana        ‘elder brother, elder cousin’ (Churchill 1912)
  Pn:   Māori              tuaka-na       ‘elder sibling’, PGeC
  Pn:   Tahitian           tuaʔana        ‘elder sibling’ parent’s elder sibling’s child’
  Pn:   Hawaiian           (kai)kuaʔana   ‘elder sibling’ elder cousin’
>

116 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


    With the exception of Bugotu kaka-, a Maringe loan, Oceanic reflexes of *kaka ‘elder s.s.
sibling’ are confined to WOc languages, but *kaka can be safely assigned to POc because it
is clearly inherited from PMP without change in meaning.

    There is also a small cognate set reflecting *kaka but denoting a parent’s o.s. sibling
(§2.4.1.2.4). It is not clear how, if at all, this is related to the set below.

<
PAn *kaka ‘elder sibling’ (ACD)
PMP *kaka ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (ACD)
POc *kaka ‘elder s.s. sibling (ADDR), elder parallel cousin (ADDR)’ (Milke 1958a)
  NNG: Gitua          kaka        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  NNG: Mindiri        kak         ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  NNG: Manam          aʔa         ‘elder sibling’
  NNG: Yabem          kaka        ‘elder s.s. sibling’
  PT:  Sudest         ɣaɣa-       ‘s.s. sibling’
  PT:  Sinaugoro      kaka-       ‘elder (s.s.?) sibling’
  PT:  W Motu         kaka-       ‘elder s.s. sibling’, PGeC (Groves 1958; Lister-Turner & Clark 1954)
  PT:  Roro           ʔaʔa-       ‘elder sibling’, PeGC
  MM:  Babatana       kaka        ‘elder sibling’
  MM:  Kubokota       kaka        ‘elder (s.s.?) sibling’
  MM:  Kokota         kaka        ‘elder sibling’, PP
cf. also
  SES: Bugotu         kaka         ‘elder sibling’ (Maringe loan) (Ivens 1940a)
>

    As Marck (1996:223–226) notes and discusses, there are two competing forms for PPn
‘elder s.s. sibling’: *tuaka-, *tuakana (above) and *toqakete (below).The data require the
reconstruction of both. PPn *tuaka-, *tuakana must be reconstructed on the basis of external
evidence, and the innovatory *toqakete on the basis of the reflexes listed below. Their
reflexes give us no clue as to why both terms occurred.

    Clark (1980) notes that in non-Eastern Polynesian languages, reflexes of PPn *taqokete
have the meaning ‘elder s.s. sibling’, but in EPn languages, this shifts to ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’,
replacing PPn *maqā (§2.4.2.2).

<
PPn *taqokete ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
Proto Tongic *taqokete ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tongan         taʔokete         ‘elder s.s. sibling’, {PesG}sC (Völkel 2015)
  Pn: Niue           taokete          ‘elder s.s. sibling, elder s.s. cousin’
PNPn *taqo-kete ‘s.s. sibling’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tuvalu         takete           ‘s.s. sibling’
  Pn: East Futunan   taʔokete         ‘s.s. sibling’ (Biggs in POLLEX)
  Pn: Rennellese     taʔokete         ‘elder s.s. sibling’, {MBeS}, FPGSCesC
  Pn: Pukapuka       taokete          ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
Proto Eastern Polynesian *taqokete ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Rapanui        taʔokete         ‘sibling-in-law’ (Fuentes 1960)
  Pn: Tahitian       tauete           ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Pn: Marquesan      toete            ‘s.s. sibling-in-law, father’s sister’s husband’
  Pn: Māori          taokete          ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Pn: Hawaiian       (kai)koʔeke      ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
>

                                                                                   Kinship terms 117


2.4.1.5.3      Opposite-sex sibling

The vast majority of Oceanic languages make a distinction between s.s. siblings and o.s.
siblings. A language has either one term for all o.s. siblings, or two terms, one for ‘♀brother’
and one for ‘♂sister’. As the tabulation below shows, the s.s. sibling terms described in the
previous two subsections make an implicit statement about the referent’s sex, that it is the same
as EGO’s. They may or may not distinguish between younger and older.

__table__
                                          younger/elder?         female/male?
           s.s. sibling term              yes or no              same as EGO
           Type A o.s. sibling term       mostly no              opposite to EGO
           Type B o.s. sibling term       no                     opposite to EGO + ALTER’s sex

O.s. sibling terms almost never make a younger/elder distinction. They make an implicit
statement about the referent’s sex (Types A and B), and Type B also redundantly specifies
ALTER’s sex explicitly. This has the effect that a female EGO uses one term for an o.s. sibling,
and a male EGO uses another term.

    There is evidence that PMP had Type A o.s. sibling terms, which Blust (1994) reconstructs
as *betaw ‘♂sister’, *ñaRa ‘♀brother’. Both terms are reflected in various WMP and CMP
languages, but not in EMP (SHWNG and Oceanic). Instead, EMP languages have either Type
A terms or they have Type B terms that reflect PMP *maRuqanay ‘male, man, husband’ and
*babinahi ‘female, woman, wife’. Their POc reflexes are respectively *mʷaqane and *papine
(vol.5:50–55).

    This raises two questions. First, how did this come about? And second, how did POc
speakers know whether a term referred to someone’s spouse or to someone’s sibling?

    Answering the second question first, PEMP and POc distinguished between direct
possession, whereby the possessed noun took a suffix indicating the person and number of
the possessor, and indirect possession, where the possessor suffix was attached to a separate
classifier morpheme (Lichtenberk 1985). Stress shifted one mora to the right when a single-
mora suffix was added.34 The o.s. sibling terms were directly possessed, the spouse terms
indirectly. Hence, for example, POc *papiné-gu ‘my sister’ contrasted with *ná-gu papíne
‘my wife’ (where *na- is a classifier).

__table__
                                             male o.s. sibling       female o.s. sibling
                  WMP:       Sangir          mahuane                 bawine
                             Tae’            anak-muane              anak-dara
                  CMP:       Kambera         ana-mini                ana-wini
                             Hawu            na mone                 na weni
                             Leti            nara muani              nara puate
                             Paulohi         leu manawa              leu pipina

[34] On the reconstruction of POc stress, see Lynch (2000b).

118 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


    Non-EMP data discussed by Blust (1994) and tabulated below enable us to answer the
first question. These are terms which, Blust argues, did not yet exist in PMP but later replaced
reflexes of *betaw and *ñaRa. Except for Sangir, all the tabulated terms have two elements,
the first denoting an o.s. sibling, the second the sex of the referent. In Sangir the first element
is missing, i.e. it behaves like POc. Of the second elements, all in the ‘male o.s. sibling’
column reflect PMP *maRuqanay, and all except Tae’ and Leti in the ‘female o.s. sibling’
column reflect PMP *babinahi.

    Blust provides evidence that these two-element terms were treated as compounds. There
was no direct/indirect distinction in WMP and some CMP languages, and possession was
direct, i.e. by suffix. In Tae’ (S Sulawesi) there is a contrast between the two constructions
below, from van der Veen (1940:17ff.).

      anak -ku muane         ‘my male child = my son
      child -my male
      anak-muane-na ‘her male o.s. sibling = her brother’
      male.cross.sibling -her

Blust, citing Fischer (1957:5), finds a similar contrast in Kambera between ana-ŋgu mini ‘my
son’ and ana.mini-ŋgu ‘my brother’. Because the sibling terms were compounds, the
possessor suffix was attached to the second element, which reflected PMP *maRuqanay or
*babinahi.

    It is easy to see that the POc o.s. sibling terms *mʷaqane- and *papine- are cognate with
the second element of the terms tabulated above. The first element dropped out, as it had in
Sangir, and the suffix remained. The surviving second element was marked as an o.s. sibling
term by its possessor suffix and right-shifted stress.

    Although many of the reflexes of POc *papine- and *mʷane- below are glossed ‘o.s.
sibling’ one can take this to be an extension of their earlier meanings ‘♂sister’ and ‘♀brother’,
that is, ‘female o.s. sibling’ and ‘male o.s. sibling’. If ‘o.s. sibling’ were their prior meaning,
one would expect a scattering of ‘♂sister’ and ‘♀brother’ in each set, but this is not what is
found.

    Only in one subgroup, NNG, does there seem to have been a relatively early shift of a
reflex *mʷaqane to the generic sense ‘o.s. sibling’.

<
PEMP *babinay ‘♂sister’
  CB: Wandamen           vavi[ni]         ‘♂sister’
POc *papine- ‘♂sister’, ♂female parallel cousin’ (Milke 1958a)
  MM:  Nalik             fafna-           ‘o.s. sibling’, FBoC, ♀FBD, WBW (Chinnery 1929)
  MM:  Tangga            fefne-           ‘o.s. sibling’
  MM:  Patpatar          hahini-          ‘sibling’
  MM:  Halia (Hanahan)   hahina-          ‘o.s. sibling’, PGsC
  MM:  Hahon             wevne-           ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC
  MM:  Torau             aine-            ‘o.s. sibling’
  MM:  Varisi            vavani-          ‘o.s. sibling’, PGoC, EsGE
  MM:  Roviana           vavene-          ‘♂sister’ (Capell 1943)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *vavine- ‘♂sister’
  SES: Bugotu            vavine-          ‘o.s. sibling’ (Bogesi 1948)
  SES: Lengo             vavine-          ‘♂sister’, ♂{PoG}D
  SES: Longgu            vavune-          ‘o.s. sibling’ (Hogbin 1938a)
  SES: ’Are’are          hahone-          ‘o.s. sibling’
  SES: E Arosi           haho-            ‘o.s. sibling’, PGoC
PNCV *vavine- ‘♂sister’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV: Kiai              vavine-          ‘♀sister’ (Lynch 2004)
  NCV: Big Nambas        vən-             ‘♂sister’, ♂{PsG}D
  NCV: Neve’ei           vivinu-          ‘♂sister’, ♂{PsG}D
  NCV: Lewo              vine-            ‘♂sister’
PSV *na-[va]vine- ‘♂sister’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV:  Sye               veven, vevne-    ‘brother, ♂sister’
  SV:  Lenakel           no-uinə-         ‘♂sister’
  Mic: Chuukese          fēfine-          ‘♂sister’, ♂PGD (Goodenough 1951)
  Fij: Rotuman           (sæŋ)vǣvǣne      ‘♀brother’, ♀PGS (Howard 1970)
cf. also:
  SV:  Anejom            n-ataheñ         ‘♂sister’, FBD (< POc *qatapine, vol. 5:56)
>

                                                                                    Kinship terms 119

<
PEMP *muaqanay ‘♀brother’
  CB: Wandamen           muani               ‘♀brother’
POc *mʷaqane- ‘♀brother, ♀male parallel cousin’ (?) (Milke 1968; Milke 1958a: *[m]ane)
  Adm: Baluan            mʷane-              ‘♀brother’, ♀{PsG}S
  NNG: Sio               mane                ‘o.s. sibling’, {PoG}oC
  NNG: Bing              mane                ‘o.s. sibling’ (Lincoln 1978)
  NNG: Sepa              mone                ‘elder sibling’ (Z’graggen 1974a)
  NNG: Ali               məne-               ‘mother’s brother’
Proto Southeast Solomonic *mʷai-mʷane ‘o.s. sibling, cross-sex cross-cousin’
  SES: To’aba’ita        wai-waena           ‘o.s. sibling’, PGoC (fossil -na)
  SES: Lau               wae-                ‘o.s. sibling’
  SES: Kwara’ae          wai                 ‘mother’s brother’, MZH, FZH, ♂ZC, ♂WBC
PNCV *mʷa(qa)ne ‘♀brother’ (Clark 2009:152–153)[35]
  NCV: Akei              mane-               ‘♀brother’
  NCV: N Ambrym          mʷena-              ‘♀brother’ (Guiart 1951)
  NCV: S Paamese         mone-               ‘♀brother’
  NCV: Big Nambas        nn̼ana-            ‘♀brother’
  NCV: Neve’ei           manu-               ‘♀brother’, ♀MZS, ♀FBS
  NCV: Lewo              mʷene-              ‘♀brother’
PSV *[na]mʷane- ‘♀brother’ (Lynch 2001b)
  SV: Sye                man, mano-          ‘♀brother’
  SV: North Tanna        mʷanə-              ‘♀brother’
  SV: Lenakel            man-                ‘♀brother’
>

[35] Clark reconstructs *mʷane in keeping with his conventions, but notes that if there is a Namakir reflex
     (Namakir retains the glottal stop) the reconstruction will be *mʷaqane.

120 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
Proto New Caledonia *mʷane ‘♀brother’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 NCal: Nêlêmwa        mʷãla-          ‘elder brother’
 NCal: Cèmuhî         mʷane-          ‘elder brother’ (archaic; Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 NCal: Iaai           mañi-           ‘o.s. sibling’ (Ray 1917)
PMic *mʷāne- ‘♀brother’
 Mic:  Nauruan        mʷæn            ‘o.s. sibling’ (Hage & Marck 2002)
 Mic:  Kiribati       mʷane           ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC (Lambert 1981)
 Mic:  Marshallese    mmʷahan         ‘♀brother’, ♀HB, ♀ZH, ♂WB (Spoehr 1949a)
 Mic:  Puluwatese     mʷǣne-          ‘♀brother’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic:  Chuukese       mwǣni-          ‘♀brother’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
PCP *ŋʷaqane- ‘♀brother’
 Fij:  Wayan          ŋʷane-          ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC
 Fij:  Bauan          ŋane-           ‘o.s. sibling’
 Fij:  Tavuki         ŋane-           ‘mother’s brother’
cf. also:
 Mic:  Satawalese     mʷæne-nnap      ‘mother’s brother’, MMB, MMZS
 Mic:  Carolinian     mʷǣle-llap      ‘firstborn son, parent’s eldest brother’
 Mic:  Woleaian       mʷāle-nnape     ‘mother’s brother’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic:  Ulithian       |mal lapa-|     ‘mother’s brother’
>

   PPn preposed *tua- to its reflexes of the forms above, giving *tua-fafine and *tua-ŋaqane.
The *tua- element regularly reflects POc *tuRaŋ ‘friend, companion; relative of ego’s
generation’ (pollex; §2.4.1.5.5). Whilst glosses of a few other reflexes of *tuRaŋ mention ‘o.s.
sibling’, as many mention ‘s.s. sibling’. It seems that its denotation has narrowed in various
ways across languages, including to ‘o.s. sibling’ in PPn.

<
PPn *tua-fafine, *tua-fine ‘♂sister’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:    Tongan             tuo-fefine        ‘♂sister’, ♂{PG}D (Völkel 2015)
  Pn:    Tokelau            tua-fafine        ‘♂sister’, ♂{PG}D (Huntsman 1971)
  Pn:    Rennellese         tua-fafine        ‘♂sister’, ♂{PsG}D, ♂F{PsG}CD
  Pn:    Pileni             tʰuohine          ‘♂sister’, ♂PGD
Proto Eastern Polynesian *tua-fine ‘♂sister’(Marck 1996)
  Pn:    Māori              tuahine           ‘♂sister’
  Pn:    Tahitian           tuehine           ‘♂sister’, ♀PGD
  Pn:    Marquesan          tuehine           ‘♂sister, father’s sister’
  Pn:    Hawaiian           kuahine           ‘♂sister’
>
<
PPn *tua-ŋaqane ‘♀brother’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn: Tongan         tuo-ŋaʔane         ‘♀brother’, ♀{PG}S (Völkel 2015)
  Pn: Samoan         tuaŋane            ‘♀brother’, ♀PGS (Williamson 1924, vol 2)
  Pn: Tokelau        tuaŋane            ‘♀brother’, ♀MZS (Macgregor 1937)
  Pn: Rennellese     tuŋaʔane           ‘♀brother’, ♀{PsG}S, ♀F{PsG}CS
  Pn: Pileni         tuoŋane            ‘♀brother’, ♀PGS
  Pn: Pukapuka       tuŋāne             ‘♀brother’ (from Rarotongan)
  Pn: Māori          tuŋane             ‘♀brother’
  Pn: Tahitian       tuʔane             ‘♀brother’, ♀PGS
  Pn: Marquesan      tunane             ‘♀brother’ (dialect variants tukane, tuʔane)
  Pn: Hawaiian       kunane             ‘♀brother’
>

                                                                           Kinship terms 121


    The Chuukic (Mic) set below appears also to be derived in some way from POc
*mʷaqane-. At the end of the *mʷaqane- cognate set above several Chuuukic reflexes are
listed under ‘cf. also’. These items give some indication of how PChk *mʷeŋ[ae]ya
might have arisen. They are compounds consisting of reflexes of POc *mʷaqane-/PMic
*mʷāne-‘♀brother’ and PMic *lapa ‘big’, literally ‘big brother of a woman’, here meaning
‘mother’s brother’. This opens up the possibility that PChk *mʷeŋ[ae]ya ‘♀brother’
reflects earlier ‘small brother of a woman’ or ‘true brother of woman’, but the etymology of
the latter part of the reconstruction, presumably †*ŋ[ae]ya, is unknown.

<
PChk *mʷeŋ[ae]ya ‘♀brother’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Puluwatese       mʷəŋeya-          ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC, ♂ZD, MZDoC, ♀MB
  Mic: Chuukese         mʷoŋeya-          ‘♀brother’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Satawalese       mʷeŋeya-          ‘o.s. sibling’, PGoC, ♂MMZD, ♀MMZCS
  Mic: Woleaian         mʷaŋeya-          ‘o.s. sibling’(Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Sonsorolese      mʷeaŋa-           ‘o.s. sibling’ (Capell 1969)
  Mic: Ulithian         mʷæŋæ-            ‘♀brother’
>

    A distinction was made above between Type B o.s. sibling terms like POc *papine- and
*mʷaqane- that distinguish male and female lexically, and Type A o.s. sibling terms that do
not make this distinction. There is just one Oceanic Type A term with quite widespread
reflexes, and it occurs in two variants, *lopu- and *lipu-. Reflexes are listed below. In some
cases assignment to one or the other variant is difficult.

    The *lopu- set is small and has an odd distribution: New Guinea Oceanic (NNG + PT) and
Kosraean (Mic). Bender et al. (2003a) take Kosraean lɔ, lou- ‘♂sister’ to reflect POc *lopu-.
If they are right, then the reconstruction of POc *lopu- is supported. Otherwise it is
reconstructable only to PNGOc.

    Another small group of possible cognates is given below. Its members are found in
Cenderawasih Bay. Unfortunately, knowledge of CB historical phonology is insufficient for
us to be certain that these are cognates of POc *lopu-. The initial consonant correspondence
regularly reflects PEMP *l-. The loss of *-p- in Ambai, Wooi and Wandamen is expected. Its
loss in Irarutu may be irregular. If these prove to be cognates of putative POc *lopu-, then the
latter can be reconstructed and so can PEMP *ləpu-.

    The *lipu- variant below is reconstructable only to PNGOc. Included here are reflexes of
the form lu-, that have lost the vowel of the initial syllable. These may reflect *lopu-. Vitu
livuka (under ‘cf. also’) is probably borrowed from a NNG language. It reflects *†lipuq: the
regular Vitu reflex would be livu-.

<
POc (?) *lopu- ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC (Milke 1965; Chowning 1991)
 SJ:  Sobei             dafu-            ‘o.s. sibling’, EoG, {PsG}oC, EPGoC
 NNG: Sera              lo(m)            ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Adzera            nafu-            ‘o.s. sibling’, {PsG}oC, {PoG}oC
 PT:  Sudest            louy-            ‘o.s. sibling’
 PT:  Bwaidoga          novu-            ‘o.s. sibling’, PGoC
 PT:  Gapapaiwa         novu             ‘o.s. sibling’
 PT:  ’Auhelawa         lou              ‘o.s. sibling’ (Milke 1965:345 )
PMic *lowu- (?) ‘♂sister’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Kosraean          lɔ, lou-         ‘♂sister’
>

122 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


<
Proto Cenderawasih Bay *ru(i,o)- ‘o.s. sibling’
  CB: Irarutu           rui-                 ‘o.s. sibling’ (van den Berg & Matsumura 2008)
  CB: Ambai             roro-                ‘o.s. sibling’
  CB: Wooi              ra-ruo-              ‘o.s. sibling’ (Sawaki 2016)
  CB: Wandamen          ra-ruo               ‘o.s. sibling’
>

<
PNGOc *lipu- ‘o.s. sibling’ (Chowning 1991)
 NNG: Gitua          livu             ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Mangap         lu-              ‘younger o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Tami           lu, liwu-        ‘♂sister’
 NNG: Maleu          liwa             ‘o.s. sibling’ (Hooley 1971)
 NNG: Lukep (Pono)   lui-             ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Kaulong        e-lu(t)          ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Lamogai        lu-              ‘elder o.s. sibling’ (Ross, fieldnotes)
 NNG: Mangseng       lu-              ‘♂sister’
 NNG: Poeng          liu-             ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Takia          lu-              ‘o.s. sibling, o.s. cross-cousin’
 NNG: Wogeo          lu               ‘o.s. sibling’, FBoC, MZoC
 NNG: Kairiru        lu-              ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Yabem          lù               ‘♀brother’
 NNG: Yabem          lù-ò             ‘♂sister, ♂mother’s sister’s daughter’ (-ò FEM)
 NNG: Numbami        lu-              ‘brother, male cousin’
 NNG: Kapin          li               ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Patep          li               ‘sibling, parallel cousin’
 PT:  Kilivila       |lu- -ta|        ‘o.s. sibling’ (Lawton f.c.)
 PT:  Muyuw          |nu- -t|         ‘o.s. sibling’
 PT:  Misima         nu-              ‘o.s. sibling’
 PT:  Gumawana       niu-             ‘o.s. sibling, o.s. cross-cousin’
cf. also:
 MM:  Vitu           livuka           ‘o.s. sibling’
>

   Marck (1996) reconstructs PPn *kawe ‘o.s. sibling’, but there is no Tongic or external
evidence for it, unless one accepts as external evidence Bauan and Lau Fijian *weka ‘o.s.
sibling’ and posits metathesis. Pawley (1981) does not reconstruct this term. Pawley (pers.
comm.) points out that its reflexes are restricted to Pn outlier languages, so that even a PNPn
reconstruction is insecure.

                                                                               Kinship terms 123

__formgroup__
  Pn: Anuta          kave        ‘o.s. sibling, cross-sex cousin’
  Pn: Tikopia        kave        ‘o.s. sibling’
  Pn: Ifira-Mele     kave        ‘o.s. sibling’
  Pn: Futuna-Aniwa   kave        ‘o.s. sibling, father’s sibling’s cross-sex child’ (Capell 1958)
  Pn: Pileni         kave        ‘s.s. cross-cousin’
  Pn: Takuu          kave        ‘o.s. sibling, o.s. sibling, father’s sibling’s cross-sex child’
  Pn: Nukumanu       kave        ‘o.s. sibling, cross-sex cousin’
  Pn: Luangiua       ʔave        ‘o.s. sibling, cross-sex cousin’
  Pn: Sikaiana       kave        ‘o.s. sibling, cross-sex cousin’

2.4.1.5.4   Cousins

No dedicated terms for cousins are reconstructable. As a consequence of bifurcate merging
(§2.2.1) parallel cousins are treated as s.s. siblings in most Oceanic languages. Some languages
have a dedicated term for ‘cross-cousin’, but the few possible reconstructions take account of
the data for very few languages (less than five).

2.4.1.5.5   Companion, friend, close relative

Milke (1968) glossed PMP *tuRaŋ as ‘companion’. His supporting reflexes not only support
this gloss, but also denote a mixed bag of kin relationships, which, as the listing below shows,
only grows as one casts the net wider. Whereas it is usually possible to attach an
unambiguous gloss to the kinship terms discussed in this chapter, in the case of *tuRaŋ this is
impossible.

<
PMP *tuRaŋ ‘kinsman, relative (undefined)’ (ACD)
POc *tuRaŋ ‘friend, companion; relative of ego’s generation’ (Milke 1968: ‘companion’; ACD: ‘kinsman, relative (undefined)’)
 NNG: Dami             tura         ‘o.s. sibling’
 NNG: Takia            tura-        ‘friend’
 PT:  Wagawaga         tura         ‘friend, spouse’
 PT:  Motu             tura         ‘a friend (of the speaker’s sex)’ (Lister-Turner & Clark 1954)
 MM:  Bola             tura         ‘cross-cousin’ (Goodenough 1997)
 MM:  Nakanai          tula-        ‘co-wife, spouse’s s.s. sibling’
 MM:  Lavongai         tuŋə         ‘older brother’ (archaic); ‘friend’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
 MM:  Tigak            tiga-        ‘s.s. sibling’
 MM:  Barok            tura-        ‘co-husband’
>

   Sense can be made of all this by glossing POc *tuRaŋ ‘friend, companion; relative of
ego’s generation’. It is reasonable to assume that friendships between relatives of the same
generation were normally between relatives for whom friendship was not tabooed, and that
these relations varied somewhat among immediately pre-modern communities.

124 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

: Table 2.15 Glosses attributed to reflexes of *tuRaŋ

__table__
Gloss                                       Gen. s/o Language
friend, companion                           ?    ? Takia, Wagawaga, Lavongai, Raga,
                                                     Paamese, Nokuku, Namakir
s.s. friend                                 ?    s Motu
relative                                    ?    ? Babatana, Roviana, Ughele
G0 relative of speaker’s moiety             ?    ? Tolai (Fingleton 1986)
same-generation relative of opposite moiety 0    ? Nehan
sibling                                     0    ? Merei, Paamese, Namakir
elder sibling                               0    ? Lavongai
s.s. sibling                                0    s Tigak, Tolai, Halia, Raga
cross-cousin                                0    ? Bola, ’Are’are
o.s. sibling                                0    o Dami, Mota, Pn
parent’s s.s. sibling’s spouse’s child      0    ? Kwaio
spouse                                      0    o Wagawaga, Araki
sibling’s spouse                            0    ? Lelepa
elder sibling’s spouse                      0    ? Neve’ei
spouse’s elder sibling                      0    ? Neve’ei
spouse’s s.s. sibling                       0    o Nakanai, Neve’ei
spouse’s o.s. sibling                       0    s Neve’ei
spouse’s s.s. sibling’s spouse              0    s Nakanai
spouse’s o.s. sibling’s spouse              0    o To’aba’ita, Kwara’ae
co-wife                                     0    o Nakanai
co-husband                                  0    o Barok
husbands of two sisters                     0    s Patpatar


2.4.2 In-laws (affinal kin)

Oceanic languages typically have three in-law categories: spouse, sibling-in-law, and
parents- and children-in-law.

2.4.2.1 Spouses: wife and husband

    POc term *qasawa- ‘spouse’ is one of the more widely reflected POc kinship terms, but it
is not reflected in SES languages or in Fiji, where its place is taken by PEOc *wati-.

    A striking feature of the cognate set supporting *qasawa- is the wide variety of forms to
which it has given rise—far more varied than, say, *tama- ‘father’ or *natu- ‘child’.

    However, the reasons for this variety are purely phonological. The form *qasawa- had
three syllables (four or five when a possessor suffix is added), and has been subject to the
Oceanic tendency towards two-syllable roots. The onset consonants of the three syllables are
ones that are unstable in Oceanic. Initial *q- is typically either lost, leading sometimes to loss
of the first syllable, or is strengthened to k-. Intervocalic *-s- easily becomes -z- or -r-, or -h-
and then disappears; in many NNG languages *-s- has become -y-. The syllable *-wa- has
often become -wo-, or, as in Proto New Caledonian *-o-.

                                                                              Kinship terms 125

<
PAn *qasawa ‘spouse’ (ACD)
POc *qasawa- ‘spouse, husband’ (ACD; Milke 1958a: *acawa)
  Adm: Aua               harāu          ‘wife’
  Adm: Baluan            asoa           ‘husband’
  SJ:    Sobei           eso-           ‘spouse’
  SJ:    Bonggo          sua            ‘husband’
  NNG: Tuam              azāwa-, azowa- ‘spouse’
  NNG: Mangap            kusi-          ‘husband, spouse’
  NNG: Sio               kaiwa          ‘spouse ’
  NNG: Maleu             awa            ‘husband’
  NNG: Mindiri           kiuwa          ‘spouse’
  NNG: Takia             iwo-           ‘spouse’
  NNG: Wogeo             yawa-          ‘spouse’
  NNG: Sissano           awua-          ‘spouse’
  NNG: Numbami           asowa          ‘spouse’
Proto Buang *rɣa- ‘husband’
  NNG:  Mapos Buang     rɛɣa-          ‘husband’
  NNG:  Patep           ləya           ‘husband’
  PT:   Sudest          wevo           ‘woman, wife’
  PT:   Kilivila        kʷava          ‘wife’ (Lawton f.c.)
  PT:   Gapapaiwa       kawa           ‘spouse’
  PT:   Sinaugoro       ɣaraɣo-        ‘spouse’
  PT:   Motu            adava          ‘spouse, mother’s brother’ (Seligmann 1910:67)
  MM:   Nakanai         harua          ‘husband’
  MM:   Lavongai        kisŋə          ‘spouse’ (Fast & Fast 1989)
  MM:   Usen Barok      isuo-          ‘spouse’
  MM:   Patpatar        suə-           ‘spouse’
PNCV *asoa- ‘spouse’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV:  Mota            ra-soa-i       ‘spouse’ (ra-: see §2.4.1.2.2)
  NCV:  Raga            ahoa           ‘spouse’
  NCV:  Araki           rua-           ‘spouse’
  NCV:  S Paamese       asō-           ‘spouse’
  NCV:  Port Sandwich   söa-           ‘spouse’
  NCV:  Lewo            o-             ‘spouse: husband, wife’
  SV:   Sye              aso-, ahʷo-   ‘husband’, ♀ZH
Proto New Caledonia *qasao- ‘spouse’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Nêlêmwa        arō-            ‘spouse’
  NCal: Fwâi           kalō-           ‘spouse’
  NCal: Xârâcùù        kʷɛ̄tɔ-          ‘spouse’
  NCal: Iaai           aeã̄-            ‘spouse’
PPn *qahawa-, *qahawana ‘spouse’ (Marck 1996)
PPn *qahawa(n,ŋ)a ‘marry’
  Pn:   Tongan         ʔohoana         ‘spouse’ (archaic; Churchward 1959)
  Pn:   Niuean         hoana           ‘wife, marry’
  Pn:   Samoan         āvā             ‘wife’ (humble term; Milner 1966)
  Pn:   Samoan         āvaŋa           ‘elope’
  Pn:   E Futunan      āvaŋa           ‘spouse, marriage’
  Pn:   E Uvean        avaŋa           ‘spouse, marriage’
  Pn:   Tikopia        āvaŋa           ‘marry’
  Pn:   Takuu          āvana           ‘marriage, be related as husband and wife’
>

126 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
PEOc *wati ‘spouse’ (ACD)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *wati- ‘spouse’
  SES: Tolo              ati-        ‘spouse’
  SES: To’aba’ita        kʷai-       ‘spouse’
  SES: Kwaio             kʷai-       ‘spouse’
  SES: E Arosi           wai-        ‘spouse’
Proto E Fijian *wati- ‘spouse, cross-sex cross-cousin’
  Fij: Tavuki            waci        ‘spouse’
  Fij: Tokatoka          wati-       ‘spouse, cross-sex cross-cousin’
  Fij: Moala             wati-       ‘spouse, s.s. sibling’s spouse, cross-sex cousin’, EoG, E{PsG}oC, sGEoG, sGE{PsG}oC
>

    Did POc have terms for ‘wife’ and ‘husband’? Tentatively, yes, POc *pine meant ‘wife’,
but the data do not suggest a corresponding ‘husband’ term.

    Oceanic languages tend to use reflexes of POc *papine ‘woman, female’ and *mʷaqane
‘man, male’ for ‘wife’ and ‘husband’. These terms are reconstructed in vol.5 (pp50–55) and
discussed in their kinship context in §2.4.1.5.3. Nonetheless, Oceanic languages have
sometimes innovated terms that render ‘wife’ and ‘woman’ distinct. At least in one instance,
this tendency was already manifest earlier than POc. PMP had a number of forms derived
from the root *bahi. It was perhaps originally a stative verb ‘be female’, as many of its
derivations include the infix *<in>, one of several PAn affixes that among other things formed
nouns from verbs. In PMP *b<in>ahi ‘woman, wife’ and *ba-b<in>ahi ‘female, woman’ are
both attested. The latter was ancestral to POc *papine ‘woman, female’. PMP *b<in>ahi gave
rise to PEMP *b<in>ai and POc *pine ‘woman, wife’, much more sparsely reflected that
*papine. The difference in usage seems to have been present at least by PEMP. The cognate
set supporting PEMP *b<in>ai and POc *pine is below.

<
PAn/PMP *b<in>ahi ‘woman, wife’ (ACD)
PEMP *b<in>ai ‘woman, wife’
  RA: Misool             pin                  ‘woman, wife’
  CB: Ambai              bine                 ‘wife’
  CB: Wandamen           vinie                ‘wife’
  CB: Warembori          e-vin(do)            ‘wife’
POc *pine ‘woman, wife’ (ACD: ‘female’)
  NNG: Barim              vne                ‘wife’
  NNG: Adzera             fini-              ‘wife’, WZ, ♂BW, ♂PGSW
  NNG: Mapos Buang vəne                      ‘wife’
  NNG: Yanta              vni                ‘wife’
Proto Solomons Outlier *fine ‘female relative’
  Pn:    Ifira-Mele       fine               ‘sister-in-law ’
  Pn:    W Futuna         fine               ‘wife, woman’
  Pn:    Pileni           hine               ‘daughter’
>

                                                                                   Kinship terms 127


    The cognate set below is a further demonstration of a split that has provided separate
‘wife’ terms. The pre-POc origin of POc *kawe(C) ‘woman’ is unknown. Initial n- occurs in a
number of languages where initial *k- is regularly lost and accretion of the POc article *na is
attested.36 Final Proto Buang *-h reflects one of POc *-k, *-q and *-R. It is possible that there
are chance lookalikes in this set, as the medial consonant is problematic. POc *-w- is
reconstructed on the basis of Adm, NCV and NCal languages. The NNG, MM and SES items
reflect *-p-.

    The NNG terms mean ‘woman’ and contrast with the terms for ‘wife’ above. In Adm
languages and Kokota (MM, Santa Isabel) and in SES languages the terms mean ‘wife’ or
‘spouse’.

<
POc *kawe(C) ‘woman, wife’ (?) (Lynch 2004: PSOc *nawe ‘wife’)
PEAd *n-awe- ‘spouse’
  Adm: Lele               n-awe-         ‘spouse’ (reciprocal)
  Adm: Drehet             n-ewe          ‘spouse’
  NNG: Yabem              àwɪ            ‘woman; wife’
  NNG: Wampar             afi            ‘woman’
  NNG: Maralango          kafe           ‘woman’
  NNG: Hote               avi            ‘woman’
Proto Buang *avɛh ‘woman’
  NNG: Mapos Buang        aveʁ           ‘woman’
  NNG: Patep              veɣ            ‘woman’
  MM: Kokota              n-afe-         ‘spouse, marriage partner of either sex’
  SES: Lau                ʔafe           ‘wife, married woman’
  SES: Kwara’ae           ʔafe           ‘wife’
  NCV: Nese               n-au           ‘wife’ (Lynch 2004)
  NCV: Big Nambas         n-au-          ‘spouse’
  NCal: Nemi              nn̥ōe-        ‘wife’ (Lynch 2004)
  NCal: Fwâi              nn̥ōe-        ‘wife’ (Lynch 2004)
>

[36] Of the languages here, *na- accretion is attested in the Admiralties (Ross 1988:340), in Santa Isabel
     including Kokota (Ross 1988:312) and on Malekula including Big Nambas. Attestations of accretion in
     New Caledonia are not known to us.

128 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


2.4.2.2 Siblings-in-law

The English terms ‘sister-in-law’ and ‘brother-in-law’ are ambiguous. A ‘sister-in-law’ is
either one’s spouse’s sister or one’s brother’s wife, and a ‘brother-in-law’ is one’s spouse’s
brother or one’s sister’s husband. Terms in Oceanic languages sometimes have the same
ambiguity, and are accordingly glossed ‘sister-in-law’ or ‘brother-in-law’. In other instances
the gloss is more specific, e.g. ‘spouse’s brother’. Often, though, as with siblings, a term
indicates the in-law’s sex relative to ego, i.e. ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (♀HZ, ♀BW, ♂WB, ♂ZH;
more briefly EsG, GsE) or, less frequently, ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’ (♀HB, ♀ZH, ♂WZ, ♂BW;
i.e., EoG, GoE).37

    The most widely reflected term for a sibling-in-law is POc *ipaR, *ipa-, primarily ‘♀sister-
in-law’ and more broadly ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’. The two Kimbe reflexes, Bola and Nakanai,
regularly reflect POc *q-, but there is no other evidence for an initial consonant.

<
PMP *hipaR ‘sibling-in-law (probably of the same sex only)’ (ACD)
POc *ipaR, *ipa- ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (ACD)
  Adm: Mussau               ie-                 ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Adm: Baluan               ipa                 ‘♀sister-in-law’
  SJ:   Sobei               ifa-                ‘younger sibling-in-law’, PGsCE, EPGsC
  NNG: Tuam                 iva-                ‘sibling-in-law’
  NNG: Mangap               iwa-                ‘sibling-in-law’
  NNG: Tami                 iu, iwa-            ‘brother-in-law’
  NNG: Takia                iwa-                ‘spouse’s o.s. sibling’, {PoG}CsE
  NNG: Manam                ia                  ‘sister-in-law’
  NNG: Yabem                yàʔ                 ‘spouse’s brother’
  NNG: Numbami              iwa                 ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  NNG: Adzera               afaʔ                ‘♀sibling’s spouse’, ♀PGSW, HZ
  NNG: Hote                 ya-                 ‘spouse’s father, daughter’s husband’
  PT:   Kilivila            |iva- -ta|          ‘♀sister-in-law’ (Malinowski 1929)
  PT:   Iduna               ɣiva-               ‘♀sister-in-law’
  PT:   Tawala              iwa-                ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  PT:   Sinaugoro           iva-                ‘sibling-in-law’
  PT:   W Motu              iha-                ‘sibling-in-law’, PGSW (Groves 1958)
  MM: Bola                  ɣiva-               ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  MM: Nakanai               hiva-               ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  MM: E Kara                ifa-                ‘father’s sister’s child’
  MM: Tangga                ifa-                ‘♀sister-in-law’, ♀FZD
  MM: Torau                 ia-                 ‘♀sister-in-law’
  MM: Varisi                iva-                ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  MM: Maringe               iva                 ‘spouse’s sibling’ (Bugotu loan)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *iva- ‘♀sister-in-law, s.s. sibling-in-law’
  SES: Bugotu               iva-                ‘sibling-in-law’ (Ivens 1940a)
  SES: To’aba’ita           θa-ifa-             ‘♀husband’s sister’
 SES: Kwaio                ifa-                 ‘sibling-in-law’
 SES: E Arosi              iha-                 ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
 SES: Owa                  -efa-                ‘spouse’s brother’ (wa-efa- EB, ka-efa- EZ)
Proto New Caledonia *iva- ‘♀sister-in-law, s.s. sibling-in-law’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
 NCal: Fwâi                ive-                 ‘♀spouse’s sister’
 NCal: Cèmuhî              iɛ-                  ‘spouse’s sister’
 NCal: Drehu               ie                   ‘spouse’s sibling’
 Fij:    Nadrogā           iva-                 ‘♀brother’s wife’
 Fij:    Wayan             iva-                 ‘son-in-law’
 Fij:    Tokatoka          ra-iva-              ‘♀sister-in-law’
>

[37] The notations GsE ‘sibling’s spouse, of same sex as ego’ and oGE ‘o.s. sibling’s spouse’ are equivalent,
     as are G’E and sGE. Both variants are used here, depending on context.

                                                                                   Kinship terms 129

     In PPn the term above was replaced by *maqā.

<
PPn *maqā ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (Pawley 1981:284)
  Pn:   Tongan             maʔa             ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:   Tokelau            mā               ‘sister’s husband’, ♂PGDH
  Pn:   Rennellese         maʔā             ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Pn:   Anuta              ma               ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Pn:   Pileni             mā               ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’
  Pn:   Sikaiana           mā               ‘spouse’s sibling’
>

   PPn *maqā was in turn displaced in Proto Eastern Polynesian by the reflex of PPn *taqokete ‘elder s.s.
sibling’, which in EPn languages shifted to ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ (§2.4.1.5.2).

   There are seeming gaps in the system of in-law terms. One might expect a specific term
for ‘♂brother-in-law’. Oceanic languages often have such a term, but only local
reconstructions can be made.

   Intriguing is the fact is that there are no NCV reflexes of POc *ipa- and no replacement
term is reflected across the archipelago, but there is a possible cognate set for ‘♂brother-in-
law’, stretching across north and central Vanuatu. Clark (2009) reconstructs PNCV *tauwia,
but Lynch (2004) divides the set in two, *taku and *tauwia, to account for the presence or
absence of reflexes of *-k-. The division is accepted here, with the rider that, given their
similarity of form and identical meaning, the two sets may have a shared history. The form
*tau-wia only occurs in Central Vanuatu languages.38 It is clearly a compound. The second
element is wia ‘good’ (vol.5:596–597). The first is perhaps reflected in Lewo i-rau and
Nguna tā, both glossed ‘friend’ (Clark 2009).

<
Proto Remote Oceanic *taku ‘brother-in-law’ (Lynch 2004: NCV)
 NCV: Akei               tau-             ‘♂brother-in-law’
 NCV: Araki              rahu-            ‘♂brother-in-law’, HZH
 NCV: Lonwolwol          tovʸa-           ‘♂wife’s brother’
 NCV: S Paamese          tau(letu)        ‘♂brother-in-law’
 NCV: Vao                tahu-            ‘♂brother-in-law’
 NCV: Nese               taɣ-             ‘brother-in-law’ (Crowley 2006d)
 NCV: Tape               e-tɣa-           ‘brother-in-law’ (Crowley 2006b)
 Fij: Wayan            -daku              ‘wife’s sister, husband’s brother’
>

[38] Reflexes of *taku- are found in North Vanuatu languages but overlap with *tau-wia in Malakula.

130 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck

<
Proto Central Vanuatu *tau-wia ‘brother-in-law’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV: Atchin          tauwen             ‘husband, sister’s husband’, ♂DH
  NCV: Uripiv          tau-               ‘♂wife’s brother’
  NCV: Port Sandwich   tauia-             ‘♂daughter’s husband’
  NCV: Nguna           (ana)tawia-        ‘♂brother-in-law’
  NCV: Lelepa          tawina             ‘♂brother-in-law’ (Guiart 1964)
>

   One would also expect a POc term for ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’. A little digging reveals that
*taci- ‘(younger) s.s. sibling’ (§2.4.1.5.1) also applied to the spouse of *taci- (sGE).
Somewhat counter-intuitively, this means that its secondary sense is ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’, also
including ego’s spouse’s siblings of the opposite sex to ego (EoG). There are also a few
instances of *tua- ‘elder s.s. sibling’ (§2.4.1.5.2) used in the same way—’few’ because they
only occur in languages that make an age distinction among s.s. siblings. In the listings
below, glosses that exemplify ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’ are placed before a semicolon, other
glosses after it. Mussau tasi- has only the ‘sibling-in-law’ sense, having lost the ‘sibling’
sense.

<
POc *taci- ‘o.s. sibling-in-law, younger than ego’; ‘younger s.s. sibling’
 Adm: Mussau           tasi-            ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’
 Adm: Lou              teri-            ‘spouse’s s.s. sibling, younger than ego’, esG, {PsG}seC (Mead 1934:342–344)
 NNG: Wab              te-u             ‘wife’s sister, younger than ego’
 NNG: Bing             te-              ‘wife’s sister, younger than ego’
 NNG: Takia            tei-             ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’, sG
 NNG: Yabem            lasi-ò           ‘wife’s sister, younger than ego’, ♂yZ, {PoG}yD, WFGyD, EMByD, ♀WMZyD
 NNG: Mapos Buang      ari-maluʁ        ‘♀brother-in-law’, (♀?)PGCH (maluʁ ‘male’)
 NNG: Mapos Buang      ari-aveʁ         ‘♂sister-in-law’, (♂?)PGCW (aveh ‘female’)
 PT:  Dobu             tasi-            ‘s.s. sibling’s spouse’, sG, {PsG}sC, {PsG}sCE, {PoG}sCE
 MM:  Bali-Vitu        tazi             ‘wife’s sister; elder s.s. sibling’, {PoG}sC
 NCV: Araki            ve-rasi-         ‘brother’s wife, younger than ego’, yZ, WByW
 NCV: Vao              tehi-            ‘♂younger brother’s wife, ♀husband’s brother, younger than ego’, yG, {PsG}yC, ♂SSS
 Pn:  Tokelau          taina            ‘s.s. sibling’s spouse’, sG, {PsG}sC, {PoG}sC, EoGE (Huntsman 1971)
 Pn:  Tuvalu           taina            ‘spouse’s s.s. sibling’, EoGE
 Pn:  Anuta            taina            ‘s.s. sibling’s spouse’, sG, PGsC
 Pn:  Tikopia          taina            ‘s.s. sibling’s spouse’, sG
 Pn:  Nukumanu         taina            ‘spouse’s s.s. sibling’
 Pn:  Luangiua         kaiŋa            ‘o.s. sibling-in-law’, sG, PGsC, EoGE
>

                                                                               Kinship terms 131


   Whilst Lou tio- below pairs with teri- above, Kilivila tua- below pairs with nothing above,
because Kilivila does not reflect *taci- but has replaced it with bʷada- ‘younger s.s. sibling,
younger o.s. sibling’s spouse, ♂wife’s younger sister’.

<
POc *tua- ‘o.s. sibling-in-law, older than ego’; ‘elder s.s. sibling’
 Adm: Lou          tio-       ‘spouse’s s.s. sibling, older than ego; elder s.s. sibling’, {PsG}seC (Mead 1934:342–344)
 PT:  Kilivila     tua-       ‘elder o.s. sibling’s spouse’, esG, MZseC (Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury 1965)
>

2.4.2.3 Parents- and children-in-law

Many Oceanic languages class parents-in-law and children-in-law together, and terms are
used reciprocally. Perhaps because this does not distinguish between generations, languages
quite often extend a consanguineal term to include an in-law category. Thus the term for a
blood-relative is extended to include the equivalent relative of one’s spouse, so that reflexes
of POc *tama- ‘father’ and *tina-‘mother’ are also used for one’s father-in-law and mother-
in-law respectively in Yapese, Manam, Chuukic languages and Rennellese (as are the
corresponding terms in many English-speaking communities). Similarly, reflexes of POc
*natu- ‘child’ are sometimes used for a child’s spouse, for example in Raga and Chuukese.
Reflexes of POc *ipa- ‘s.s. sibling-in-law’ are extended to include other in-law generations in
a number of languages along the north coast of New Guinea (perhaps a result of contact).
Reflexes of PPn *matuqa ‘parent’ are extended to parent-in-law in Anuta, Tikopia and
Tongareva.

    Sometimes a language has a single term for ‘mother’s brother’ and ‘♂father-in-law’, due
originally to asymmetric cross-cousin marriage (§2.4.1.2.5). A more complex example
diachronically is found in southern New Caledonia. In Drubea and Kwênyii tũ̃-, reflecting
POc *tubu- ‘grandparent’ denotes ‘mother’s brother’ and ‘♂father-in-law’. This reflects two
extensions. First, *tubu- reflexes were extended in meaning to include MB (§2.4.1.2.5). Then
the term for MB was extended to EF.

    These extensions are found in the midst of reflexes of two terms, POc *rawa- and PEOc
*puŋao- ‘parent- or child-in-law’. Reflexes of POc *rawa- are found throughout most of
WOc, with just a few popping up in NCV and NCal. Reflexes of *puŋao- are found
throughout EOc. Thus reflexes of *rawa- and *puŋao- are almost in complementary
distribution.[39]

    There is little doubt that *rawa- was the POc term for ‘parent- or child-in-law’,40 both
because it has a sprinkling of reflexes in SOc and because there is a CB cognate.

<
PEMP *r(a,e)wa ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  CB:   Wandamen       rewa             ‘son’s wife’
POc *rawa ‘parent- or child-in-law’ (Milke 1965: PNGOc)
  SJ:   Sobei          dawo-            ‘parent-in-law’, EPG, EPGE, CE
  NNG:  Tuam           rawa-            ‘parent-in-law’
  NNG:  Mangap         rwo-             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NNG:  Sio            lawa             ‘child-in-law’
  NNG:  Tami           lau, laua-       ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NNG:  Lukep (Pono)   rō-              ‘parent-in-law’
  NNG:  Poeng          lao-             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NNG:  Takia          rao-             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NNG:  Manam          rawa             ‘parent-in-law’, E{PsG}
  NNG:  Yabem          lawa-            ‘father- or son-in-law, male affines of father’s and great-grandfather’s generations’
  NNG:  Yabem          lawa-ò           ‘mother- or daughter-in-law, female affines of mother’s and great-grandmother’s generations’
  NNG:  Numbami        lawa-            ‘father-in-law, daughter’s husband’
  PT:   Misima         yawa-            ‘father-in-law, daughter’s husband’
  PT:   Kilivila       yawa-            ‘parent- or child-in-law’, sGCE (Lawton f.c.)
  PT:   Dobu           lawa-            ‘mother-in-law, son’s wife’
  PT:   Iduna          lawa-            ‘wife’s parent, child-in-law’
  PT:   Gapapaiwa      rawa             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  PT:   Tawala         lago-            ‘cross-sex parent-in-law’
  PT:   Tubetube       rawa             ‘spouse’s sibling’
  PT:   W Motu         rava-            ‘parent- or child-in-law’, E{PsG}, GEC, EPP, CCE (Groves 1958)
  MM:   Vitu           rava-            ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  MM:   Bulu           lava             ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  MM:   Bola           lavo             ‘parent-in-law’
  MM:   Nakanai        loa              ‘wife’s parent, son-in-law’
  MM:   Tinputz        noa-             ‘mother-in-law’
  MM:   Torau          roa-             ‘wife’s parent, daughter’s husband’, ZH
  MM:   Varisi         rava-            ‘parent- or child-in-law’, GCE
  MM:   Roviana        roa-             ‘parent-in-law’ (Capell 1943)
  NCV:  Big Nambas     rawa-            ‘parent-in-law’
  NCV:  Mota           rowoa-           ‘♀sister’s husband’, ♀ZHS, ♀HGS (Vienne 1984)
  NCV:  Vao            rava-            ‘♀sister-in-law’
  NCal: Paicî          tʌ̄̃               ‘parent- or child-in-law’
>


[39] Chowning (1991) thought they were complementary, as she did not have access to the NCV and NCal
     reflexes.

[40] Rather than *puŋao- (Pawley 1981).

132 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   The term *puŋao- almost replaced *rawa- in EOc languages, although it is rare in NCV
languages. In PPn it split into the expected reflex *fuŋao-na, but with its meaning restricted to
‘child-in-law’, and PPn *fuŋao-ai ‘parent-in-law’.

<
PEOc *puŋao- ‘parent- or child-in-law’ (Chowning 1991; Milke 1958a: POc *puŋo)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *vuŋao- ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  SES: Bugotu           vuŋao          ‘parent-in-law’ (Bogesi 1948)
  SES: Lengo            vuŋau-         ‘parent-in-law, ♂child-in-law’, ♂GCE, ♂FZCCE
  SES: To’aba’ita       fuŋao          ‘daughter’s husband’, GDH, ZH, PZH (appears to mean ‘male in-law of any generation’)
  SES: Kwara’ae         fuŋa           ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  SES: E Arosi          huŋo-          ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NCV: Araki            vuŋŋo-         ‘mother-in-law’, MBW
Proto North New Caledonia *pmʷao- ‘parent- or child-in-law’ (Ozanne-Rivierre 2000)
  NCal: Nêlêmwa         mō-            ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NCal: Fwâi            fʷã̄-           ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NCal: Cèmuhî          mʷā-           ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  NCal: Iaai            ũŋo-           ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  Fij:  Wayan           vuŋa-          ‘mother- or daughter-in-law’
  Fij:  Tokatoka        vuŋo-          ‘parent- or child-in-law’
PPn *fuŋao, *fuŋaona ‘child-in-law’ (Marck 1996)
  Pn:   Niue            fiŋona         ‘child-in-law’
  Pn:   Tuvalu          fuŋaona        ‘child-in-law’ (archaic)
  Pn:   Rennellese      huŋa           ‘parent- or child-in-law’, BDH, BSW, ZSW
  Pn:   Anuta           puŋona         ‘parent- or child-in-law’
  Pn:   Tikopia         foŋona         ‘child-in-law’
  Pn:   Pileni          huŋo-          ‘child-in-law’
  Pn:   Takuu           hinaona        ‘parent- or child-in-law’, sGsCE, {GoC}E
  Pn:   Pukapuka        unaoŋa         ‘child-in-law’
  Pn:   Rapanui         hunoŋa         ‘child-in-law’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Māori           hunaoŋa        ‘child-in-law’ (metathesis)
  Pn:   Tahitian        hunoʔa         ‘child-in-law’ (metathesis)
  Pn:   Hawaiian        hūnōna         ‘child-in-law’, EGC
>

                                                                        Kinship terms 133

<
PPn *fuŋao-ai ‘parent-in-law’ (Pawley 1981:284; Marck 1996)
  Pn: Niue           |(matua) fuŋavai|  ‘parent-in-law’ (matua ‘parent’)
  Pn: Rennellese     huŋabai            ‘parent-in-law’
  Pn: Pileni         ŋʰovae             ‘parent-in-law’
  Pn: Māori          huŋarei            ‘parent-in-law’ (-r-for †-v-)
>

   Neither *rawa- nor *puŋao- is reflected in Adm languages. Instead, the term for ‘parent-
or child-in-law’ is *(ñ,n)ana, identical in form with the POc address term for
‘mother’ (§2.4.1.2.2). Whether there is a historical connection between the two terms is not
clear: this may be a chance resemblance. The gloss ‘parent- or child-in-law’ is shown with a
question-mark because none of the reflexes has this range of meaning.

<
PAdm *(ñ,n)ana ‘parent- or child-in-law’ (?)
  Adm: Baluan        nana-          ‘parent-in-law’
  Adm: Lou           nana-          ‘father- or son-in-law’
  Adm: Lele          nono           ‘father- or son-in-law’, MMBDH, EFZH (Mead 1934:345–347)
  Adm: Loniu         ñana           ‘father- or son-in-law’
  Adm: Nyindrou      ñana-          ‘father- or child-in-law’
>

134 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


   The fact that neither *rawa- nor *puŋao- has many reflexes in NCV languages was noted
above. Instead, there are reflexes of PNCV *bʷalika ‘parent- or child-in-law’. One apparent
external cognate is found, To’aba’ita kʷaliʔa-, listed under ‘cf.also’ because its gloss, although
a kinship term, is quite different from those of its NCV cognates.

<
PNCV *bʷalika ‘parent- or child-in-law’ (Clark 2009: ‘affine’)
 NCV: Loh                kʷiliga           ‘♀father- or son-in-law’, ♀ZDH, ♀HFB
 NCV: Mota               kʷaliɣa           ‘♂parent- or child-in-law’, WPG, ZCE (Vienne 1984)
 NCV: Raga               bʷaliɣa           ‘♂father- or son-in-law’
 NCV: Kiai               palia-            ‘father-in-law, son-in-law’
 NCV: Kiai               ve-palia-         ‘mother-in-law’ (ve- FEM)
 NCV: Araki              paliha-           ‘♂father- or son-in-law’
 NCV: Araki              ve-paliha-        ‘♂mother-in-law’ (ve- FEM)
 NCV: Big Nambas         ð̼lia-             ‘mother-in-law’
 NCV: Uripiv             pʷile-            ‘father or mother-in-law’
 NCV: Naman              balɣə-            ‘wife’s father’
 NCV: Port Sandwich      vilax             ‘daughter-in-law’
cf. also:
 SES: To’aba’ita       kʷaliʔa-          ‘member of grandparent or grandchild generation and beyond’, MG, FZ, GC
>

2.5 Marriage

There are a number of generalisations about Oceanic marriage that emerge from dictionaries
and ethnographies. Early Oceanic societies probably had moieties, and a person was
constrained to marry someone from the opposite moiety. Often there was a preference for that
person to be a cross-cousin. Sister exchange was also evidently practised. A number of
languages have a verb meaning ‘marry out of order’, i.e. marry someone of one’s own moiety
or division. If a marriage was deemed proper, then the man’s family would pay a negotiated
brideprice for his bride. Many languages have a term for ‘co-wife’, pointing to polygyny.

   Reconstructable terms are disappointingly few, perhaps because these matters were
referred to by idioms. ‘Shake hands’ and ‘take a woman’ are quite widespread Oceanic
idioms for ‘marry’. There are, however, two reconstructable verbs for ‘marry’.

   The first of these has POc *qasawa ‘spouse’ as its root (cf §2.4.2.1). It is evident from
ACD data that cognate verbs also occur in a number of non-Oceanic languages. However, the
reconstruction is questionable, as it is plausible that such a term was invented on various
occasions during the spread of Oceanic languages into the Pacific. Indeed, the Pn terms
below retain the PPn suffix *-na which occurred on inalienably possessed kinship nouns.

<
POc *qasawa ‘marry’ (?)
 Adm: Lou              asɔ                ‘marry’
 Adm: Nyindrou         esou               ‘marry’
 PT:   Ubir            yawa-n             ‘marry’
 NCal: Fwâi            halō-n             ‘marry’
 NCal: Xârâcùù         xɔyɔ               ‘get married’
 NCal: Iaai            hɔiɔ               ‘get married’
 Pn:   Niuean          hoa-na             ‘wife; marry’
 Pn:   Samoan          ava-ŋa             ‘(woman) marry’
 Pn:   E Uvean         ʔohoa-na           ‘wife; marry’
>

                                                                           Kinship terms 135


   A more probable reconstruction is POc *laki or *tau-laki ‘marry’. Its origin was perhaps
PMP laki ‘male, masculine, man’ (ACD), and occasional reflexes (e.g. Tiang [MM] lek
‘husband’) point to POc *laki ‘married man’. However, compound forms like Tolai {MM)
tau-lai ‘married person’ (cf *tau, vol.5, §2.2.1.1) suggest that POc *laki was a stative verb.
Either way, reflexes of both *laki and *tau-laki are widely enough reflected as verbs to allow
their POc reconstruction as ‘marry, get married’.

<
POc *[tau]laki ‘marry; married person’[41]
 Adm: Mussau             laai               ‘marry’
 PT:  Gumawana           nai                ‘marry (s.o.)’
 PT:  Dawawa             naɣi               ‘marriage’
 MM:  Vitu               laki-a             ‘married person’ (-a NOM)
 MM:  Nakanai            tau-lai-la         ‘marriage ceremony’ (-la NOM)
 MM:  Tiang              lek                ‘husband’
 MM:  Madak              (at)lok            ‘husband’
 MM:  Patpatar           tole               ‘marry’
 MM:  Patpatar           t<in>ole-n         ‘wedding; marriage’ (<in> NOM)
 MM:  Tolai              taulai             ‘married person’
 MM:  Ramoaaina          taula              ‘marry’
 MM:  Ramoaaina          t<in>aula          ‘marriage’ (<in> NOM)
 MM:  Siar               taulai             ‘marry’
 MM:  Nehan              le                 ‘marry, married person’
 MM:  Banoni             nai                ‘marry’
 MM:  Maringe            tolaɣi             ‘marry’
 SES: Bugotu             taulaɣi            ‘marry’
 SES: Lengo              taulaɣi            ‘marry’
 SES: Longgu             taulai             ‘marry’
 SES: Bauro              auragi             ‘marry’
 SES: Arosi              ragi               ‘marry’
 NCV: Mota               laγ                ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Ambae              laki               ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Raga               laγi               ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Apma               laγ                ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Araki              laɣi               ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Nokuku             (te)leki-a         ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Lonwolwol          le                 ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Larevat            ne-laγ             ‘husband’
 NCV: Lewo               la                 ‘marry, be married (of woman)’
 NCV: Tape               laγ                ‘marry’
 NCV: Tape               e-laγ              ‘husband’
 NCV: Pt Sandwich        laγ                ‘marry, be married’
 NCV: Nakanamanga        laki               ‘marry, be married (of woman)’
 NCV: S Efate            lak                ‘be married’
 SV:  Sye                (empγu)laγ         ‘marry, be married’ (empγu ‘dance’)
 SV:  Anejom             (asan)lai          ‘marry, be married’
>

[41] We thank John Lynch for providing the NCV and SV data.

136 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


2.6 Conclusion(s)

The kinship terms we reconstruct are summarised in Table 2.11 and plotted as a tree diagram
in Figure 2 in §2.3.5. The research reported here is founded in large degree on the work of
others (§2.1), but it is innovative in three respects. First, it is based on a much larger data
corpus than previous reconstructions. Second, it modifies the inventory of reconstructed POc
kinship terms, adding to and subtracting from the inventory and suggesting resolutions to
some disagreements. Third, it examines the structure of the POc kinship terminology in some
detail and makes some novel findings.

    The inventory of POc terms includes the addition or confirmation of alternative or address
terms that Blust (1979) reconstructs for PMP or Chowning (1991) for POc. A summary of
these forms is given in §2.4.1.1. They include POc *ama ‘father, father’s brother’, *mama
‘father, father’s brother (ADDR)’, *tata ‘father, father’s brother, other senior males (ADDR)’,
*ina ‘mother, mother’s sister’, *(ñaña ‘mother, mother’s sister’, *nai ‘mother (ADDR)’,
*[bu]bui ‘grandparent, grandchild’. The multiplication of terms for ‘father’ and ‘mother’ is
unsurprising when one considers the number of English expressions for them. Also
confirmed are Milke’s (1965) reconstructions of *wawa ‘mother’s brother’ and *rawa-
‘parent- or child-in-law’, which are promoted from PNGOc to POc.

    A formal novelty is the replacement of Milke’s (1958a) *tuqaka ‘s.s. older sibling’ by two
forms, *tua- and *tuaka- (§2.4.1.5.3). An addition is POc *bawa[-] ‘great-great-grandparent,
great-great-grandchild’ (§2.4.1.4.3)

    It was originally hoped to provide a history of developments in the structure of Oceanic
kinship terminologies from POc through to PPn, but this was abandoned for reasons of space.
Instead, §2.3 and its subsections provide a typology of Oceanic terminologies, from which
something of their history can be gleaned. The typology situates the POc terminology and its
descendants in relation to some of the concerns of kinship theorists. It shows that POc had a
bifurcate merging terminology, not surprisingly, given that this structure has been attributed to
many of its descendants (§2.3.1). Unexpectedly, however, the typology led us to the
conclusion that POc was generationally skewed (a ‘Crow’ terminology), or, more probably,
that this was a two-state terminology like Dobu or like Fanti of Ghana, with different sets of
terms being used for ‘cross’ relations according to circumstances. A fair quantity of data
supports the predictions that generational skewing entails (§2.3.6).

    A major reason for suspecting that POc had a generationally skewed terminology is the
difficulty that others before us have had in reconstructing a term for father’s sister, a
relationship that is a ‘converse’ of mother’s brother, for which dedicated terms are ubiquitous
in Oceanic languages. The improbability that POc *aya meant ‘father’s sister’ is discussed in
§2.4.1.2.6.

    Another term that must also be removed from the POc terminology is *puŋao- ‘parent- or
child-in-law’. It has no Admiralties or WOc reflexes and is evidently a PEOc innovation,
replacing POc *rawa- (§2.4.2.3).

                                                                      Kinship terms 137


2.7 Appendix to chapter 2: Ethnographic sources

Adzera: H. Holzknecht 1976; S. Holzknecht      Fijian, E (Moala): Sahlins 1962
    1986                                       Fijian, E (Nasau): Cayrol 2015
Ajië: Leenhardt 1930, 1935; de la Fontinelle   Fijian, E (Tokatoka): Nayacakalou 1955
    1971                                       Fijian, W (Nadi): Capell & Lester 1945
Akei: Guiart 1958                              Fijian, W (Nadrogā): Capell & Lester 1945
Ambae, NE (Lombaha): Allen 1964a               Fijian, W (Tavuki): Capell & Lester 1945
Ambae, NE (Longana): Lovell 1980               Fijian, W (Vuda): Capell & Lester 1945
Ambel: Arnold 2018                             Fijian, W (Wayan): Pawley & Sayaba 2022
Ambrym, N: Deacon 1927; Franjieh 2012;         Futuna, E: Burrows 1936
    Guiart 1951; Lane & Lane 1956;             Futuna, W: Capell 1958; Dougherty 1983
    Löffler 1960; Scheffler 1970               Fwâi: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000
Anejom: Lynch 2005                             Galea: Digim’Rina 1995
Aniwa: Capell 1958                             Gedaged: Hannemann 1942
Anuta: Feinberg 1979                           Gela: Codrington 1891; Hogbin 1938a; Fox
Araki: François 2002                                1955
Arosi, E: Fox 1924                             Guadalcanal, W: Hogbin 1964a
Avau: Hiroko Sato, fieldnotes                  Hahon: Blackwood 1935
Avava (Niviar ): Deacon 1934                   Hawaiian: Handy & Pukui 1951
Babatana: Money n.d.                           Iaai: Ray 1917; Ozanne-Rivierre 2000
Baegu: H. Ross 1973                            Ifira-Mele: Clark 1998
Baluan: Schokkin & Otto 2017                   Kapingamarangi: Lieber & Dikepa 1974
Bariai: Gallagher 2008                         Kara, W: Küchler 2002
Barok, Karu: Chinnery 1929                     Karavar: Errington 1974
Barok, Usen: Wagner 1986                       Kaulong: Goodale 1979
Bauro: Fox 1924                                Kilivila: Malinowski 1929; Lounsbury
Belep: McCracken 2012                               1965; Lawton f.c.
Big Nambas: Guiart 1952; Dodd 2014             Kiribati: Spoehr 1949b
Bipi: Mead 1934                                Kiribati (Butaritari-Makin): Lambert 1981
Birao: Hogbin 1937                             Kove: Chowning 2009
Bugotu: Bogesi 1948                            Kubokota: McDougall 2000
Bukawa: Eckermann 2007                         Kwaio: Keesing 1968
Butmas: Guiart 1958                            Kwamera: Lindstrom 1981, 1986, pers.
Bwaidoga: Jenness & Ballantyne 1920                 comm.
Cèmuhî: Bensa & Rivierre 1982                  Kwara’ae: Deck 1934
Chuukese: Goodenough 1951                      Kwênyii: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000
Daakaka: von Prince, 2012, 2017                Lamusong: Clay 1977
Dobu: Fortune 1932                             Larëvat: Deacon 1934
Drehu: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000                    Lele: Boettger 2015
Drubea: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000                   Lelepa: Guiart 1964
Fijian, E (Bauan): Capell & Lester 1945        Lengo: Hogbin 1964a
Fijian, W (Deuba): Geddes 1945                 Loh-Toga: Durrad 1940; Mondragón 2014
Fijian, E (Lakeba I.): Pauwels 2015            Longgu: Hogbin 1964a
Fijian, E (Matailobau) Turner 1991             Luangiua (= Ontong Java): Hogbin 1931

138 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


Malua Bay: Deacon 1934                      Pukapukan: Beaglehole 1991; Salisbury &
Manam: Wedgwood 1934                            Salisbury 2018
Mangaia: Hīroa 1934                         Puluwat: Elbert 1972, 1974
Manihiki-Rakahanga: Hīroa 1932b             Raga: Taylor 2008
Māori: Hīroa 1949                           Rapa: Hanson 1970
Mapos Buang: Rambok & Hooley 2010           Rarotongan: Buse & Taringa 1996
Maringe: Boswell 2009                       Rennellese: Elbert & Monberg 1955
Marovo: Capell 1943                         Roro: Monsell-Davis 1981
Marquesan: Handy 1923                       Roviana: Capell 1943
Marshallese: Spoehr 1949a, 1949b            Sa’a: Ivens 1927
Marshallese (Namu): Pollock 1970            Samoan: Williamson 1924; Holmes 1957
Maw: Guiart 1964                            Satawalese: Sudo 1985
Mekeo, N: Mosko 1985                        Sikaiana: Donner 2020
Molima: Chowning n.d.                       Sinesip: Seniang in Deacon 1934
Mota: Codrington 1891; Codrington &         Sio: Groves 1934
    Palmer 1896; Vienne 1984                Sobei: Sterner 1992
Motu, W: Groves 1958, 1963                  Sori: Romanucci-Ross 1985
Mussau: Brownie & Brownie 2007; John        Sudest: Lepowsky 1991
    Brownie, pers. comm. 2020               Sursurunga: Samson et al. 2020
Mwerlap: Durand 2013                        Sye: Humphreys 1926; Crowley 2000
Naha’ai : Wilemp in Deacon 1934             Tahitian: Handy 1930
Nakanai: Chowning & Goodenough 2016         Takia: Malcolm Ross’ fieldnotes
Nalik: Chinnery 1929, Volker 2020           Takuu: Moyle 2011
Namakir: Sperlich 2019                      Tamabo: Rubinstein 1979
Naman: Lagalag in Deacon 1934               Tangga: Bell 1977
Nauruan: Wedgwood 1936                      Teop: Schwartz et al. 2007
Nduindui: Allen 1964b                       Tikopia: Firth 1922
Nengone: Ray 1917                           Titan: Mead 1934
Nehan: Nachman 1978; Glennon &              To’aba’ita: Lichtenberk 2008
    Glennon 2006                            Tokelau: Macgregor 1937; Huntsman 1971
Nêlêmwa: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000               Tolai, dialect unknown; not Matupit: Trevitt
Nemi: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000                      1940
Neve’ei: Lambumbu in Deacon 1934            Tolai (Matupit): Fingleton 1986; Simet 1991
Nguna: Guiart 1964; Facey 1989              Tongan: Völkel 2015; Douaire-Marsaudon
Ninde: Mewun in Deacon 1934                     2015
Notsi: Powdermaker 1933                     Tongarevan (= Penrhyn): Hīroa 1932a
Nukumanu: Feinberg 2009                     Torau: Bethwyn Evans’ fieldnotes
Nukuoro: Carroll & Soulik 1973              Tuam: Bugenhagen 2011
Owa: Mellow 2014                            Tubetube: Seligmann 1910
Paicî: Leblic 2005                          Tuvalu: Besnier 2000:626–631
Pak: Mead 1934:347–349                      Ulawa: Ivens 1927
Patpatar: Peekel 1908                       Ulithian: Lessa 1966; Hage & Marck 2002
Petats: Blackwood 1935                      Ura: Lynch 1983c
Pileni (= Vaeakau-Taumako) Feinberg 2013,   Uripiv: Deacon 1934
    Næss & Hovdhaugen 2011                  Vao: Layard 1942
Pingelapese: Schneider 1980                 Varisi: Scheffler 1965

                                       Kinship terms 139


Vitu: Blythe 1978
Vurës: Malau 2016
Wagawaga: Seligmann 1910
Wala: Hogbin 1939
Wandamen: Flaming 1983
Warembori: Donohue 1999
Watut, Middle: Fischer 1963
Whitesands: Humphreys 1926; Casson &
    Gregory 1976
Wogeo: Hogbin 1964b, 1970
Woleaian: Burrows & Spiro 1957
Wuvulu: Hafford 2014
Xârâcùù: Ozanne-Rivierre 2000
Yabem: Streicher 1982
Yapese: Schneider 1953

140 Malcolm Ross and Jeffrey C. Marck


3 Was Proto Oceanic society matrilineal?

Proto Oceanic society is believed to have developed in the region of the Bismarck
Archipelago in western Melanesia around 1500 BC.[1][2] Within a few hundred years daughter
societies expanded eastward into the rest of Melanesia and into nuclear Micronesia,
eventually reaching the remotest islands of Polynesia by 1000 AD (Kirch 1997).[3] Lexical
reconstruction has revealed a great deal about Proto Oceanic economy, technology and
material culture [Ross, Pawley and Osmond 1998]4 but very little about aspects of social
organisation. In particular there is considerable uncertainty about the type and even the
existence of descent groups. My purpose is to suggest, through a combined analysis of
historical linguistic, ethnographic and cross-cultural data, that POc society had unilineal,
probably matrilineal descent groups and unilocal, probably matrilocal or matri-avunculocal
residence rules.

   Conjectures about descent groups in Proto Oceanic [read “early Oceanic”] society have
a long history with contributions by anthropologists, linguists and archaeologists. Rivers
(1914) assumed that early Melanesian society, like all early societies, was matrilineal on the
grounds that only maternal kinship connections could be known for certain. He thought that
matrilineal moiety systems developed early in Melanesian history as the result of a fusion
between indigenous peoples and later arrivals, and he attributed shifts to patrilineal descent
and succession to the influence of immigrants with an advanced culture. As Allen
(1984:27) observed, Rivers’ argument was not really refuted, but simply “abandoned as a
result of the general demise of evolutionary anthropology in favour of structural
functionalism”. In a variation of Rivers’ scenario, Allen proposed that matrilineal descent
groups were a precondition of social stratification in Melanesia, the argument being that
that their restrictions on membership encouraged the formation of larger non-kinship
political groups such as the graded societies of Vanuatu.

[1] This is a slightly edited and abridged version of a paper first published in The Journal of the
    Polynesian Society 107:365-379 (2007). The editors thank Andrea Hage for permission to reproduce
    the paper.

[2] The author wishes to thank Robert Blust and Ann Chowning for their most helpful comments on a draft
    of this paper. Responsibility is, of course, solely his own. The research was supported in part by a grant
    from the National Science Foundation.

[3] [Recent archaeology suggests 1300 BC instead of 1500 BC, and 1300 AD instead of 1000 AD (Reith &
    Cochrane 2018).]

[4] [Square brackets enclose editorial insertions.]

142 Per Hage


    Several decades after Rivers, Murdock (1949) concluded from the application of an
evolutionary algorithm that Proto Malayo-Polynesian and Proto Oceanic society were
bilateral or “Hawaiian” in type and lacked descent groups of any kind. By Hawaiian,
Murdock meant a cluster of traits including generational-Hawaiian kinship terminology,
bilateral kindreds and bilocal extended families as well as the absence of unilineal descent
groups. Goodenough (1955), noting that land tenure is generally associated with kinship
groups in Malayo-Polynesian societies, amended Murdock’s conclusion by adding to it the
feature of cognatic landholding descent groups. Linguistic evidence in support of
Murdock’s reconstruction was provided by Milke (1958) who interpreted the basically
generational-Hawaiian structure of POc kinship terminology, in which M = MZ = FZ and
G = PGC as consistent with a bilateral form of social organisation.5 Evidence against the
bilateral hypothesis was adduced by Blust (1980a) and Hage and Harary (1996) who
showed that a strict application of Murdock’s algorithm leads to the conclusion that POc
society was just as likely to have been “Iroquois” in type with either matrilineal or double
descent.

    In a recent work, Kirch (1997) proposed on general ethnographic grounds, that Lapita,
i.e. Proto Oceanic, descent groups were cognatic in type:

__blockquote__
      Social anthropologists have long been aware that Oceanic peoples do not organize
      themselves onto strict unilinear descent groups but rather tend to have more
      flexible cognatic (sometimes called “ambilinear” or “non-unilinear”) systems of
      descent reckoning” (Kirch 1997:189-90)

   While it is true that there are many cognatic societies in Oceania, they do not
predominate in all regions and where they do exist, they may not be a continuation of
POc society but, rather, a later development.

   In a linguistic approach to the problem, Pawley (1981) reconstructed a POc term
*kainaŋa as meaning ‘descent group’ and, following Goodenough (1955) as
‘landholding descent group’ [but see §4.2.2.6]. However, Chowning (1991) objected that
*kainaŋa may be attributable only to a lower-order branch of the Oceanic family tree
and she argued that even if *kainaŋa, or an equivalent term *qapusa, could be attributed
to POc,

__blockquote__
      we would have no clue as to what kind of descent group or category might be
      represented. For the former, cognate terms designate a patrilineal group in Tikopia
      [a Polynesian outlier in Melanesia], a matrilineal one in Truk [in Micronesia] and
      a cognatic one in Maori [in Polynesia]. Furthermore, the kinship terms
      reconstructed so far for POc do not solve the problem. If POc had unilinear
      descent, we would expect either that a term for cross-cousin was reconstructable,
      or that many more of the societies would be like Truk and the Trobriands in
      having kinship systems (Crow, in these cases) that group cross-cousins with other
      kin types. I would also expect a reconstructable term for FaSi [father’s sister]
      unless, as in Kove, she was called by the same term as MoBro [mother’s brother],
       but this does not seem to happen in many Melanesian societies (Chowning
       1991:70).

[5] The following kinship abbreviations are used in this paper: F = father, M = mother, B= brother, Z =
    sister, G = sibling, S = son, D = daughter, ss = same sex as ego, os = opposite sex from ego, FB =
    father’s brother, MB = mother’s brother, etc; +1 = first ascending generation.

                                                           Was Proto Oceanic society matrilineal? 143


    The problem of descent in POc society is not as insoluble as it might appear. POc
kinship terminology (Milke 1958), like that of Proto Polynesian (Marck 1996) and Proto
Malayo-Polynesian (Blust 1980a) terminology, was bifurcate merging for males in the first
ascending (+1) generation: F = FB ≠ MB (POc *tama ‘F, FB’, *matuqa ‘MB’. [See ch. 2 of
this volume for a detailed reconstruction of POc kinship terms.] It is uncertain for all three
of these protolanguages whether +1 terminology for females was also bifurcate merging (M
= MZ ≠ FZ) or generational, as Milke (1958) thought, but as far as inferences about descent
are concerned it does not matter at all. Nor does it matter that the POc terminology lacked
terms for cross-cousins (PssGC ≠ PosGC) or that Crow type terminologies (FZ = FZD, F =
FZS) are not more common in ethnographically known Oceanic societies. Generalising
from an earlier study by Murdock (1947), the presence of a term for MB alone is sufficient
to establish that descent in Proto Oceanic, Proto Polynesian and Proto Malayo-Polynesian
society was almost certainly unilineal.6 As shown in Table 3.1, bifurcate merging
terminologies for +1 males in non-unilineal societies are almost always found together with
unilineal descent groups (patrilineal, matrilineal or both) 85 percent of the time.7 The rare
cases of bifurcate merging terminologies in non-unilineal societies are best interpreted as
survivals from earlier unilinear states, under the assumption that changes in kinship
terminology usually follow changes in descent rules (Lowie 1948; Murdock 1949; Fox
1967). As shown in Table 3.2, bifurcate merging terminology is also associated with
unilocal residence—91 percent of the time.8 Proto Oceanic society was either patrilineal
and patrilocal, or matrilineal and matrilocal or matri-avunculocal. Using the same cross-
cousin sample as for Tables 3.1 and 3.2, 81 percent of the matrilineal societies are either
matrilocal or avunculocal.

[6] The association between bifurcate merging female relations, including the triad M = MZ ≠ FZ, and
    unilineal descent and unilocal residence was demonstrated long ago by Murdock (1947, 1949). It was
    also deduced by Rivers (1914).

[7] Tables 3.1 and 3.2 are based on Murdock and White’s (1969) Standard Cross-Cultural Sample. This
    consists of 186 societies chosen from 200 world sampling provinces (Murdock 1968b). Tables 3.1 and
    3.2 show a smaller number of societies owing to the absence of data or to questions about the coding of
    kin terms (in Murdock 1970), descent rules and residence rules (in Murdock 1967) and the lack of
    alternative societies from the same sampling province.

[8] That is, with patri-, viri-, matri-, uxori-, avuncu- or natolocal residence. In Table 3.2, societies are coded
    for the dominant or permanent rule of residence indicated by a capital letter in Column 16 of the World
    Ethnographic Atlas.

144 Per Hage

: Table 3.1 The relation between bifurcate merging kinship terminology and descent groups

__table__
            Type of kinship
            terminology                                     Descent groups
                                         Unilineal           Cognatic            Absent
            Bifurcate merging
                                         47                  —                    8
            (F = FB ≠ MB)
            Other                        63                  10                  47
            Sources: Murdock 1967, 1970; Murdock and White 1969.


    The case of a separate term for FZ is interesting and deserves a comment in view of
its uncertain existence in POc, PPn and PMP kinship terminologies (Pawley 1981;
Marck 1996; comments on Blust 1980a [and §2.5.1.2.6 of this volume]).[9] In Oceanic
the presence of a term for FZ almost always implies the presence of a term for MB. This is
displayed in Table 3.3 which is based on the terminologies reported in Murdock (1970) for
all the Oceanic-speaking societies in the World Ethnographic Atlas (WEA) (Murdock
1967).10 The implicational relationship between these two terms is an expression of a
marking rule in which the presence of the marked term (FZ) implies the presence of the
unmarked term (MB) but not necessarily conversely (Greenberg 1980).11 In most Oceanic
as in most Polynesian and Malayo-Polynesian kinship terminologies (Hage 1996, 1998a;
Hage and Harary 1996; Blust 1980a) ‘male’ is the unmarked term. Diachronically
interpreted, if POc, PPn and PMP terminologies had a separate term for FZ it was lost
before the term for MB.

: Table 3.2 The relation between bifurcate merging kinship terminology and residence rules

__table__
                    Type of kinship
                    terminology                                   Residence
                                                  Unilocal              Non-unilocal
                     Bifurcate merging
                                                     49                  5
                     (F = FB ≠ MB)
                     Other                        103                   17
                     Sources: Murdock 1967, 1970; Murdock and White 1969.

[9] There is an extensive literature on the special position of the FZ in Oceanic societies, including Rivers
    (1910), Mead (1934), Mabuchi (1964), Rogers (1977) and Douaire-Marsaudon (1996).

[10] In Tables 3.3 and 3.4, Yap is counted as an Oceanic society (Ross 1996).

[11] An extended application of marking theory to kinship terminology is given in Hage (1999b).

                                               Was Proto Oceanic society matrilineal? 145

: Table 3.3 The relation between cross distinctions in ‘uncle’ terms and ‘aunt’ terms in Oceanic speaking societies.

__table__
                ‘Aunt’ terms                        ‘Uncle’ terms
                                         Cross distinction    Cross distinction
                                         present              absent
                Cross distinction
                                      13                 1
                present
                Cross distinction
                                      11                 9
                absent
                Sources: Murdock 1967, 1970; Murdock and White 1969.

The evidence for matrilineal rather than patrilineal descent in Proto Oceanic society is
distributional, linguistic and historical in nature. As Rivers (1914) and Allen (1984)
emphasised, matrilineal descent groups are found extensively in many areas of Melanesia
including

__blockquote__
     the Huon Gulf, New Britain [east of the Willaumez Peninsula] and New Ireland
     [in the Bismarck Archipelago], the Massim Archipelago [apart from the northern
     d’Entrecasteaux], Bougainville, parts of the Solomons and much of north and
     central Vanuatu (Allen 1984:26). [Brackets are Hage’s]

Double descent groups are also found in Melanesia, e.g. Bunlap [Sa, south Pentecost]
(Tattevin 1928), Vanua Levu [Fiji] (Quain 1948) and also in Micronesia, e.g. Pingelap
(Damas 1979) and in Polynesia in Pukapuka (Beaglehole and Beaglehole 1938). If
Murdock (1940, 1949) was right, one of the origins of double descent is the intrusion of
patrilineal institutions into a strongly integrated matrilineal system. In a survey of double
descent systems Murdock found that exogamy is everywhere associated with both
matrilineal and patrilineal groups, but that inheritance and succession are almost always
patrilineal. Residence is always patrilocal and political organisation is patrilineal.

   In Table 3.4, all the Oceanic-speaking societies in the WEA are classified by type of
descent group. In Polynesia, the last region of Oceanic settlement, descent groups are
almost entirely cognatic; in nuclear Micronesia they are almost entirely matrilineal; and in
Island Melanesia,[12] the homeland of Proto Oceanic society, they are predominantly
matrilineal or formerly matrilineal, as attested by systems of double descent.

: Table 3.4   Types of descent groups in Oceanic-speaking societies

__table__
        Type of kinship
        terminology                               Descent groups
                                  Unilineal        Cognatic            Absent
        Bifurcate merging
                                  47               —                    8
        (F = FB ≠ MB)
        Other                     63               10                  47
        Sources: Murdock 1967, 1970, Murdock and White 1969.

146 Per Hage

    With a larger sample of societies, the rows in Table 3.4 could specify major subgroups
of the Oceanic language family. On the basis of available data in the WEA, matrilineal and
double descent are not confined to societies in any one subgroup. It must be noted that
anthropologists are sometimes uncertain about the existence of double descent, Thus
Hogbin changed his mind about double descent in Wogeo, referring in 1970 to matrilineal
moieties and agnatic residential groups. Schneider (1984) changed his earlier view of Yap
(Schneider 1961) when he, most unfortunately, came to reject the entire metalanguage of
kinship analysis.

    Historical linguistic evidence for matrilineal descent in Proto Oceanic society is
provided by Blust (1986-87) whose argument may be summarised. In the Austronesian
languages terms for ‘orphan’ are in some cases monomorphemic as in Bontok so ‘be an
orphan’ but in other cases descriptive as Malay anak piatu (anak ‘child, piatu ‘desolate,
orphaned’). In some Oceanic languages the descriptive term refers to one or both parents.
In a sample of 12 Oceanic languages, Blust found that in eight languages there is an
agreement between the parent mentioned in the descriptive term and the rule of descent.
For example, in Ere ‘orphan’ is timan pwi ‘father none’ and descent is patrilineal; in
Woleaian ‘orphan’ is sile-mas and descent is matrilineal; in Samoan ‘orphan’ is matua-oti
‘parents dead’ and descent is ambilineal (cognatic). This correlation suggests that in
Austronesian societies an orphan is defined in relation to his/her descent group rather than
his/her parents.The four exceptions are Kwara’ae, Lau, ’Are’are and Sa’a, all of which are
spoken in patrilineal societies in Malaita in the southeast Solomons. In all four languages
there is a pair of terms reflecting Proto Malaita-Cristobal *tina mate ‘mother dead; and
*tina mauri ‘mother living’ which refer to both parents, or to the father alone, and to
persons of high and low status.

__blockquote__
       It is noteworthy that a paired term reflecting earlier *tina mauri (“mother living”) is
       found widely in the Southeast Solomons (but not in Micronesia). Compare LAU
       (C.E. Fox 1974) inamae/inomae ‘orphan, relatives dead, poor and unprotected’,
       inamauri/inomauri ‘parents alive, prosperous, important’, inamouri ‘eldest son of a
       living chief’; (Catherine Tyhurst, pers. comm.) inomae ‘eldest son of a deceased
       man’, faa-inomae ‘to bereave’.—‘ARE’ARE (Geerts 1970) inamae ‘orphan’,
       inamauri ‘a very big chief, a person of very great importance’.—SA’A (Ivens
       1929[a]) inemae ‘be an orphan, be bereft of parents, an orphan’, inemauri ‘be a
       chief, have a due succession of chiefs, a chief’.—AROSI (C.E. Fox 1970) inemae
       ‘child whose mother is dead, orphan’, inemauri ‘child whose mother is living’ (Blust
       1986-87:220).

[12] The great majority of Oceanic-speaking societies in Melanesia are in Island Melanesia and are the only
     ones included in the WEA. In the Encyclopedia of World Cultures, vol. 2, Oceania, [Hays 1991] five
     mainland New Guinea Oceanic-speaking societies are represented: four (Mekeo, Motu, Maisin and Sio)
     are patrilineal and one (Wamira [= Bartle Bay dialect of Wedau]) is matrilineal. In distinguishing
     Oceanic from non-Austronesian-speaking societies in Melanesia one should not overlook the effects of
     interaction between these groups, as Green (1991) and Kirch (1997) have emphasised in archaeological
     studies. In cultural anthropology, Chowning (pers. comm.) notes an interesting historical connection
     between them: “At least in East New Britain and on Bougainville, the [non-Austronesian]-speaking
     societies, whose ancestors presumably arrived there long before the [Oceanic] speakers, are also
     matrilineal… [I]n the matrilineal arc that extends from the Massim up through Bougainville and across
     to New Britain, matrilinearity, regardless of language affiliation, is associated with the belief that the
     lines in the palms of the hands designate the bird tabu to the descent group.” See Chowning 1982.

                                                         Was Proto Oceanic society matrilineal? 147


    Blust interprets the discrepancy between the proto-term for ‘orphan’, and its reflexes as
evidence for a shift from matrilineal to patrilineal descent in Malaita and by implication in
the “wider Oceanic context”. Under this interpretation the correlation between lexical
glosses of terms for ‘orphan’ and rules of descent in his sample of Oceanic-speaking
societies is “exceptionless”.

    Specific historical evidence in favour of Rivers’ matrilineal hypothesis was adduced by
Lane (1961). Using kinship data collected by different observers over a period of nearly
100 years, Lane described the breakdown of matrilineal social organisation in two Vanuatu
societies, Mota in the Banks Islands and Barabet in Pentecost. Matrilineal clan and moiety
organisation was weakened or disappeared, residence (in Barabet) became bilocal and
Crow kinship terminologies [cf. §2.3.3], which are usually associated with matrilineal
descent, gave way to modified generational Hawaiian terminologies [cf. §2.3.1]. Lane
attributes these changes to the effects of sudden and extensive depopulation which fatally
weakens more rigid lineage systems and moves them in the direction of more flexible
bilateral systems. Generalising this result, Lane, following Dole (1967), concluded that the
bilateral organisation of Polynesian, especially eastern Polynesian, societies developed in
response to the difficulties faced by small unstable populations settling widely separated
islands.

    Kinship systems are generally conservative in nature: they change slowly, sometimes
glacially, under normal (non-acculturative) circumstances, and they are more resistant to
diffusion than other cultural traits (Dyen and Aberle 1974; Eggan 1955; Murdock 1949). If
Proto Oceanic society was, in fact, matrilineal then one might expect a continuation of
matrilineal traits in its descendants. The converse would be true if Proto Oceanic society
was patrilineal. Data for testing this hypothesis come from a recent study by Burton,
Moore, Whiting and Romney (1996).

    Burton and his colleagues, building on the work of Murdock (1967), have shown that
nine world regions can be distinctively characterised by two dimensions of social structure:
gender and descent. These two dimensions score 63 different traits of social structure.13 The
first dimension contrasts matricentric and patricentric traits of social organisation and
kinship terminology.

    In order of strength from highly to weakly positive,

__blockquote__
       [m]atricentric social organization traits include matrilocal or uxorilocal residence,
       monogamy, and the absence of marriage exchange.14 Hence, matricentric societies
       tend to organize kinship groups around women through matrilocal or uxorilocal
       residence or through matrilineal kinship groups (Burton et al. 1996:93)

[13] According to Burton et al (1996:93), “the scores are similar to factor loadings but are standardised
     differently and therefore have a different range.” A plot of all 63 traits is given in Whiting et al.
     (1988).

[14] In Column 12 of the WEA, “Mode of marriage”, “marriage exchange” refers to the ‘transfer of a sister
     or other female relative of the groom in exchange for the bride’. “Bridewealth (or brideprice)” refers to
     the ‘transfer of a substantial consideration in the form of livestock, goods, or money from the groom or
     his relatives to the kinsmen of the bride’ (Murdock 1967:47).

148 Per Hage


In order of strength,

__blockquote__
     [p]atricentric social organization traits include nomadic or seminomadic
     settlement patterns, clan communities, localized or dispersed patrilineal groups,
     patrilocal residence, polygyny, and bridewealth payments. Hence, patricentic
     societies tend to organize kin groups around men through patrilocal residence,
     patrilineal descent or polygyny… Strongly matricentric kinship terminologies
     include generational aunt terms, bifurcate merging aunt terms and Crow cousin
     terms. The former two terminologies classify mother and mother’s sister together,
     as one would expect of societies that keep related women together after marriage,
     and Crow cousin terms are well known to be associated with matrilineal descent.
     Strongly patricentric kinship terminologies include bifurcate collateral aunt terms
     and Omaha cousin terms. Bifurcate collateral terminologies assign separate terms
     to mother and mother’s sister, as one would expect of societies that separate
     women after marriage, and Omaha terms are well known to be associated with
     patrilineal descent.
     The second dimension…contrasts unilineal and bilateral traits… Unilineal social
     organization traits include clan communities, dispersed or localized patrilineal
     groups, dispersed matrilineal groups, patrilocal residence, nonsororal polygyny,
     cousin marriage, patrilocal residence, and bridewealth payments. Bilateral social
     organization traits include bilateral kin groups, ego-centered kindreds, virilocal
     residence, bilocal residence, monogamy, and prohibition of cousin marriages.

    Applying the method of correspondence analysis (Greenacre 1984) these two
dimensions define a space in which societies can be located by their social structural traits.
Halves of this space are matricentric versus patricentric and unilineal versus bilateral, while
quadrants are matricentric and bilateral versus matricentric and unilineal, and so on. Two of
the nine world regions identified by Burton et al. are the Southeast Asia and the Insular
Pacific (Micronesia and Polynesia) region, which is matricentric, and the Australia, New
Guinea and Melanesia region, which is unilineal. Since the authors give the rating on each
dimension for every society in their world-wide sample, it is possible to define a region
strictly by language group. We will consider only the Oceanic-speaking societies in
Polynesia, Nuclear Micronesia and Melanesia, cross-cutting the two worlds just mentioned.

    If Proto Oceanic society was strongly matrilineal, one would expect to find a continuation
of matricentric traits in its descendants, including those that later developed different descent
rules. Support for this hypothesis is given in Figure 3.1. With two exceptions (Seniang
[Sinesip] and Lau, Fiji) all the Oceanic-speaking societies in the WEA are matricentric
whatever their rule of descent—cognatic, patrilineal, matrilineal or double descent.

                                                     Was Proto Oceanic society matrilineal? 149


Figure 3.1: Social structural traits of Oceanic-speaking societies (based on Burton et al. 1996. M= Melanesia, P= Polynesia, I= Micronesia)

    We conclude, on the basis of historical-linguistic, ethnographic and cross-cultural
evidence, that descent in Proto Oceanic society was matrilineal and residence matrilocal or
matri-avunculocal. This result would account for certain unusual ethnographic facts, such
as the presence of Crow kinship terminology and patrilineal descent in Seniang [Sinesip] (a
case in which changes in kinship terminology, as usual, lag behind changes in descent),
marriage with the MBW (Rivers 1914) (a practice commonly found in matrilineal societies
of generalised exchange; Lévi-Strauss 1969, Hage 1998b), and double descent (the
undermining of a strongly integrated matrilineal system by patrilineal institutions).

    It may be, as Lane (1961) and Dole (1967) have argued, that demographic and
geographic constraints—small unstable populations and great distances—led to the
development of more flexible cognatic social organisation in the settlement of Polynesia. It
may also be the case that relative isolation after settlement led to the weakening or
disappearance of matrilineal descent in some Oceanic societies. As Lévi-Strauss (1984:183)
observed with respect to Micronesia, in those societies that have lived in relative isolation,
“we find…a retreat from matrilineal institutions: left to themselves these institutions, by
reason of their well-known instability, have a tendency to evolve spontaneously towards
other forms.” Damas (1979) makes this point with respect to isolated atolls in the
Carolines—Pingelap, Mokil and Ngatik—where matrilineal descent was left with few
functions other than exogamy:

150 Per Hage

__blockquote__
       I would argue that the comparative vitality of matrilineal emphasis in the Yap and
       Truk districts is closely related to regular reinforcement of those ties through the
       process of clientship, trade relations, and (in the case of Yap) a system of tribute
       which operated largely within a matrilineal context. By contrast, relative isolation
       of the atolls and islands in the eastern Carolines appears to have promoted
       conditions which serve to weaken matriliny (Damas 1979:192).

    One should also mention here the two isolated outliers, Enewetok and Ujelang, in the
solidly matrilineal Marshall Islands which evolved patrilineal descent groups (moieties)
(Hage and Harary 1996). According to Ann Chowning (pers. comm.) the majority of
Oceanic-speaking societies in the New Guinea mainland are patrilineal rather than
matrilineal. In this case, rugged terrain rather than geographical distance was a barrier to
social communication which led to the weakening or disappearance of matrilineal
institutions.

    The hypothesis of matrilineal Proto Oceanic social organisation should have interesting
culture historical implications. Rivers, as mentioned, attributed moiety systems, which are
common in Melanesia, to the fusion of indigenous and immigrant peoples. As evidence he
noted the presence of inter-moiety hostility, native traditions of separate origins and the
attribution of physical and mental differences to members of different moieties. As Blust
(1981a) has observed, there is no linguistic evidence for the “fusion hypothesis”, i.e., no
significant differences in vocabulary, phonology or grammar between members of different
moieties in Oceanic societies. An alternative, more plausible explanation, which applies to
moiety systems in general, derives from a theory of Murdock’s (1940, 1949). Typically,
when a matrilineal society fissions, the new community, in order to preserve the proximity
of males to their natal groups, consists of two exogamous lineages. Eventually these two
groups may develop onto a moiety system with all its attendant symbolism. Could such a
process account for the prevalence of moiety systems in Melanesia?[15]

[15] Under Blust’s (1981a) hypothesis that dual organisation was a feature of Proto Malayo-Polynesian
     society which continued in many Oceanic societies, the two groups would be lineages belonging to
     different moieties or lineages of the same moiety which became exogamous.



4              Social rank

4.1 Introduction

Around 3000 BP bearers of Lapita became the first people to move beyond the intervisible
islands of western Melanesia and settle Santa Cruz and the Reef Islands in the eastern
Solomons and the archipelagos of Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji. By 2800 BP there were
Lapita settlements in Tonga and Samoa, 4500 km east of the Bismarcks.1

    The Lapita dispersal across the southwest Pacific was astonishing in its speed and scale.
Founding populations were established almost simultaneously in several previously uninhab-
ited island groups. This must have involved the organising of many long-distance voyages
carrying considerable numbers of people, including the building of ocean-going outrigger
canoes, the recruitment of crews and passengers, and the transport of useful plants and
breeding stocks of domestic animals.

    The question arises as to what forms of leadership underpinned these achievements and
whether historical linguistics in combination with the ethnographic record can provide clues,
in the form of relevant lexical reconstructions. The following discussion will draw on a
number of earlier studies which have addressed these questions, including Green (1994,
2002), Hage (1999a,b), Hayden (1983), Kirch (1984), Kirch and Green (2001), Lichtenberk
(1986) and Pawley (1982).

    The Polynesian material is surveyed first because it yields a number of well supported
Proto Polynesian terms to do with rank and leadership, indicating that Proto Polynesian
society had hereditary chiefs in a system of ranked descent groups, with rank based on
seniority of descent. We then turn to other Oceanic-speaking societies. Although the evidence
there is less straightforward I will argue that Proto Oceanic society had a system of rank and
leadership essentially similar to that reconstructed for Proto Polynesian. I will not discuss
evidence for reconstructing terms for rank and leadership in Austronesian interstages earlier
than Proto Oceanic. Blust (1995b:500) observes that relevant reconstructions for Proto
Malayo-Polynesian are few and semantically ambiguous. Bellwood (1996) speculates on the
role of hierarchy in the Austronesian dispersal.

[1] Thanks to Paul Geraghty, Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross for helpful comments on a draft.

152 Andrew Pawley


4.2 Reconstructing terms for rank and leadership in Proto Polynesian society

The archaeologists Kirch and Green (2001) draw on linguistic, archaeological and ethnograph-
ic evidence to reconstruct elements of ‘ancestral Polynesian society’. They equate ancestral
Polynesian society with the communities that spoke PPn. This equation may seem a straight-
forward matter but there are problems in determining precisely where and when PPn was
spoken. Bearers of the Lapita culture settled Tongatapu, in the south of the Tongan archipelago,
at about 2850 BP (Burley et al. 2011). Within a century or so Lapita settlements were estab-
lished on the islands of western Polynesia to the north of the Tongan group, on Samoa,
Niuatoputapu and ‘Uvea and probably Futuna.[2] The divergence between Tongic and Nuclear
Polynesian presumably followed these settlements.

    However, it seems that Tongic and Nuclear Pn remained part of a dialect complex and that
innovations continued to spread across western Polynesia for many centuries after the initial
colonisation. The innovations defining the Polynesian subgroup are so numerous that they
indicate a millennium or more of unified development after it diverged from all other Oceanic
languages. If so, some elements of the reconstructed PPn language must date to a period
before distinct Tongic and Nuclear Pn dialects developed, and others date to a later time. I
will refer to the former as ‘early PPn’ and the latter as ‘late PPn’. Late PPn society, being
spread over several widely separated island groups in the Tonga-Samoa area, would have
shown some regional variation.

4.2.1 Proto Polynesian *qariki ‘chief’

The linguistic evidence for attributing hereditary chieftainship to PPn society is compelling.
Almost every Polynesian language has a reflex of PPn *qariki, which can be roughly glossed
‘chief, person of chiefly rank’ and in most Polynesian societies chiefly rank is determined by
seniority of birth. A number of derived forms based on *qariki are also attributable to PPn.

    Initial *q, representing a glottal stop /ʔ/, is reconstructed in PPn *qariki because it is
retained in the Tongan, Uvean and Rennellese reflexes. PPn *r is reconstructed rather than *l
because *r is regularly lost in the two Tongic languages, while they retain PPn *l as l. PPn *r
and *l merged as *l in Proto Nuclear Pn. The fact that reflexes of *qariki in Tongic and Nuclear
Pn have undergone the sound changes characteristic of each subgroup, yielding Proto Tongic
*ʔeiki and Proto Nuclear Pn *ʔaliki, indicates that the reflexes are inherited from an early stage
of PPn, i.e. before Tongic and Nuclear Pn diverged, rather than being later diffusions across the
dialect boundary between Tongic and Nuclear Pn.

<
PPn *qariki ‘chief, person of chiefly rank’
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan      ʔeiki             ‘hereditary chief, man or woman of chiefly rank’; ‘be of chiefly rank’
 Pn: Niue        iki               ‘chief, any important person’
-Nuclear Polynesian languages of western Polynesia plus Pukapukan
 Pn: Samoan      aliʔi             ‘chief, lord, man of noble birth’; ‘high chief as opposed to orator or talking chief’
 Pn: Samoan      aliʔi-taʔi        ‘be subordinated, subservient to’
 Pn: E Futunan   aliki             ‘hereditary chief, main priest’ (for expected ʔaliki)
 Pn: E Futunan   |aliki sau  |     ‘paramount chief’ (see §4.2.2.1)
 Pn: E Futunan   |aliki fenua|     ‘village chief’
 Pn: E Uvean     ʔaliki            ‘chief, noble, lord’
 Pn: E Uvean     ʔaliki-ʔaŋa       ‘nobility, dignity’
 Pn: E Uvean     |aliki sau|       ‘paramount chief’ (see §4.2.2.1)
 Pn: Tokelauan   aliki             ‘sacred leader, descendant of founding lineage’
 Pn: Tokelauan   |kāinga aliki|    ‘chiefly lineage’
 Pn: Tuvaluan    aliki             ‘chief’
 Pn: Tuvaluan    ulu-aliki         ‘head chief’
 Pn: Tuvaluan    aliki-ŋa          ‘chief’s reign’
-Outliers
 Pn: Anutan      ariki             ‘hereditary chief’
 Pn: Tikopia     ariki             ‘chief, clan head; leader’; ‘become a chief’; ‘chiefly’
 Pn: Tikopia     |ariki fafine|    ‘Female Chief (title of chief’s eldest daughter)’
 Pn: Rennellese  ʔagiki            ‘chief, headman, old gentleman’
 Pn: Rennellese  |ʔagiki ʔeteaki|  ‘chief-priest, priest under vigorous taboo during certain rites’
 Pn: Takuu       ariki             ‘hereditary chief and traditional religious leader’; ‘captain of a ship or leader of a canoe-based fishing expedition’; ‘function as an ariki’
-Pukapukan and Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Pukapukan   aliki             ‘chief, head of a major paternal descent group, priest by virtue of chiefly rank’
 Pn: Pukapukan   |aliki wolo|      ‘high chief’
 Pn: Pukapukan   |aliki wui |      ‘lesser chief’
 Pn: Rapanui     ariki             ‘chief, nobility, royal family’; ‘govern, reign, rule’
 Pn: Hawaiian    aliʔi             ‘hereditary chief, king, queen, noble’; ‘rule or act as a chief, govern, reign’
 Pn: Maori       ariki             ‘first-born male or female in a family of note; chief of a clan (hapuu); priest; leader’
 Pn: Mangarevan  aka-riki          ‘hereditary chief of district’
 Pn: Marquesan   haka-ʔiki         ‘hereditary chief, leader of a tribe (ma ʔeinaʔa)’
 Pn: Rarotongan  ariki             ‘high chief, ruler over a tribe’
 Pn: Rarotongan  |ariki tumu|      ‘paramount high chief; king’
 Pn: Tahitian    ariʔi             ‘head or principal chief of a tribal group’
>

[2] Some have argued that Samoa was permanently inhabited only from about 2500 BP (Rieth and Cochrane
    2018).

                                                                               Social rank 153


    The PPn term *qariki evidently served both as a noun ‘chief’ and as head of a derived
stative verb *qariki-tia ‘be occupied by a chief or chiefs, have a chief or chiefs present’. Its
derivation is of the type described by Pawley (2001), whereby PPn *-Cia (where *C is one of
a number of consonants) forms a stative verb equivalent to an English passive participle:
‘chief-ed’, i.e. ‘be presided over by a chief’ or ‘have a chief present’.

154 Andrew Pawley

<
PPn *qariki-tia ‘be occupied by a chief or chiefs, have a chief or chiefs present’
  Pn: Tongan        ʔeiki-sia      ‘(of a meeting, society etc) have a chief in it’
  Pn: Samoan        aliʔi-tia      ‘(of a village or meeting) be occupied by chiefs or distinguished guests, have a chief or chiefs present’
  Pn: E Uvean       ʔaliki-tia     ‘have a chief’
  Pn: Tokelauan     aliki-tia      ‘be occupied by chiefs or distinguished visitors’
  Pn: Tikopia       ariki-tia      ‘have s.o. as a chief’
>

   PPn *faka- inherited two functions of POc *paka-. One function was to form a manner
adverb, and this gave PPn *faka-qariki ‘(act) in the manner of a chief’.

<
PPn *faka-qariki ‘(act) in the manner of a chief’
  Pn: Tongan           faka-ʔei-ʔeiki ‘in a chiefly manner, like or pertaining to a chief’
  Pn: E Uvean          faka-ʔaliki    ‘in the manner of chiefs, majestic, royal’
>

The other function was to form a causative transitive verb, giving PPn *faka-qariki ‘make into
a chief’. Note that the E Uvean term is in both sets.

<
PPn *faka-qariki ‘make into a chief’
  Pn: Niuean         faka-iki        ‘treat as a chief’
  Pn: E Uvean        faka-ʔaliki     ‘make oneself master of, usurp’; ‘in the manner of chiefs, majestic, royal’
  Pn: E Futunan      faka-aliki      ‘name as chief’; ‘nomination as chief’
  Pn: E Futunan      faka-ali-aliki  ‘ennoble’
  Pn: Rapanui        haka-ariki      ‘proclaim as a king’; ‘become king’
  Pn: Maori          faka-ariki      ‘submit to orders’
>

4.2.2 Other terms denoting rank or authority

Several other terms associated with rank or authority can be attributed to PPn and in some
cases, to PCP.


4.2.2.1 PPn *sau ‘chiefly authority or rule’; ‘ruler, one who has authority, secular chief’

The range of meanings associated with reflexes of PPn *sau suggests that it referred to the
authority or power of a high chief. The Fijian evidence is consistent with this inference.

<
PCP/PPn *sau ‘chiefly authority or rule’; ‘ruler, one who has authority’ (Green 2002; Kirch and Green 2001)
 Fij: Bauan       sau                 ‘high chief’; ‘commandment or prohibition of a high chief’
 Fij: Bauan       |sau ni vū-ni-valu| ‘war chief’ (vū-ni-valu ‘title of war chief’)
 Fij: Bauan       |vaka-sau-sau|      ‘behave as a chief’
 Fij: Wayan       sau                 ‘high chief or paramount chief who has been officially installed’; ‘ruler, one who has authority over the people’; ‘authority or command of a chief over people or events, the power of high rank’
 Fij: Wayan       sau-takini-         ‘exert one’s authority or power over s.o.’
 Fij: Wayan       |sau ni vanua|      ‘ruler or chief of a particular people or place (vanua)’
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan       hau                 ‘secular chief, as opposed to sacred chief’; ‘champion, victor, conquerer’
-Nuclear Polynesian in western Polynesia
 Pn: E Futunan    sau                 ‘govern, reign, have supreme power’
 Pn: E Futunan    |aliki sau|         ‘carrier of the highest title’
 Pn: E Futunan    |sau malū|          ‘peace, time of peace’ (lit. ‘gentle rule’)
 Pn: E Uvean      hau                 ‘rule, ruler’
-Outliers
 Pn: Tikopia      sau                 ‘select a man for office by traditional process of grasping him and elevating him as chief’
-Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Tahitian     hau                 ‘peace, government’; ‘reign’
 Pn: Tongarevan   hau                 ‘peace’; ‘be in peace, be settled’; ‘the local government, judges and police’
cf. also:
 Fij: Rotuman     sau                 ‘king, kind of sacred chief’; ‘be king’; ‘royal, pertaining to a king’ (possibly a Pn loan)
 Pn: Rennellese   sau                 ‘divine gifts, abundance of gifts from gods’
>

                                                                                  Social rank 155


4.2.2.2 PPn * laŋi

A PPn term *laŋi having to do with chiefly status is reconstructable. Its precise meaning is
uncertain but the broad definition proposed by Green (1994) is consistent with the range of the
reflexes.

<
PPn *laŋi ‘one of sufficiently high rank to be honoured or treated as one in authority’ (Green 1994)
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan       laŋi         ‘royal tomb, raised and terraced burial place of sovereigns’
-Nuclear Polynesian in western Polynesia
 Pn: Samoan       faʔa-laŋi    ‘address or refer to s.o. by his ceremonial title’
-Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Hawaiian     lani         ‘noble, royal, exalted’; ‘high-born aristocrat, very high chief’
 Pn: Hawaiian     |lani aliʔi| ‘royal chief’
 Pn: Hawaiian     hoʔo-lani    ‘treat s.o.as a chief’
 Pn: Maori        raŋi         ‘chief, generally as a term of respectful address: sir’
 Pn: Rarotongan   raŋi         ‘supreme in authority, highest authority, power’
>

156 Andrew Pawley



4.2.2.3 PMP *datu, Samoan lātū, Fijian rātū: an accidental resemblance?

Many Malayo-Polynesian languages of the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia reflect a PMP
form *datu. Its reflexes have widely varying glosses, including ‘chief’, ‘headman’, ‘leader’,
‘lineage priest’, ‘head of family, ‘grandparent’, ‘prince’, ‘king’, ‘title given to a sovereign’,
‘term of respect to any man of standing’, ‘shaman’, ‘ancestor in the female line’ (ACD). It is
tempting to see a connection to Samoan lātū ‘person in charge of an undertaking’ (Milner
1966); ‘head builder’ (Pratt 1911) and to Fijian rātū ‘honorific particle and title of rank before
names of males’ (Capell 1941). However, the resemblance may be accidental. No possible
cognates have been reported from any non-Central Pacific Oceanic language. The Central
Pacific forms have two long vowels, which suggests that they originally consisted of two
morphemes. Furthermore, Geraghty (pers. comm.) advises that the use of Fijian rātū as an
honorific before names of men of rank is an innovation of the colonial era. Its older use was as
a prefix to a chiefly title in certain regions of Fiji.

4.2.2.4 PPn _*fatu kāiŋa_ ‘? head of family’

Kirch and Green (2001:232-236) reconstruct PPn _*fatu kāiŋa_ which they tentatively gloss
‘leader of the kāiŋa’ [a land-holding residential group, local kin group]. They acknowledge that
reflexes of *fatu have a diverse range of meanings in daughter languages, which makes
semantic reconstruction uncertain. The range includes: (1) ‘head of family’, (2) low-ranked
chief’, (3) ‘master, owner of an estate or resources’, (4) ‘person of mature age, elder’. Reflexes
of the compound *fatu kāiŋa sometimes mean ‘senior person or carer in a family, one who
oversees use of resources such as food’, sometimes ‘land owner’ or ‘overseer’ and in one case,
‘be a married person’.

<
PPn *fatu, *|fatu kāiŋa| ‘leader of the _*kāiŋa_’ (Kirch and Green 2001)
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan      |fatu taŋata|     ‘middle-aged man’
 Pn: Tongan      |fatu fafine|     ‘middle-aged woman’
 Pn: Niuean      patu              ‘a lowly ranked chief (not an iki) and head of a family group’ (p for †f)
-Nuclear Polynesian in western Polynesia
 Pn: E Futunan   |fatu taŋata|     ‘man who has arrived at a mature age’
 Pn: Tokelauan   |fatu kāiŋa |     ‘the obligation of caring for one’s family (kāiŋa) in the traditional way (of both men and women)’
 Pn: Tuvaluan    |fatu kāiŋa|      ‘be a married person’
-Outliers
 Pn: Tuvaluan    fito-ariki        ‘chiefs (collective)’ (unexpected i and o for †a and †u)
 Pn: Nukuoro     foto-oliki        ‘chief of island’
-Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Hawaiian    haku              ‘lord, master, overseer, owner’
 Pn: Hawaiian    |haku ʔāina|      ‘land owner or overseer’
 Pn: Hawaiian    |haku hale |      ‘landlord, house owner, host, hostess’
 Pn: Mangarevan  |ʔatu motua|      ‘name of a founding ancestor’
 Pn: Marquesan   hatu              ‘master, owner of an animal’
 Pn: Tahitian    fatu              ‘lord, master, owner’
 Pn: Tongarevan  hatu              ‘lead a work’; ‘lord, owner’
 Pn: Tongarevan  |hatu henua|      ‘land owner’
 Pn: Rarotongan  ʔatū              ‘lord, master, owner, landlord’
 Pn: Rapanui     |hotu matuʔa|     ‘primary founding ancestor of Rapanui’
>

                                                                                      Social rank 157


4.2.2.5 *tuqi ‘ceremonial title of the paramount chief of a region’

It is tempting to propose a reconstruction PCP, PPn *tuqi ‘ceremonial title of the paramount
chief of a region’, occurring before the name of the region. This term has reflexes in Tongan,
Futunan, Uvean (all tuʔi), Samoan, Niuean and the Fijian languages (all tui). However, it is not
reflected in Eastern Polynesian or Outlier languages and it is likely that it spread relatively
recently, i.e. in post-PPn times, across western Polynesia and Fiji.


4.2.2.6 Chief of what?

If ancestral Polynesian society had descent groups what were they called?

    In several Micronesian languages reflexes of the term *kainaŋa denote a clan or sib, i.e. a
unilineal descent group:

  Trukese          kaiɾaŋ             ‘matrilineal sib’
  Puluwat          yayinaŋ            ‘clan’
  Woleaian         xairaŋ             ‘clan, tribe’

A cognate term occurs widely in Polynesian with a range of meanings. The most extensive
discussion of the semantic history of this term is Marck (2010). In Tikopia and Anuta it refers
to a non-exogamous patrilineal descent group consisting of several exogamous lineages, and in
Pukapukan it denotes a matrilineal sublineage. This close formal and semantic agreement with
the Micronesian cognates supports attributing *kainaŋa ‘unilineal descent group’ both to PPn
and to the stage of Oceanic ancestral to PPn and Micronesian.

    However, in several Polynesian languages (Tongan, E Uvean, Rennellese, Hawaiian,
Marquesan and Manihiki) the reflex of *kainaŋa refers not to a unilineal descent group but
rather to the subjects of a chief, the common people. Marck (2010:617) argues that PPn
developed over a long period of time across the islands of western Polynesia and that PPn
society and language showed regional variation. He attributes the sense ‘clan, unilineal descent
group’ to an early stage of PPn. This was retained in a few Nuclear Pn daughter languages, but
in some PPn communities unilineal descent groups were replaced by cognatic descent groups,
in which membership could be claimed through either a male or female ancestor, and *kainaŋa
was used to refer to these groups. In late PPn times *kainaŋa came to have an additional sense,
as a collective term for the populace, the common people of a place, headed by a chief.

158 Andrew Pawley

<
PPn *kainaŋa (1) ‘clan, unilineal descent group’; (2) ‘cognatic descent group’; (3) ‘populace, commoners’ (Marck 2010)
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan           kainaŋa          ‘populace, people without chiefly rank’
-Nuclear Polynesian in western Polynesia and Pukapukan
 Pn: E Uvean          kainaŋa          ‘people not of chiefly rank’
 Pn: Pukapukan        keinaŋa          ‘maternal sub-lineage, headed by its oldest member’
-Outliers
 Pn: Tikopia          kainaŋa          ‘clan, a non-exogamous descent group consisting of several exogamous lineages’
 Pn: Emae             na-kainaŋa       ‘titled person subordinate to a given person’
 Pn: Rennellese       kainaŋa          ‘subject of a chief’
-Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Hawaiian         maka-ʔainana     ‘commoner, populace, people in general’
 Pn: Manihiki         mata-keinaŋa     ‘common people, tribe’
 Pn: Mangarevan       mata-kainaŋa     ‘assembly, congregation’
 Pn: Rarotongan       mata-keinaŋa     ‘a tribe, people of a district, headed by an ariki’
>

4.2.2.7 Commoners

Most Polynesian languages have a term or terms for a commoner, a person who is not of
chiefly lineage. The literal meanings of such terms fall into three main classes: (1) derogatory
terms, e.g. ‘worthless person’ or ‘person of low degree’, (2) those that refer to ordinary people,
the populace, people of the land, (3) those that refer to a person of a junior lineage. Although on
distributional grounds it seems likely that PPn had one or more terms denoting a person of low
rank, no well-supported PPn reconstructions can be made from these comparisons. The partial
agreement between Tongan kai fonua, E Uvean kai fenua, and Samoan tū-fanua and tau-fanua
points to a PPn compound *N + fanua referring to commoners, where N is a noun denoting
person or people.

__formgroup__
-Tongic
 Pn: Tongan      tuʔa               ‘commoner, person without chiefly rank’; ‘be common, not of chiefly rank’; ‘(of a chief’s relative) be of lower lineage’
 Pn: Tongan      |kai fonua|        ‘commoner’ (lit. ‘person of the land’)
 Pn: Niuean      |taŋata fakateaŋa| ‘commoner’ (lit. ‘careless person’)
-Nuclear Polynesian in western Polynesia
 Pn: E Futunan   seka               ‘commoner, untitled person, of low birth’
 Pn: E Uvean     kai-fenua          ‘commoner, peasant’ (lit. ‘person of the land’)
 Pn: Samoan      tū-fanua           ‘person of lower rank, commoner’ (fanua ‘land’)
 Pn: Samoan      tau-fanua          (1) ‘commoner’; (2) ‘owner of land’
 Pn: Samoan      |taŋata lautele|   ‘commoner’ (lautele ‘common, ordinary’)
-Outliers
 Pn: Nukuoro     |ŋati taŋata|      ‘ordinary person, commoner, one of slight social value’ (ŋati ‘worthless, empty, useless’)
 Pn: Takuu       |tanata vare|      ‘commoner’ (vare ‘ordinary, not special’)
 Pn: Tikopia     |faka arofa|       ‘commoner, person not of chiefly class’ (lit. ‘calling forth benevolence, sympathy’)
 Pn: Rennellese  |taŋgani peŋgea|   ‘commoner’ (lit. ‘useless person’)
-Eastern Polynesian
 Pn: Maori       tūtūā              ‘mean, low-born’; ‘person of low degree’
 Pn: Maori       marahea            ‘commoner’; ‘be of low degree’

                                                                                Social rank 159


4.3 Variation in systems of rank and leadership in Polynesia

The brief glosses given to reflexes of *qariki in dictionaries of Polynesian languages do not
provide satisfactory descriptions of the role of chiefs in Polynesian societies. For more detailed
information we must look to ethnographic accounts.

   Various types of political systems were found in Polynesia at first European contact. There
is an extensive anthropological literature on the evolution of these types. Most such works
before about 1980 rely on a comparative typological method, based on the geographic
distribution and frequency of types and the logic of transformations between types. Important
studies relying chiefly on comparative typology include Williamson (1924), Burrows (1938),
Sahlins (1957, 1958, 1963), Koskinen (1960) and Goldman (1957, 1970).

   Most of the above-mentioned works take little account of the comparative method used in
historical linguistics to reconstruct the sound system and lexicon of the common ancestor of a
family of related languages and to construct a family tree (or subgrouping) for the family.
However, in recent decades a number of studies have drawn on evidence from historical
linguistics to support hypotheses about the history of Polynesian political systems. Among
these are monographs by Kirch (1984) and Kirch and Green (2001) and papers by Pawley
(1982), Kirch and Green (1987), Hage (1999a,b) and Marck (2010).

   Goldman (1970), a 600-page work comparing 18 Polynesian societies, distinguishes three
main types of political systems in Polynesia which he calls ‘traditional’, ‘open’ and ‘stratified’.

•    In the traditional type, status dominates, based on seniority of descent and the sanctity of
     chiefs. Descent groups are headed by the first-born male and are in turn ranked by seniority
     of birth (the ‘conical clan’ system). However, chiefs have quite limited political authority
     over their descent group. Effective polities are small.
•    In open systems political power is dominant. In succession to chiefly titles, seniority of
     birth is secondary to military and political effectiveness.
•   In stratified societies inherited status and political power are both more consequential than
    in traditional systems. High ranking people hold political power and possess the land titles.
    Commoners are landless subjects.

160 Andrew Pawley

4.3.1 Societies with ‘traditional’ political systems

In Goldman’s sample the traditional type of political system is represented by Tikopia, New
Zealand Maori, Futuna, Uvea, Tongareva, Manihiki-Rakahanga and Pukapuka. Notes on
Tikopia and New Zealand Maori follow.


4.3.1.1 Tikopia

Tikopia is a small high island (4.6 km2) with very limited arable land. Its population of around
1250 at first European contact tested to the limit the carrying capacity of the environment.
Nevertheless, as described by Firth (1936), it exemplifies perfectly the essential characteristics
of conical clan societies. Tikopia’s population was divided into four ramified patrilineal descent
groups or clans (kainaŋa), each headed by a senior chief. The four clans themselves were
ranked from senior to junior. Clans divide into paito ‘ramages’ (lit. ‘houses’) consisting of
related families tracing descent from a common ancestor a few generations back. There are
chiefly families (paito ariki) and commoner families (paito fakaarofa). These are ranked
according to traditional ritual privileges and obligations associated with the beliefs in the gods.
Commoner families divide into families that have a ritual leader as head (paito pure) and
families that have no significant ritual privileges. Firth (1936:313) observes that

__blockquote__
     differences in the ordinary social position of chiefly and commoner families are not
     great. They all own lands, they mingle freely, exchanges take place between them on a
     basis of general reciprocity, there is no “chief’s language”, as in Samoa or Java, kinship
     terms are used between them, and nowadays intermarriage takes place freely between
     their members.

Deep genealogies were kept by chiefly lineages. As the genealogically senior man in a descent
group, a chief had sacred powers deriving from his mana (mystical power to make things
happen) and responsibilities to his people. He communed with the gods on behalf of his kin, for
example, to ensure economic prosperity. The chief had the ability to control a ritual circulation
of goods. He is the initiator of the grand cycle and is responsible for keeping in motion the
distribution and redistribution of food. He was the giver of feasts on his own account and the
sponsor of all kainaŋa-wide and island-wide rituals, which also involve energetic consumption.
All who gave to him were honoured by being literally drawn into the lines of connection that
run between chiefs and gods. For the most part, the chief's bounty was directly in the interests
of his community, for ritual, and for public works.

4.3.1.2 New Zealand Maori

Despite great differences in geographic context, Maori and Tikopia societies resemble each
other quite closely in their systems of rank and leadership. Maori tribes

__blockquote__
     are classic examples of aristocratic organisations in which the basic principles of
     primogeniture, seniority of descent, graded rank, sanctity of chiefs, and the sanctity of
     the male line are well established but which show none of the specialised features –
     achieved chiefly position, sharp social stratification, and political centralisation – of the
     Open and Stratified societies (Goldman 1970:30).

                                                                                      Social rank 161


Chiefly status was hereditary. Descent groups were ranked by seniority of birth of the founding
ancestor. The first-born son of the senior clan outranked lesser chiefs, who came from junior
lines. Deep genealogies were kept by chiefly lineages. As the genealogically most senior man
in a descent group a chief had sacred powers deriving from his mana and responsibilities to his
people. However, a lesser chief from a junior line could extend political power beyond his own
clan and add to his mana by demonstrating leadership in secular domains, such as warfare,
diplomacy and organisation, which gave him prestige beyond his own lineage.

4.3.2 Stratified societies

A very few Polynesian societies, most notably those of Hawaii, Tonga and the Society Is., had
at the start of the colonial era a feudal system in which a chiefly class ruled over a class of
commoners. Land was held by the chiefs, with commoners as tenants. Marriage between
nobles and commoners was proscribed. This extreme degree of stratification most likely
developed independently in each of these societies and reached its zenith at the beginning of
the colonial era. We will consider the Tongan case.


4.3.2.1 Tonga

With a land area of only 696 km2, the Tongan group is much smaller in geographical extent and
poorer in natural resources than the Hawaiian (16,600 km2) and Society (1535 km2) groups. It
contains one relatively large island, Tongatapu, with its satellites in the south, and two clusters
of smaller islands in the north, the Ha’apai and Vava’u groups. Nevertheless, Tonga at first
contact was densely populated (estimated 40,000) and had developed a highly stratified, feudal
society in which all the land was owned by an aristocracy ruling a commoner class of landless
tenants, who served as the chief’s labour force and provided warriors in times of war.

    Tongan aristocracy combined ranking by seniority of birth in the male line, with a pattern of
bilateral ranking based on superiority of sisters and sisters’ sons to brothers and brothers’ sons.
The first factor established rank, the second shaped deference and respect.

    Chiefly lineages had a classical Polynesian conical clan organisation: major lineages
branched into lower-order segments, with succession to titles in the higher-order lineages
strictly patrilineal. The supreme chief was semi-divine and sometimes referred to as a god.
Adherence to primogeniture was strongest in the highest-ranking lineages. Junior chiefs from
outside the leading families could compete to succeed to a title.

    In theory, all chiefs were related by descent from an original supreme chief, the Tuʔi Tonga.
However, Gifford (1929) could not find genealogies outside the royal line going back beyond
about AD 1600. The archipelago was politically unstable between 1600 and 1800, with frequent
assassinations of paramount chiefs. Oral history records that Tonga was seldom under a single
chief. Rather, a number of high chiefs ruled separate domains. The secular authority of the Tuʔi
Tonga was limited to his home island, Tongatapu. Outlying islands owed him first fruits but not
political tribute.

162 Andrew Pawley

    ʔeiki is a broader category of chiefly rank below tuʔi. It was extended by courtesy to all kin
of a chief. A distinction was made between high chiefs (‘eiki motu, ʔeiki taupoto or ʔeiki toho)
and petty chiefs (ʔeiki siʔi).

    Chiefs made large ceremonial displays of food, the burden of supply falling on the tenants
who served as the labour force. Under the Tuʔi Tonga were four high chiefs who served as
ministers with ritual duties. Matāpule were ceremonial attendants of chiefs, the highest-ranking
matāpule being himself a chief with authority over lower-ranking matāpule.

    The Tuʔi Tonga was too sacred to fight. A cadre of professional warriors (toa) drawn from
matāpule families were part of the royal court. High chiefs were not priests. Priests performed
minor duties at shrines and served offerings to the gods. Their standing depended on rank of the
lineage and its gods.

4.3.3 Open societies

As examples of open societies Goldman cites Samoa, Niue, Marquesas, Mangaia and Rapanui.
Although he places Futuna in the traditional category it shows some features of his open class
and I include it here. Notes on Samoa and Futuna follow.


4.3.3.1 Samoa

Samoan society lacked ramified descent groups. The core kinship unit was the ʔāiŋa, an
indefinitely extended bilateral kindred with branches representing hierarchically ranked
segments. Every extended family was headed by one or more high chiefs (aliʔi paʔia). Each
high chief was paired with a junior chief, tulāfale, who served as orator (‘talking chief’) and
came from the female line. There was some recognition of primogeniture and descent lines and
patrilineal succession but primogeniture played a weak role in the assignment of chiefly titles.
The highest ranked titles were transmitted through the male line (tama tāne). The female line
(tama fafine) had the power to curse, through the father’s sister.

    Administrative powers in a village were held by the fono, village council of chiefs. The
transmission of high ranked chiefly titles was under the jurisdiction of the fono. The chiefly
title of tāupōu ‘village maiden’ was held by a high-ranking female who had charge of the
aualuma ‘association of unmarried women of a village, with various formal duties’. The Great
Fono was a conceptual body, which never met, representing all of Samoa.

    The title of tui, followed by the name of a district, was given to the paramount chief of that
district. In pre-European Samoa ten districts were recognised. Before the Tongan invasion
(possibly ca AD 1200) the Tui Manuʔa title held the highest rank in Samoa. The person and
belongings of the Tui Manuʔa were sacred and dangerous, but political and economic authority
was lodged in local autonomous districts. In the early 19th century a chief of the Malietoa
family had conquered the whole of Samoa but his power was limited to rank and title, not
extending to economic control.

    The wealth of chiefs was measured in terms of valuable goods, especially ʔie toŋa ‘fine
mats’, siapo ‘bark-cloth, and ʔoloa ‘valuable goods’. Samoa, with its three large islands, had
extensive areas of fertile land, allowing production of a food surplus. The distribution of food
in feasts accented the social position of chiefs.

                                                                                 Social rank 163


   The patron-craftsman relationship stood outside the traditional system of genealogical rank.
Craftsmen held the title of tufuŋa. The highest status crafts were those of canoe builder,
carpenter and tattooer. Craft titles were transmitted in descent lines.

   Chiefs were priests, taula. Some priests were concerned with family gods, higher order
priests with great gods.

4.3.3.2 Futuna

The Futuna or Hoorn group consists of two islands, Futuna and Alofi, that in early colonial
times supported a population of 3000-4000, most living on the larger island, Futuna. Land
shortage was a pressing problem often leading to war.

    There are three levels of rank: aliki sau ‘high chiefs’, aliki ‘sub-chiefs’ and seka ‘common-
ers, including untitled members of chiefly lineages’. By colonial times the main island was
divided into two districts each with its own aliki sau. Each clan in turn divides into a number of
ramages (kutuŋa), each having its own chief (aliki or launiu), with the paramount chief being
from the highest ranked ramage. The landholding groups are kāiŋa, a term that refers to both
the group of landowners and to the segment of land they own.

    Seniority of birth was important but not the major factor in qualification for chiefly office.
Chiefs came from important families but were selected on the basis of their accomplishments.
Distinguished warriors (given the title of toa) were potential chiefs and sometimes usurped
royalty.

    Chiefs were expected to move freely among their people and to work in the gardens and as
craftsmen. Commoners owed their chiefs respect but not servility. But chiefs were set apart in
various ways. They were spokesmen for the ancestral gods. They were the instigators and
organisers of war. Certain foods – turtles and certain birds and fish – were reserved for them.
The fasu institution (special rights given to sister’s children) was restricted to chiefs in earlier
times. They had highest status in the kava circle. A village council (fono) dealt with mundane
village affairs, chiefs with more elevated matters, such as warfare, and the imposing and lifting
of tapu. Symbols of rank were important. There is an honorific vocabulary, used in addressing
chiefs.


4.4 Issues with ‘ancestral Polynesian society’

Kirch (1984) and Kirch and Green (1987) conclude that ancestral Polynesian society had
chiefdoms corresponding to the ‘traditional’ type, exemplified by Tikopia and New Zealand
Maori, and that those Polynesian societies with very high or very low levels of stratification
represent later developments. In this respect they are in accord with some previous commenta-
tors on the evolution of Polynesian societies, such as Sahlins (1957, 1963), Koskinen (1960)
and Goldman (1970).

   Following Sahlins, Kirch and Green argue that the organisational basis of ancestral
Polynesian society was the conical clan, a group claiming descent from a common ancestor,
ranked and segmented along genealogical lines. Descent groups of this kind are typically
associated with terms for same-sex siblings distinguished by seniority of birth (PPn *tuqakana
‘older sibling of same sex’, *tahina ‘younger sibling of same sex’; see §3.5.1.5.1–2). Kirch and
Green (2001:231) define PPn *qariki as ‘the senior male, titled leader of a social group,
probably the *kainaŋa, who typically inherited his position patrilineally within the senior
ranked line of this group, and who acted as the group’s secular as well as ritual leader.’

164 Andrew Pawley


    By virtue of their inherited rank *qariki had mana ‘supernatural efficacy, the power to make
things happen’ and were tapu ‘sacred, set apart by taboos’. A chief had important sacred duties
to perform relating to the well-being of his subjects, such as ensuring success in growing crops
and in communal fishing activities.

    Kirch and Green (2001:231) propose that their extended definition of the roles of a priest-
chief in ancestral Polynesian society allows one to trace, in some detail, transformations that
have occurred in particular societies after the breakup of the PPn speech community. In more
conservative societies, chiefs retained both their secular and sacred roles and continued to be
associated with descent groups. In many Polynesian societies, however, a functional separation
between sacred and secular roles developed. This was particularly so in Eastern Polynesia,
corresponding to the widespread importance of a priestly class. Yet another kind of transforma-
tion accompanied the breakdown of the ancient *kainaŋa-type social groups and their
replacement with strictly territorial groupings, in which chiefs became the owners of such land
units: Hawaii and Tonga both exemplify this kind of change.

    Dye (1987) is sceptical of Kirch and Green’s (1987) definition of the role of PPn *qariki,
remarking that their reconstruction “is modeled on the rights, duties, and modes of succession
associated with chiefs of contact-era societies in possession of full land situations” (Dye
1987:445-446). He doubts whether these institutions could have existed in the pioneering phase
of settlement, when a founding community of fewer than 100 people occupied an island
covered with virgin forest.

    However, PPn was not the language of a small first-generation, founding population but of
communities which had lived in western Polynesia for many centuries, during which time the
innovations defining the Polynesian subgroup developed and spread across this region. The
initial colonisation of the different islands in the Polynesian Triangle and of the Outliers must
have involved many cases where a small founding population settled uninhabited islands, and it
is striking that similar beliefs and practices associated with chieftainship survived these
foundation events. That indicates that the founding populations carried the ideology with them.


4.5 Rank and leadership in Proto Oceanic society

We turn now to a consideration of rank and leadership in Proto Oceanic society. Reconstruction
of the lexicon of POc is less straightforward than is the case for PPn. An etymon can be
attributed to POc if it is reflected in (a) at least two first order subgroups of Oceanic or (b) in an
Oceanic language and a non-Oceanic Austronesian language.

    A problem is that the first-order subgrouping of Oceanic is not clear-cut (see Figure 1.2).
There are several candidates for first-order subgroups in western Melanesia: the Admiralties,
Mussau and Western Oceanic, and several in southeast Melanesia and the central Pacific:
Southeast Solomonic, Temotu, Micronesian, Vanuatu, New Caledonia-Loyalties, and Central
Pacific. To meet criterion (a) a conservative procedure is to require that an etymon be reflected
in at least one subgroup in NW Melanesia and one outside NW Melanesia.

                                                                                      Social rank 165


4.5.1 Political systems in Oceanic-speaking societies of Melanesia

In an influential and controversial paper Sahlins (1963) sought to explain the larger size of
polities found in certain Polynesian societies, running into the thousands, compared with the
smaller scale polities, ranging from 70 to 300 people, characteristic of many societies in NW
Melanesia. Central to his explanation are differences in the nature of rank and leadership.

__blockquote__
     The Polynesian advance in political scale was supported by an advance over Melanesia
     in political structure […] The characteristic western Melanesian “tribe”, that is, the
     ethnic-cultural entity, consists of many autonomous kinship-residential groups.
     Amounting on the ground to a small village or a local cluster of hamlets, each of these is
     a copy of the others in political status. The tribal plan is one of politically unintegrated
     segments – segmental. But the political geometry in Polynesia is pyramidal […]
     Smaller units are integrated onto large through a system of intergroup ranking, and the
     network of representative chiefs of the subdivisions amounts to a coordinating political
     structure. So instead of the Melanesian scheme of small, separate and equal political
     blocks, the Polynesian polity is an extensive pyramid of groups capped by the family
     and following of a paramount chief (Sahlins 1963:287).

   Commentators have pointed out that a simple Melanesian/Polynesian dichotomy in systems
of rank and leadership is not justified (Chowning 1979; Douglas 1979; Hage 1999b; Sand
2002). Forms of hereditary leadership based on rank are found in various Oceanic-speaking
communities of Papua New Guinea, e.g. in the Admiralty Islands (Mead 1934; Otto 1994), in
Wogeo in East Sepik Province (Hogbin 1970), in Manam in Madang Province (Wedgwood
1934), in Mekeo (Hau’ofa 1981), Motu (Seligman 1910) and Roro (Seligman 1910) in Central
Province, in the Trobriand Is. in Milne Bay Province (Malinowski 1922), in Hahon in
Bougainville (Blackwood 1935), and parts of the Solomon Is., e.g. Arosi (Fox 1924), Baegu
(Ross 1973) and Sa’a (Ivens 1927), in various societies in Vanuatu (Facey 1981), and New
Caledonia (Douglas 1979; Guiart 1963) and throughout Fiji, as well as in most societies in
Micronesia (Shimizu 1987).

   Sahlins (1963:286) acknowledges that “in eastern Melanesia, New Caledonia and Fiji for
example, political approximations of the Polynesian condition became common” but he finds
that political structures showing an extensive pyramid of genealogically ranked groups are
characteristically Polynesian. Extensive regional trading systems linking scores of local
communities have developed in various parts of western Melanesia, but these produced “at
best, an ephemeral sort of political association” (Harding 1970:111).

   There follow notes on a small selection of Oceanic-speaking societies of Melanesia that
have a form of hereditary chieftainship.

4.5.1.1 New Caledonia

Douglas (1979:16-18) describes traditional New Caledonian socio-political organisation as
follows:

__blockquote__
     [It] centred on localized, patrilineal and patri-virilocal clans, and on tribes, aggregates of
     clans paying allegiance to the chief of one of their number […] clan members claimed
     common descent and owed allegiance to a hereditary chief, in theory the genealogically
     senior man of the senior lineage; a tribe was regarded as a group of related clans with a
     common founding ancestor, which paid allegiance to the senior male member of the
     senior lineage of the original clan. The chief was a clan’s ‘great (first-born) son’ […]
     Neither the ideology of common descent nor that of chiefly seniority was necessarily
     borne out in practice, however […] Both clans and tribes commonly absorbed unrelated
     individuals and groups, and rationalized the process in kinship terms. Ideology was thus
     satisfied, but common residence was in practice a key factor in group cohesion. A
     newcomer was sometimes installed as chief by earlier inhabitants who nonetheless
     continued to exercise covert authority through their control of land […]
     A clan or tribal chief […] enjoyed many prerogatives and possessed authority because of
     his role as intermediary between the group and its ancestral spirits […]
     The chief was neither the sole office holder nor the only decision maker. He shared
     authority with such dignitaries as the war chief, master of the soil, priests and powerful
     sorcerers, who with respected elders formed an advisory council which assisted the
     chief to reach the consensus on which group action was usually based […]
     The sanctity of New Caledonian chiefs and the deference to which they were entitled
     rested on their implied genealogical connexions with deified ancestors.

166 Andrew Pawley

Douglas comments that in degree of political stratification New Caledonian leadership
resembles ‘mid-range’ Polynesian societies (corresponding to Goldman’s ‘traditional’ type)
such as Maori, though the descent ideology was probably more flexible than in the Maori case.

4.5.1.2 Mekeo (Central Province, Papua New Guinea)

Seligman (1910) and Hau’ofa (1981) describe Mekeo society in the early colonial period, when
tribal warfare was still ongoing. Key institutions were the hereditary offices of the high chief or
civilian chief (lopia faʔa) and the war chief (iso lopia, more commonly simply iso), the official
sorcerers (uŋauŋa) and the war magicians (faiʔa). A village is made up of agnatically related
subclans, ranked in order of seniority of descent from older vs younger brothers.

    Each subclan should have both a civilian chief and a war chief, representing a fundamental
division of authority between the civilian and military spheres in Mekeo society. High chiefs do
not take an active part in warfare but are regarded as men of peace whose authority rests on
their control of sorcerers, and so of life and death. War chiefs are dangerous men of anger and
violence valued for their military prowess. High chiefs are ceremonially installed. Hau’ofa
(1981:185) observes that in a large subclan the civilian chieftainship is divided between the
lopia faʔa and a junior chief (lopia eke). The junior chief performs certain ritual duties on
behalf of the high chief in the ufuapie ceremonial feasts.

    When large clans segment the junior branch is headed by a junior chief. Once a particular
chieftainship is established, be it senior or junior, succession to the office becomes hereditary
from father to son, with the qualification that only a successful warrior can succeed to a war
chieftainship. The father sometimes chooses a junior son or an adopted son to succeed him but
only if the eldest son is not suitable.

    Chiefs’ houses differ from those of other villagers in that they are built parallel to the central
ground and have special roof designs. Chiefs were not wealthy but derived their prestige and
authority from their rank, personality, numerical strength of their group and command of
certain kinds of magic.
    Mekeo believe that powers of sorcery (uŋauŋa)

__blockquote__
     were given personally by the deity, A’aisa, to certain men who founded some of their
     present-day sorcery families. They believe that when A’aisa created their political
     organization by an edict he appointed two kinds of hereditary leaders, the military and
     the civilian. For the civilian leadership he appointed some men as chiefs and others to
     enforce the authority of the chiefs. Sorcery lineages which have risen from these
     appointments are the most prestigious in the land. (Hau’ofa 1981:230)

                                                                                   Social rank 167


   Hereditary leaders, particularly sorcerers, usually acquire one or more kinds of non-sorcery
magic which they incorporate in their arsenal of powers. These enhance their prestige and at
the same time allow them additional sources of wealth.

4.5.1.3 Baluan (Admiralty Is., Papua New Guinea)

Baluan, a society of the Admiralty Is., is described by Otto (1994) as thoroughly hierarchical.

__blockquote__
     Ascribed hierarchy was without a doubt a pervasive trait of Baluan society at the end of
     the nineteenth century. It was expressed in various ways: birth-order name, kinship
     terminology, a system of dual rank, ranked titles for leaders, and material signs of
     distinction (Otto 1994:224)
     Hierarchy was not based on ascription or achievement alone, but on a specific articula-
     tion of these two principles […] The relative ranking of leaders of high rank was
     determined by their success in warfare and feast-giving. The status of a lapan [chiefly]
     lineage would be eroded by inadequate performance, although they could continue
     claiming the title for several generations. The lapan stories show clearly that lapan
     status could also be appropriated through violence […]” (Otto 1994:232)

4.5.1.4 Manam (Schouten Islands, off north coast of Papua New Guinea)

Wedgwood (1934) reports that in Manam society descent is patrilineal, residence is patrilocal
and leadership is hereditary, based on primogeniture. There are two named social groups, the
aristocracy (tanepoa or tanepwa) and the commoners (gadagada). Membership in these groups
is based on birth. The village chief, tanepoa labalaba, literally ‘big chief’, is the “senior male
descendant in the male line of the original founder of the village” (Wedgewood 1934:383). The
chief’s sons and younger brothers are called tanepoa siʔisiʔi, literally ‘little chief’. There is a
strong preference for marriage between chiefly families. Lutkehaus (1990) states that tanepoa
were believed to inherit from their ancestors special marou, a form of supernatural power or
mana, with both benign and malign aspects. “Its benign form was manifested in a tanepwa’s
ability to produce abundant taro in his gardens, to protect his village against illness and strife, to
promote his village’s reputation through the organization of large and munificent pig-exchange
celebrations” (Lutkehaus 1990:300) and through success in amassing valuables from mainland
trading partners. The dark side of marou was its association with sorcery, which a chief was
able to control.

4.5.1.5 Sa’a (Malaita, Solomon Is.)

The Sa’a occupy the island of Small Malaita in the Southeast Solomons. Their society around
the end of the 19th century is described by Codrington (1891) and Ivens (1927). They made a
sharp distinction between chiefs (alaha) and commoners (apoloa). Descent is patrilineal.
Chieftainship is hereditary. The reciting of genealogies is practised. Ivens recorded one
genealogy going back 39 generations. Sons can be adopted to ensure succession. Codrington
(1991:50) writes that

168 Andrew Pawley

__blockquote__
     [T]he chief’s power at Sa’a comes from his birth and personal qualities, not from his
     intimacy with supernatural beings and his magical knowledge, [although] he may well
     have these […] He inherits wealth from his father, and adds to it by the fines he imposes
     and by the gifts of his people, but no wealth or success in war could make a man a chief
     at Sa’a if not born of the chief’s family.
     Chiefs lived in more substantial buildings than commoners. The toohi ‘chief’s lodge’ is
     the reception house for all visitors of importance.

    Chiefs were not allowed to go into battle. Their main social function was the provision of
feasts. The malaohu (initiation of boys into bonito fishing) system was also under their control.
The head wife of a chief is chosen from among the girls of neighbouring places who them-
selves are alaha. His other wives may be apoloa. If the head wife has no male heir, a son of
one of the other wives succeeds to the chieftainship.

    The persons of chiefs were sacred to the extent that anyone who cursed them or the marks
of their chiefly position, their gongs or official houses, was marked down for death. The relics
of deceased chiefs, their skulls, were held in especial reverence. The common people paid
honour to both chief and priest; the one was the glory of the place and the other served ghosts
who either had been chiefs themselves or were connected with chiefs through the bonito
fishing. It was customary for the commoner to make offerings of garden produce to the chief
and of cooked food to the priest; and no return was made or expected. Chief and priest were
exempted from the obligation to make a return for gifts received which always held in the case
of commoners.

4.5.2 Distributional and other arguments for attributing hereditary chieftainship to Proto Oceanic society

Hereditary chieftainship is found in societies speaking languages belonging to almost every
major subgroup of Oceanic. By contrast, as far as I am aware, none of the more than 700 non-
Austronesian language communities of Melanesia have hereditary chiefs. This is a strong
distributional argument in favour of attributing hereditary chieftainship to POc society. It is
highly unlikely that that such an institution would have arisen independently in many different
Oceanic societies.

    Furthermore, as Hage (1999a,b) points out, POc kinship terminology makes it probable that
POc society had unilineal descent groups based on seniority of birth. Milke’s (1958) recon-
struction of POc kin terms is diagnostic of a unilineal system, distinguishing as it does between
terms for father’s brother (*tama) and mother’s brother (probably *matuqa), and between
terms for mother’s sister (*tina) and father’s sister (*aia or *aya), a pattern which cross-
culturally strongly equates with unilineal descent groups (85% correlation in Murdock's
worldwide survey; Murdock 1947, 1967). There is a widespread association between such a
terminology and descent group organisation and exogamy, such that a parent’s opposite-sex
siblings will always be in a different descent group from their same-sex siblings (see §3.2.3).

    The highly marked status of the seniority distinction in terms for siblings of the same sex in
Oceanic societies also implies the existence in POc society of a conical clan system

__blockquote__
      in which all individuals and all descent lines theoretically have unique ranks. This
      ranking is generated by a rule of […] primogeniture in the Oceanic case, which
      distinguishes elder siblings from younger siblings […] and descendants of elder and
      younger siblings […] Primogeniture is reflected in the seniority distinction in [Proto
      Oceanic] sibling terminology and more emphatically in the marked status of the term
      for elder (parallel) sibling. In a number of [Oceanic] terminologies, e.g. Fijian, the term
      for younger (parallel) sibling can be used generically to mean sibling irrespective of age
      (or sex) while the term for elder (parallel) sibling can only have this specific meaning,
      reflecting the special, elevated position of this relation […] Titles are passed down the
      senior lines, and members of more senior lines form an upper, chiefly class while
      members of more junior lines form a lower, commoner class, for example, ‘eiki […]
      and tua as in Tonga, iroij and kajur as in the Marshall Islands, and lapan and lau as in
      the Admiralties.”(Hage 1999a:208)

                                                                                       Social rank 169


A further argument, mentioned earlier, for supposing that Lapita society was stratified stems
from the very rapid colonisation of all the major island groups of the southwest Pacific after the
initial Lapita movements into this region. This achievement required considerable capital
investment in skilled labour to build ocean-going sailing canoes.[3] It required the recruitment of
crews and passengers in sufficient numbers to form viable founding populations, and the
transport of useful plants and breeding stocks of domestic animals. It implies the existence of
prestigious leaders who could plan and command these undertakings.

    This point is well made by Hayden (1983) who argued that boats and trade are the key to
understanding the maintenance of social stratification in Polynesia and other regions initially
settled by Lapita people. He notes that the construction of a single medium-sized ocean-going
canoe took from one to three years, and canoe builders were specialists trained through a rigid
system of apprenticeship.

4.5.2.1 POc *ta(u)-lapat ‘chief’ or ‘big-man’?

If POc society had hereditary chiefs, what were they called? Are cognates of PPn *qariki
present in other branches of Oceanic?

   C.E. Fox (1924, 1970) noted that Arosi, a Southeast Solomonic language of Makira, has a
pair of terms araha ‘chief’ and ariʔi ‘eldest son of a chief’ (the latter used in songs). The eldest
son became chief before his father’s death. Fox asserted that each of these Arosi terms can be
analysed into a personal article a, and an adjective, raha ‘big, great’ or riʔi ‘little, small’. That is
to say, a-raha is literally ‘Great one’ and a-riʔi is ‘Little one’, i.e. the chief’s heir. Arosi a is
preposed to “names native or foreign; used with nouns to personify; with verbs or adjectives to
form a descriptive noun or nickname” (Fox 1970:1). A cognate article is found in some other
Oceanic languages, including Polynesian, where it precedes personal names and/or, in some
languages, place names (Pawley 1972:58).

   In Pawley (1982), I accepted Fox’s claim that Arosi ariʔi is cognate with PPn *qariki and
observed that cognates of Arosi araha denoting a chief or person of a chiefly descent group
occur in several languages of the Malaita-Makira subgroup in the Southeast Solomons,
supporting the reconstruction of Proto Malaita-Makira *alafa ‘chief’:

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *alafa ‘chief, person of a chiefly lineage’
  MM: Arosi      araha            ‘chief, man of the chiefly clan’
  MM: Arosi      haʔa-araha       ‘raise s.o. to chiefly rank, make a child a member of the of the chiefly clan by his father giving a series of feasts’
  MM: Bauro      araha            ‘chief, man of the chiefly clan’
  MM: Owa        arafa            ‘boss, chief, lord, ruler, important person’
  MM: Owa        |arafa ni finua| ‘village chief’ (ni ‘of’, finua ‘village’)
  MM: Sa’a       alaha            ‘hereditary chief’
  MM: Sa’a       alaha-ŋa         ‘rule, dominion, chieftainship’
  MM: Sa’a       |aʔo i alahaŋa|  ‘elder branch of a chiefly family’
  MM: Sa’a       |puri alahaŋa|   ‘the cadet branch’
  MM: ’Are’are   araha            ‘chief’
  MM: ’Are’are   |araha ana komu| ‘chief of a bilateral family’
  MM: ’Are’are   araha-a          ‘to rule over’
  MM: ’Are’are   araha-ha         ‘be a chief, to rule’
  MM: ’Are’are   araha-ŋa         ‘chieftainship’
  MM: Kwaio      alafa            ‘wealthy influential leader’
  MM: Lau        alafa            ‘a chief’’
  MM: Lau        alafa-la         ‘kingdom, region of chief’s authority’
  MM: Lau        alafa-na         ‘kingdom, dominion’
>

[3] These were probably five-piece outrigger canoes with hulls built up with a topstrake, and with platform
    amidships (Pawley and Pawley 1994). Double canoes, with much larger carrying capacity, probably
    arose in Fiji or western Polynesia after Lapita colonisation (Anderson 2018).

170 Andrew Pawley


In line with Fox’s analysis of Arosi araha, I treated Proto Malaita-Makira *alafa as consisting
of a personal article *a and a nominalised adjective *lafa ‘big, great’.

    Lichtenberk (1986:351) proposed a different analysis. He argued that Proto Malaita-Makira
*alafa comes from POc *ta-la(m)pat, where *ta- was a reduced form of the well-attested noun
*tau ‘man, person’, preceding *la(m)pat ‘big, great’.4 POc *t is regularly lost in all positions in
Malaita-Makira languages.

    Lichtenberk also gave a phonological reason for reconstructing *ta rather than *a. This has
to do with the order in which certain sound changes occurred in Malaita-Makira languages
(Lichtenberk 1986, 1988:41). POc *q had already been lost before PMaMa separated from
other SES languages. Next, a sporadic but frequent change of word-initial *a to *θa (theta-
prothesis) spread across Malaita-Makiran. Initial θ then became s in several Malaitan lan-
guages, l in Kwaio but remained θ in To’aba’ita.5 so that, for example, POc *qalipan
‘centipede' is reflected as To’aba’ita θāfila (metathesis), Lau saruhe, ‘Are’are rarihe, Kwaio
lalifa, Oroha saruhe, but Sa’a ɛluhe, Ulawa aliha (Lichtenberk 1986:36). Subsequently POc *t
was regularly lost in MaMa. If the protoform had been PEOc *qa-lapat, it would have
undergone the following sequence of changes: *qalapat > PMaMa *a-lafa > post-PMaMa
*θa-lafa. But the forms listed above show no sign of theta-prothesis, pointing instead to the
sequence PEOc *ta-lapat > PMaMa *a-lafa

    Lichtenberk was uncertain as to whether his POc *tala(m)pat referred to a hereditary chief
or to a self-made big-man. He comments:

__blockquote__
      The literal meaning of *tala(m)pat was ‘big [person], great person’, and it referred to a
      leader, as do its reflexes in the [Makira-Malaitan] languages […] Given its literal
      meaning one might be tempted to conclude that the expression referred to a big-man
      rather than a chief. However, this conclusion is not warranted. The literal meaning
     under-determines the denotation of *tala(m)pat. It is compatible with the denotation
     ‘chief’ just as well as […] ‘big-man’. (Lichtenberk 1986:351)

[4] In the orthography for POc that is now conventional, after Ross (1988), Lichtenberk’s reconstruction of
    POc *la(m)pat would be written *la(b,p)at,. with *b representing [ᵐb]. However, the weight of evidence
    now favours reconstructing *lapat, *lapʷat or *lapuat as reconstructed in vol.2:191-192. *lapat is used
    here.

[5] This prothesis is distributed unevenly across the Malaita-Makiran languages and therefore must have
    spread after the breakup of Proto Malaita-Makiran.
                                                                                   Social rank 171


Lichtenberk was apparently not aware that many Oceanic languages of the Admiralties reflect
*lapa-ña ‘chief, leader’, analysable into a nominal root *lapa (homophonous with Proto
Admiralties *lapa ‘big, great’) and a suffix *-ña, reflected as -n in many Admiralties languages, 
which marks singular agreement on an adjective.

<
PAdm *lapa-ña ‘chief, leader’
  Adm: Mussau       lapa-n         ‘important person, chief’
  Adm: Baluan       lapa-n         ‘leader of hereditary status’
  Adm: Titan        lapa-n         ‘leader, chief, those of noble blood’
  Adm: Nyindrou     laba-n         ‘leader, chief’
  Adm: Koro         laba-n         ‘chief’
  Adm: Loniu        lapa-n         ‘leader, God’
  Adm: Koro         laba-n         ‘chief’
  Adm: Seimat       la-lap         ‘chief’; ‘important, large’
>

    As noted in §4.5.1.4, in Manam, a Western Oceanic language of north New Guinea, the
village chieftainship is a hereditary position occupied by the senior male descendant of the
village founder. The chief is called tanepoa labalaba, where tanepoa is ‘chief’ and labalaba is
‘big’. The latter term comes from POc *lapat ‘big, great’. The chief’s sons and younger
brothers are called tanepoa siʔisiʔi, literally ‘little chief’.

    A number of Micronesian languages also have reflexes of *lapat, referring to chiefs and
genealogical seniority.

__formgroup__
  Mic: Marshallese  |iroij laba-lap|   ‘head of royal lineage’ (lit. ‘very great chief’)
  Mic: Marshallese  |iroij elab|       ‘lesser chief’ (lit. ‘great chief’)
  Mic: Lamotrek     mala-lap           ‘senior representative of a matrilineal clan’
  Mic: Woleaian     tame-lap           ‘eldest male of a family’ (lit. ‘great father’)

   The agreement between languages from four widely dispersed subgroups (Malaita-Makira,
Admiralties, Western Oceanic and Micronesian) suggests that in POc the adjective *lapat ‘big,
great’ also had the senses ‘genealogically senior’ and ‘of chiefly rank’, and occurred as the
modifier in one or more compound nouns denoting a chief or person of chiefly rank. One such
compound noun was probably *ta(u)-lapat, where the head noun was *tau ‘man, person’.

   Note also the title of the high chief of Nadrogā (SW Vitilevu) is kʷālevu, lit ‘the big one’,
contrasting with kʷāhewa, lit ‘the small one’, his child.

  One other term for chief or leader can be reconstructed, with reflexes in two Admiralties and
two New Ireland languages.

<
POc *kabi-ña ‘chief’
 Adm: Levei         kapi-ŋ          ‘chief’
 Adm: Nyindrou      kapi-n          ‘clan leader, chief’
 MM: Sursurunga     kabi(sit)       ‘chief, head man, fight leader’ (meaning of sit not known)
 MM: Patpatar       kabi-n(sit)     ‘supreme chieftain of one or more villages’ (meaning of sit not known)
>

172 Andrew Pawley


4.5.2.2 On the origin of PPn *qariki

It was noted in §4.5.2.1 that PPn *qariki ‘chief’ resembles Arosi ariʔi ‘first-born son of a chief,
chief’s heir’, and that this has led some to conclude that these forms are cognate, each
historically analysable as consisting of a personal article and a reflex of POc *riki ‘little’. The
sound correspondences are regular. However, Arosi ariʔi has cognates in several Malaitan
languages, and, as Lichtenberk (1986) notes, these do not mean ‘first-born son of a chief’.

__formgroup__
  MM: Kwara’ae        s-ariʔi              ‘unmarried girl’
  MM: Kwaio           la-aliki             ‘unmarried girl, daughter’
  MM: Lau             s-arii               ‘unmarried girl, maiden, daughter’
  MM: To’aba’ita      θa-ariʔi             ‘unmarried girl, maiden’

Lichtenberk argues that the Malaitan cognates continue a Proto Malaitan form *a-ariki that
consisted of two morphemes: *a ‘personal article’ and *ariki which he glossed as ‘unmarried
girl, maiden, daughter’. Contemporary Malaitan languages have accreted a prothetic consonant
to the personal article *a and other roots beginning with the vowel *a.

    How are the differences of meaning between the Polynesian, Arosi and Malaitan forms to
be resolved? Lichtenberk suggests that the most likely meaning in their common ancestral
language was ‘oldest child’. Chowning (1991:63) points to Mussau aliki ‘child’ and Bariai
(New Britain) galiki ‘firstborn child’ as possible cognates, and suggests ‘child’ (as an age-grade
term, not a kinship term) as the meaning in POc. We may note the existence of the well
supported POc etymon *natu- ‘child’ (kinship term, requiring a possessor) but it is usual for
Oceanic languages to have distinct terms for ‘child’ as a kinship term and as an age grade term.

    At some point in the history of Polynesian it may be that the term *qariki ‘child’ was used
as a nickname for the chief himself, and that in PPn it became the conventional term for
‘chief’. A parallel usage occurs in Samoan, where tama ‘boy, youth; son of a woman’ can refer
to chiefs of high rank and the compound tama-ali’i (lit. ‘chiefly boy’) as a noun denotes a chief
and as a verb means ‘be of noble descent or lineage’ (Milner 1966). The holder of any of the
four highest titles in Samoa is known as tama-ʔāiŋa (lit. ‘boy of the lineage’). In Tongan tama
‘child, son especially of a woman’ also has the meaning ‘male of chiefly rank’. In Bauan Fijian
ŋone tūraŋa, lit. ‘chiefly child’, is an honorific term for a chief (Paul Geraghty pers. comm.).

4.5.2.3 Terms for people of low status

Lichtenberk (1986:351) allows that if it were possible to reconstruct a term for ‘commoner’ for
POc, this would be strong evidence that POc society had chiefs.

   Many Oceanic languages have a term or terms for people of low status but no widespread
cognates are found. Often a derogatory term meaning ‘useless, unimportant’ is involved.

__formgroup__
  Adm: Nyindrou       |lau leleyah|      ‘commoner’ (lau ‘person’; leleyah ‘nothing’)
  Adm: Titan          lau                ‘commoners’
  Adm: Baluan         lau                ‘collective term for followers of a lapan’
  Adm: Baluan         sayo               ‘person of low status, opposite of lapan’
  NNG: Manam          gada-gada          ‘commoner’
  SES: Gela           bonaɣa             ‘commoner, of no importance’
  SES: Arosi          |mʷae taʔa|        ‘commoner, man of no importance, man of any clan except araha’ (mʷae ‘man’, taʔa ‘bad, poor’)
  SES: Lau            nēna               ‘commoner’
  SES: Owa            |ainuni purua|     ‘common people’ (ainuni ‘people’, puru ‘ordinary, common’)
  Mic: Marshallese    kacuṛʷ             ‘commoner, common people’
  Mic: Marshallese    |aṛʷmec wān|       ‘commoner’ (aṛʷmec ‘person’, wān ‘trivial, common, worthless’)
  Fij: Bauan          tau-vanua          ‘commoner’ (tau ‘person’, vanua ‘land, place’)

                                                                               Social rank 173


    New Caledonian languages usually have a term that means ‘subject of (a chief)’. These
include: in Pije, Fwâi, Nemi, Jawe, Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa yabʷec, Cèmuhî abʷɛ̄, Xârâcùù
kʷara and Iaai kei-. Most of these terms can occur with a collective proclitic, and the Iaai term
is directly possessed, e.g. la kei-ñ ‘his subjects’, la kei-k ‘my subjects’ (la ‘collective’).

    One candidate for ‘commoner’ is POc *mwala, which Blust (1981a) suggests may have been
a noun denoting a person of low social status. However, the evidence favours reconstructing
*mwala as a stative verb and adjective meaning ‘common, worthless’ and as a noun meaning
‘misfortune, lack of prosperity’.

__formgroup__
   SES: Gela               mala                ‘comparative marker with deprecatory force’
   SES: Arosi              mara                ‘deprecatory prefix’
   SES: Sa’a               mʷala               ‘people, commoners (as opposed to chiefs)’
   NCV: Mota               mala                ‘bad, poor’ (often used in depreciation)
   Mic: Marshallese        wān                 ‘trivial, common, worthless’
   Mic: Marshallese        |aṛʷmec wān|        ‘commoner’ (lit. ‘worthless person’)
   Mic: Mokilese           mʷāl                ‘useless, disadvantaged, low (socially)’
   Mic: Ponapean           mʷāl                ‘common, useless, of no consequence’
   Mic: Ponapean           |aramas mʷāl|       ‘commoner’ (lit. ‘person of no consequence’)


4.6 Conclusion

The Proto Oceanic language can be associated with the Lapita culture which appeared in the
Bismarck Archipelago at about 3300-3200 BP. Around 3000 BP bearers of Lapita became the
first people to settle island groups of the southwest Pacific east of the main Solomons group,
and within the space of two or three centuries colonised Santa Cruz and the Reef Is., Vanuatu,
New Caledonia, Fiji, Tonga and Samoa. This was an achievement that implies strong leader-
ship, requiring as it did the building of large ocean-going outrigger canoes, the recruitment of
crews and passengers and the transport of domestic animals and useful plants.

    A number of terms relating to chiefly authority and status are attributable to Proto Polyne-
sian, the daughter of POc that developed in western Polynesia, with some regional variation, in
the millennium or so following colonisation by Lapita people. There is strong evidence that
speakers of PPn had ranked descent groups, probably termed *kainaŋa, headed by hereditary
chiefs, called *qariki, and that rank was based on primogeniture.

174 Andrew Pawley

    In Melanesia, hereditary chieftainship based on primogeniture is also found in societies
representing several major subgroups of Oceanic but is absent in societies speaking non-Austronesian 
languages. This is a powerful distributional argument in favour of attributing
hereditary chieftainship to POc society. It is unlikely that that such an institution would have
arisen independently in many different Oceanic societies. Furthermore, POc kinship terminolo-
gy is of a type that makes it probable that POc society had unilineal descent groups ranked by
seniority of birth.

    Agreement between languages from four widely dispersed subgroups (Admiralties, Western
Oceanic, Malaita-Makiran and Micronesian) suggests that in POc the adjective *lapat ‘big,
great’ also had the meanings ‘genealogically senior’ and ‘of chiefly rank’, and that it occurred
as a constituent in a compound noun denoting a chief or person of chiefly rank, possibly *ta(u)-
lapat.

                

5 Settlement patterns and territory in the Proto Oceanic speech community

5.1 Introduction

This chapter asks what linguistic evidence can tell us about Proto Oceanic speakers’
settlement patterns and relation to territory, both land and sea.1 Where were settlements
located? What sort of residential communities existed? Did people live in sizeable villages or
in dispersed hamlets? What sort of buildings were constructed, in terms of function and
architecture? What sort of territorial units were recognised?

    A conjunction of archaeological and linguistic evidence places the primary dispersal
centre of Proto Oceanic in the Bismarck Archipelago and associates this language with the
archaeological tradition known as (Early Western) Lapita, whose bearers spread very swiftly
across the southwest Pacific around 3000 BP, reaching Tonga by 2850 BP. Archaeology tells
us a good deal about the preferred habitation sites of early Lapita settlements in the Bismarck
Archipelago (Green 2003; Kirch 1997, 2000; Spriggs 1997; Summerhayes 2010). All the
sites are on the coast, close to beaches and fringing reefs that, respectively, would have
provided landing places for canoes and for obtaining seafood. However, archaeology has
yielded little evidence about the internal organisation of Lapita dwelling sites, as very few
have been excavated extensively enough to reveal the arrangement of houses and other
structures and areas of use.

    Ethnographic evidence on settlement patterns and use of territory in Oceanic speaking
communities is rich (comparative studies include Forge 1972, Hogbin and Wedgwood 1953,
Oliver 1989). Patterns that recur in the ethnographic accounts include the following:

[1] Architecture and settlement patterns in the POc speech community were the subject of a chapter in
    vol. 1 of The lexicon of Proto Oceanic (Green and Pawley 1998) but that volume focused on the
    material culture of the POc language community and it seems appropriate to return to a consideration of
    settlement patterns in a volume on POc society. The late Roger Green is included as co-author of the
    present chapter because it draws heavily on Green and Pawley (1998). Section 5 of the present chapter,
    on *panua, is a reworking of Pawley (2005), which in turn drew on Blust (1987) and Pawley (1979).
                                                    175
176 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green


1) Consistent with the record for Lapita sites, there is a strong preference for settlements on
   the coast, near beaches, fringing reefs and lagoons and close to land suitable for
   gardening.
2) Both nucleated and dispersed settlements are common. Nucleated settlements, villages
   of up to several hundred people, are invariably found when land is in short supply.
   Dispersed settlements, consisting of scattered hamlets, are most common where land is
   plentiful. Where attacks are feared settlements may be situated in inaccessible places
   with defences constructed.
3) In villages where the terrain allows, main dwellings are usually arranged in parallel
   lines on each side of a rectangular space that serves as a ceremonial centre.
4) Villages divide into sections, each section containing households belonging to a single
   lineage or part of a lineage.
5) Each lineage owns certain house sites. These sites have ritual importance.
6) Each family has a main dwelling house. In western Melanesia this is generally
   rectangular and raised on piles. In most other regions of Oceania houses are usually
   built on the ground or on a flat mound of earth or coral rubble and come in rectangular,
   round or oval forms.
7) Main dwelling houses have a two-section thatched roof with high gable.
8) There is a porch in the front of raised houses.
9) The interior of the main dwelling is divided into a sleeping compartment and a living
   room.
10) Most daily activities, e.g. food preparation, cooking, eating, weaving mats,
    conversation with neighbours, take place in smaller structures erected near the main
    dwelling. These structures are open-sided or only partly-walled, often with flat roofs of
    coconut leaves or rough thatching.
11) Coastal settlements have open-sided boat houses, each usually belonging to an
    extended family.
12) In yam-growing areas there are storage houses with raised platforms for keeping yams.
13) In parts of Melanesia a men’s house is commonly part of the hamlet or village, serving
    as a centre where men and boys may gather and perform certain rituals.
14) Graves, often marked by piles of stones may be sited under or close to the main
    dwelling.

    However, as ethnographic comparisons refer only to recent times they can do no more
than suggest hypotheses about the situation in POc times, some three millennia ago. We turn
to lexical reconstructions as a source of evidence.


5.2 Proto Oceanic speakers were fishermen-farmers

POc speakers were a maritime people, for whom the sea was an important economic
resource. They had an extensive vocabulary for fishing methods and technology (vol.1, ch.8)
and for outrigger canoe parts and sea travel (vol.1, ch.7). More than 140 POc names for
marine fish taxa and more than 40 names for marine invertebrates have been reconstructed
(vol.4, chs 2 and 4). Relevant terms for the seascape and landscape (vol. 2, ch.4) include
*tasik ‘sea’, *masawa(n,ŋ) ‘open sea’, *laman ‘deep sea beyond the reef’, *ŋalun ‘mounting
wave, ocean wave’, *bayau ‘ocean swell’, *loka (N) ‘high sea, heavy breakers’, (V) ‘be
rough, of sea’, *maqati ‘low tide, dry reef,’ *Ruap ‘high tide’, *sakaRu ‘coral reef’, *motu(s)
‘detached reef’, *laje ‘coral’, *mwaloq ‘submerged rock or coral reef’, *namo ‘lagoon inside
reef, deep pool in reef’, *mata (qi, ni) sawa(n,ŋ) ‘passage through reef’, *b(w)iker ‘beach,
esp. sandy beach’, *nusa ‘island’, *tobwa ‘bay’, *(i,u)cuŋ ‘cape’.

                                                                            Settlement patterns 177

   POc speakers were also farmers. They cultivated a range of ground and tree crops (vol.1,
ch.5; vol. 3, chs 9–13) and kept pigs (vol. 4:237–240) and chickens (vol. 4:283–287). Terms
for clearing garden land (*quma, *poki), for a plantation (*topa) and fallow land (*talun)
contrasted with one for bushland, inland country (*qutan). There were terms for planting
(*tanum), planting in holes in the ground (*asok), weeding (*papo), scattering seeds
(*kabu(R)), garden fence (*kaRi), and boundary marker in a garden (*bayat) (vol.1, ch.5).


5.3 Kinds of domestic buildings

That POc speakers occupied permanent dwellings is indicated by a host of terms to do with
house construction. Terms for several kinds of buildings can be reconstructed. Blust (1987)
compared four different cognate sets, widely represented in Austronesian languages, that
refer to kinds of domestic buildings. He reconstructs Proto Malayo-Polynesian (PMP)
*Rumaq ‘dwelling house’ *balay ‘public building’, *kamaliR ‘men’s house’ and *lepaw
‘granary’.[2] The first three terms were continued in POc.

<
PAn *Rumaq ‘dwelling house’ (Blust 1987)
POc *Rumaq ‘dwelling house’[3]
  Adm:  Lou            um                ‘house’
  Adm:  Loniu          umʷe              ‘house’
  NNG:  Arawe          a-rumuk           ‘village’
  NNG:  Vehes          ɣumak             ‘house’
  PT:   Motu           ruma              ‘house’
  MM:   Bali           rumaka            ‘house’
  MM:   Petats         luma              ‘house’
  SES:  Lau            luma              ‘family house’
  SES:  Arosi          ruma              ‘house’
  SES:  To’aba’ita     luma              (1) ‘traditionally, house where a woman and her children lived; today, family house’; (2)  ‘building’ (̄in compounds)
  NCV:  Mota           imʷa              ‘house’
  NCV:  Raga           imʷa              ‘house’
  NCV:  Nokuku         ima               ‘house’
  NCV:  Vara Kiai      ima               ‘house’
  SV:   Lenakel        n-imʷa            ‘house’
  NCal: Drehu          uma               ‘house’
  Mic:  Kiribati       uma               ‘any kind of building, anything with roof’
  Mic:  Marshallese    yimʷe-            ‘house’
  Mic:  Ponapean       iimʷ              ‘house’
>

[2] Tryon proposes the gloss ‘granary’ for PMP *lepaw rather than ‘men’s house’ on the grounds that (a)
    dedicated men’s houses are not a characteristic of Austronesian-speaking societies outside of Melanesia
    and (b) in some such societies reflexes of PMP *kamaliR refer to granaries.

[3] Some scholars reconstruct POc *Rumwaq with labiovelar *mw but at least some labiovelar reflexes are
    likely to be secondary developments following the high back rounded vowel (Blust 1981b).

178 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green

    A host of reconstructed POc terms for house parts and construction, including the
following, indicate that at least some dwelling houses were substantial buildings, with heavy
superstructure, gabled, with floor raised on piles (for supporting cognates see vol.1, ch.3):

*gabwari ‘the area underneath a raised house’ (vol.1:51)
*pupuŋ(an) ‘ridgepole’ (vol.1:53), from PMP *bubuŋ (Dempwolff 1938; Zorc 1994), PMP
    *buhuŋbuhuŋ (Blust 1972) ‘ridgepole, ridge of the roof’
*bou ‘probably main bearers or cross-beams supporting a raised floor or roof structure, or
    centre post supporting ridgepole’ (vol.1:56)
*soka(r) ‘crossbeam, bracing timber’ (vol.1:56), from PMP *seŋkar ‘transverse beams that
    support the roof of a house’ (ACD)
*kaso ‘rafter’ (vol.1:55), from PMP *kasaw ‘rafter’ (Dempwolff 1938)
*qatop ‘thatch, roof’ (vol.1:54), from PMP *qatep ‘thatch, roof’ (Dempwolff 1938)
*turu(s) ‘probably weight-bearing post, supporting raised floor or ridgepole’ (vol.1:55).

   Some Oceanic-speaking societies distinguish by name more than one design of dwelling
house. The Arosi speech community of Makira distinguishes at least the following kinds of
ruma ‘house’ (Fox 1978):

ruma huri       a round house, taller than the well known Santa Cruz round house
ruma gaura      a double, long house
ruma ora        a house with five pairs of posts or more
ruma pʷarapʷara a house roughly built, with roof of fronds instead of thatching
ruma raŋi       a house with two roofs, the second roof only above the upper part of the
                first, made by extending the rafters upwards
ruma okera      like ruma raŋi but with the two roofs close together
ruma sinakuhi   house with rounded end
ruma waiho      simplest form of oblong house with three pairs of posts

    Although no compound term consisting of *Rumaq plus modifier has so far been
reconstructed for POc, the latter retained two PMP terms for buildings other than main
dwelling houses.

    POc *pale, continuing PMP *balay, has in some daughter languages replaced *Rumaq as
the usual term for a dwelling house. However, in languages where both terms are retained
reflexes of *balay and *pale generally refer to a simpler kind of building, such as an open-
sided boat shed, shed for storing yams or garden shelter. The replacement was perhaps due to
speakers habit of humorously referring to their dwelling house as a humbler kind of building.

                                                                   Settlement patterns 179

<
PMP *balay ‘public building’ (Blust 1987); ‘unwalled building’ (Waterson 1993)
POc *pale ‘building for storage or public use, open-sided building, shed’
 Adm: Lou             pal           ‘canoe hut’
 Adm: Mussau          ale           ‘house’
 NNG: Bebeli          bele          ‘house’
 NNG: Yabem           ale           ‘house’
 NNG: Lukep (Pono)    para          ‘yam house’
 MM:  Tolai           pal           ‘house, room’
 MM:  Tolai           |pia na pal|  ‘place where there are houses, village’ (pia in compounds, ‘a place’)
 MM:  Tangga          pal           ‘small house or shed, storehouse for temporary storage of food’
 MM:  Mono-Alu        hale-hale     ‘public building’
 SES: Arosi (East)    hare          ‘shed for yams’
 SES: Arosi (West)    hare          ‘house with side of roof only, made in garden’
 SES: Bugotu          vaðe          ‘house, building’
 SES: Bauro           hare          ‘canoe house, men’s house ’
 SES: Sa’a            hale          ‘yam shed outside a garden’
 SES: Kwaio           fale          ‘hut for childbirth’
 MM:  Gela            hale          ‘house’
 NCV: Raga            vale          ‘house, hut, garden house’
 NCV: Nokuku          vale          ‘shelter’
 NCV: Nokuku          val-val       ‘garden shelter’
 NCV: Kiai            vale          ‘shed, shack’
PMic *fale ‘meeting house’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Puluwat         fǣl           ‘meeting house’
 Mic: Woleai          fal, fale-    ‘men’s house, club house’
 Fij: Bauan           vale          ‘house’
 Pn:  Samoan          fale          ‘house’
 Pn:  Hawaiian        hale          ‘house’
>

   POc *kamali(R) ‘men’s meeting house’ has reflexes in languages of the Admiralties and
North and Central Vanuatu. Among the Ponam, a Titan speaking community of Manus,
kamal is the name both of a patrilineal descent group (a land-owning group) and of the men’s
house of such a group (Carrier & Carrier 1989). In Vanuatu the reflex of *kamali(R) refers to
a building used by men of a village as a recreational centre, e.g. for drinking kava, and as a
sleeping and living area for unmarried men and boys and male visitors.

<
PMP *kamaliR ‘men’s house’ (Blust 1987); ‘granary’ (Tryon 1995)
POc *kamali(R) ‘men’s meeting house’ (Blust 1987)
 Adm: Titan        kamal            ‘patrilineal property-owning group; men’s house of such a group’
 Adm: Nyindrou     kamen            ‘men’s house’
PNCV *kamali ‘men’s house’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota         gamal            ‘club house of supʷe (graded society) or of a single high rank’
 NCV: Raga         gamali           ‘men’s house’
 NCV: SE Ambrym    n-emel           ‘men’s house’
 NCV: Lewo         kumali           ‘village, men’s meeting house’
 NCV: Makatea      kamali           ‘men’s house’
 NCV: Namakir      na-kamal         ‘men’s club house, dancing ground, village meeting place’
>

180 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green

   A term for ‘canoe house’, *v(a,o)lau, is reconstructed for PCP. This term is formally
cognate with a verb meaning make a sea voyage, which has antecedents in POc *palau(r)
‘make a sea voyage’ and PMP *pa-laSud ‘go down to the sea or coast. ’

<
PCP *v(a,o)lau ‘canoe house’
 Fij: Bauan           volau             (1) ‘canoe shed, with ridged roof but no ends or sides’; (2) ‘carpenter’s workshop’
 Fij: Wayan           volau             (1) ‘boat shed’; (2) ‘workshop, tool shed’
 Pn:  Tongan          ala-folau         ‘canoe shed’ (l in ala unexpected)
 Pn:  E Futunan       a-folau           ‘boat house’
 Pn:  Samoan          ā-folau           ‘long house, used, e.g., for receiving guests’
 Pn:  Tikopia         a-forau           ‘canoe shed’
 Pn:  Maori           farau             (1) ‘temporary shed of tree branches’; (2) ‘canoe shed’
 Pn:  Rarotongan      ʔōrau             ‘canoe shed’
>

   In Sa’a and Ulawa, Malaita, SE Solomons, chiefs had a canoe house, taoha, built at the
landing place of canoes. This served the double purpose of a house for the chief’s decorated
canoe and a house where men congregated and slept (Ivens 1927:7, 34).

   A term for ‘house site’ or ‘house foundation, consisting of a mound or platform of earth or
coral rubble’, is attributable to PEOc. It has reflexes in Southeast Solomonic, Fijian, and
Polynesian. It is cognate with a verb meaning ‘to pile up, heap, make a mound or wall’.
House mounds are associated with houses without raised floors, which are characteristic of
eastern Melanesia, Polynesia and Micronesia.

<
PEOc *apu ‘house foundation’
  SES: Gela        avu           ‘house site’
  SES: Arosi       ahu           ‘mound of earth, heap of things’
  Fij: Bauan       yavu          ‘house site, house foundation’
  Fij: Wayan       avu           ‘house site, house foundation’
  Pn:  Tahitian    ahu           (1) ‘platform of stones, often stepped, with religious functions’; (2) ‘pile up stones, put up wall of a marae’
  Pn:  Rapanui     ahu           ‘large platform of stones, with religious function’
  Pn:  Maori       ahu           ‘platform of stones’
>

                                                                            Settlement patterns 181


Ivens (1927:375) writes of Sa’a communities that

__blockquote__
      [i]n certain hamlets…there is more or less of an appearance of house mounds, but
      speaking generally there is nothing to correspond to the Fijian yavu… This is owing to
      the frequent changes of location in the past, and to the absence of anything like settled
      towns.


5.4 Settlement, village, hamlet

It is noteworthy that there is no very well supported POc reconstruction whose primary sense
was ‘village’. There are several candidates, chiefly *pera, *koro, *malaqai and *panua, but
objections can be raised against each.

<
POc *pera ‘? settlement, open space associated with a house or settlement’
 NNG: Manam             pera          ‘house, room’
 SES: Bugotu            vera          ‘courtyard, open space in a village’
 SES: Tolo              vera          ‘village, home, country, place where one lives’
 SES: Ghari             vera          ‘village’
 SES: ’Are’are          he-hera       ‘open space in front of the houses for walking’
 SES: ’Are’are          herā          ‘agglomeration of houses, village’
 SES: Arosi             hera          (1) ‘open space for dancing, usually to the east of burial ground for chiefs’; (2) ‘any burial space surrounded by stone walls’
 SES: Baegu             fera          ‘hamlet, a named locality’
 SES: Kwaio             fela          ‘skull house’
 SES: Lau               fera          ‘land; village; habitation, home, artificial island (for habitation)’
 SES: Lau               mā-fera, mae-fera ‘hamlet, 2 or 3 houses’ (mā, mae ‘classifier for round objects)
 SES: Lau               |fera fū|       ‘mainland, solid land’
 SES: Lau               |fera daudau| ‘artificial island’
 SES: To’aba’ita        fera          ‘traditionally, house where a woman and her children lived; today, family house’
 cf. also:
PNCV *vareqa ‘outside, public space’ (Clark 2009)[4]
 NCV: Mota              varea                    ‘village, place of a village settlement’
 NCV: Nokuku            varea                    ‘home, village’
 NCV: Namakira          vareʔ                    ‘outside’
 NCV: Uripiv            varea                    ‘outside’
 NCV: Nguna             varea                    ‘chiefs’ meeting house’
>

[4] If the NCV forms reflect *pera, one would have to posit (a) final *-q on *peraq; (b) vowel metathesis;
    (c) nominalisation with *-an, i.e. PNCV *vareʔa < *peraq-an.

182 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green


It can be seen that *pera is widely reflected in Southeast Solomonic languages, with
meanings that range from ‘village’, ‘hamlet’, ‘habitation’, ‘house’, ‘named locality’ to ‘open
space for dancing, courtyard’, ‘burial space’, ‘skull house’ and ‘land.’ Elsewhere in Oceanic
only one secure reflex has been noted, in Manam, a North New Guinea language, where it is
the usual term for ‘house’.

    Some of these disparate meanings are better associated with other POc terms, e.g. ‘house’
with *Rumaq and *pale (§5.3), ‘open space in a village’ with *malaqai (see below), ‘land’,
‘inhabited place’ and perhaps ‘settlement’, with *panua (§5.5.1).

    The reflexes of POc *koro in Vanuatu and Polynesian indicate that it referred primarily to
any enclosure that is fenced or protected by barriers and that it has later come to mean
‘village’ in languages of the Admiralty Islands, Fiji and Tonga.

<
POc *koro (1) ‘fenced-in area’; (2) ‘? settlement fortified by barrier’
 Adm: Leipon            kor                 ‘village’
 Adm: Titan             kor                 ‘home, village, settled land, farm, the earth’
 NCV: Nguna             kooro               ‘enclosure, pen, blowhole’
 NCV: Nguna             na-koro             ‘yard’
 NCV: Nguna             na-ko-koro          ‘fence, hedge, windbreak’
 NCV: Nokuku            kokoo               ‘garden’
 NCV: Namakir           kor                 ‘fence, rail’
 Fij: Bauan             koro                ‘village, an eminence’
 Fij: Wayan             koro                ‘settlement, village, hamlet, town’
 Fij: Wayan             |loma ni koro|      ‘centre of a village’
 Pn:  Tongan            kolo                ‘village, town; fortress; temporary fence around open grave’
 Pn:  Niuean            kolo                ‘fort, tower, lookout point’
 Pn:  Samoan            ʔolo                ‘fort, shelter, tower’
 Pn:  Tikopia           koro                ‘fort, barrier against sea’
 Pn:  Rarotongan        koro                ‘fenced or walled-off area, enclosure, yard, fence, palisade, surrounding wall’
>

   Another candidate, *malaqai, is attested throughout Polynesian, where it denotes an open
space in the middle of a village or in front of a house used for public activities, and in a North
New Guinea language and a Papuan Tip language, where it refers to a village. Possible
cognates appear in Tangga, a Meso-Melanesian language, but the data are problematic.[5]

<
POc *malaqai ‘? public space in a village, village plaza’
 NNG: Yabem          malaʔ              ‘village, place of residence, dwelling place’
 NNG: Yabem          malaʔ-gɛdɔ         ‘part of a village, a group of village houses’ (gɛdɔ ‘part’)
 NNG: Yabem          malaʔ-luŋ          ‘village square, meeting place’ (luŋ ‘middle’)
 PT:  Wedau          melagai            ‘village’
 Pn:  Tongan         malaʔe             ‘village green, playground, open market place’
 Pn:  Samoan         malae              ‘open space in the middle of a village, meeting ground’
 Pn:  Futunan        malaʔe             ‘public area, open space in front of houses’
 Pn:  Tikopia        marae              ‘open space for public assembly, including dance festivals’
 Pn:  Maori          marae              ‘village common, courtyard, enclosed space in front of a house’
cf. also:
 MM:  Tangga         male               ‘village’
 MM:  Tangga         male-lil           ‘village square’
 MM:  Tangga         māli               ‘dancing square within the confines of every village settlement’
 Mic: Kiribati       marae              ‘open space, public place (Pn loan)’
>

[5] In the dictionary of Tangga (Bell 1977) male ‘village’ and male-lil ‘village square’ appear in the
    English-Tangga finder list but not in the main (Tangga-English) dictionary. Conversely, ma:li ‘dancing
    square’ appears in the Tangga-English part but not in the findcr list.

                                                                       Settlement patterns 183


   Another term whose reflexes in certain contemporary languages refer to a village plaza is
POc *mwalala. However, in POc this probably had a more general meaning such as ‘land
cleared of vegetation (but not planted or built on)’, as well as serving as a stative verb
meaning ‘be cleared of vegetation’.

<
POc *mwalala (n) ‘cleared land, clearing’; (V) ‘be cleared of vegetation, vacant’
 Adm: Baluan            malala              ‘clearness; free from weeds’
 NNG: Manam             malala              ‘market place, assembly place’
 MM: Lakalai            malala              (N) ‘area within a village used as a dance ground; garden area cleared but not yet planted’; ‘be cleared of vegetation’
 SES: Arosi             mwarara             ‘space (between things), hole, opening’
 Mic: Chuukese          mannaan             ‘grassland (open, treeless)’
 Mic: Ponapean          mall                ‘natural clearing in a forest’
 Mic: Satawal           melal               ‘cleared ground’
 Fij: Bauan             ŋalala              ‘be spacious, empty, free, at liberty, exempt’
 Fij: Wayan             ŋwalala             ‘be vacant, unoccupied, empty, free, exempt’
>

   The semantics of POc *panua are discussed in §5.5.


5.5 Territorial units and land tenure

5.5.1 POc *panua ‘land, territory, inhabited place, community, etc.’

POc *panua, which continues PMP *banua, is very widely reflected in Oceanic languages,
indeed more widespread than any of the terms reconstructed above. The persistence of
*panua suggests that it denoted something of very fundamental importance in the early
Oceanic worldview. However, reconstructing its semantic history is a considerable challenge
because its reflexes in present-day languages show an even more puzzlingly disparate range
of meanings than *pera, *koro. and *malaqai. Some idea of how reflexes of *panua vary in
meaning within and across different subgroups of Oceanic is given by the following sample.

184 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green

__formgroup__
  Adm: Mussau       anua            ‘land’
  Adm: Penchal      panu            ‘village’
  NNG: Bariai       panua           ‘village’
  NNG: Bam          anu             ‘earth’
  NNG: Gedaged      panu            ‘village, settlement, hamlet, place, (modern) town’
  NNG: Gedaged      panu-panu       ‘everybody, the whole world’
  NNG: Kove         pana            ‘people’
  NNG: Tami         panu            ‘house’
  PT:  Muyuw        ven             ‘land, earth, country, village, hamlet, town, home, place, locality, district, weather’
  PT:  Dobuan       anua            ‘house’
  PT:  Kiriwina     valu            ‘any place, land, village, uninhabited land’
  PT:  Molima       vanua           ‘house’
  PT:  Molima       vanua-pou       ‘residents of a village’
  PT:  Motu         hanua           ‘village’; ‘world subject to diurnal cycle’ (in compounds)
  PT:  Mekeo        panua           ‘social division in a village’
  MM:  Lakalai      la-valua        ‘the men’
  MM:  Lakalai      valua-gu        ‘members of my club’ (_-gu_ ‘my)
  MM:  Bali         vanua           ‘island’
  MM:  Vitu         vanua           ‘garden’
  MM:  Tabar        vanua           ‘house’
  MM:  Taiof        fan             ‘village’
  MM:  Tangga       fān             ‘many people, everybody’
  MM:  Teop         van             ‘land’
  MM:  Marovo       vanua           ‘house’
  MM:  Vangunu      vanua           ‘house’
  SES: ’Are’are     hanua           ‘land (not sea); district, place, country; island; the territory where a person lives and where his possessions are, including houses, food, trees, water, graves’
  SES: Lengo        vanua           ‘village’
  SES: Arosi        hanua           ‘island, village’
  SES: Lau          fanua           ‘land, the earth, world, weather’
  SES: Kwaio        fanua           ‘place, village, shrine-territory’
  SES: Kwaio        mā-ʔe-fanua     ‘segment of a territory, sub-clearing of a settlement’
  SES: Sa’a         henua           ‘land, country, village, site of village, place’
  SES: Sa’a         |i hanua|       ‘on land, shore (not sea)’
  SES: Sa’a         |taʔa ni hanua| ‘people living inland’
  NCV: Mota         vanua           ‘land, island, village, place’
  NCV: Nokuku       venua-na        ‘house, home, village’
  NCV: Nguna        vanua           ‘bounded plot of land for gardening’
  NCV: Nguna        na-vanua        ‘land, country, island’
  NCV: Neveei       ne-vanu         ‘place from which one originates’
  NCV: Paamese      hanuo           ‘person, human being’
  NCV: Lewo         vanua           ‘outside’
  SV:  Aneityom     n-henou         ‘taro swamp’
  SV:  Kwamera      ru-kʷanu        ‘home, residence, house, village, hamlet’
  SV:  Lenakel      na-uanu         ‘village’
  Mic: Woleaian     faẓüw           ‘land, island’
  Mic: Puluwat      fanɨ            ‘land, island, islet, country’
  Fij: Bauan        vanua           ‘land, country, community, place, confederation of clans’; ‘world subject to diurnal cycle’ (in compounds)
  Fij: Rotuman      hanua           ‘land, country, place, native land, home, people’; ‘world subject to diurnal cycle’ (in compounds)
  Fij: Rotuman      |hanua noho|    ‘dwelling place, village’ (noho ‘dwell’)
  Pn:  Tongan       fonua           ‘land, country, territory, place, people (of the land), grave’
  Pn:  Samoan       fanua           ‘land, field’
  Pn:  E. Futunan   fenua           ‘people, a people, nation, territory, land’
  Pn:  Nukuoro      henua           ‘land mass, island, country or any other geopolitical unit’
  Pn:  Tikopia      fenua           ‘land; island; country; inland, as opposed to shore; people of a land, folk; general physical environment; abroad’
  Pn:  Rennellese   henua           ‘land (not water), island, unknown land (poetic), people of the land’
  Pn:  Tokelauan    fenua           ‘land (owned by someone, or a land mass), country (geo-political unit), people of the village’
  Pn:  Hawaiian     honua           ‘land, earth’

                                                                Settlement patterns 185


   This sample exhibits about 20 more or less distinct senses associated with reflexes of
*panua. The distribution of these senses across major subgroups of Oceanic is as in Table 5.1.

   In his discussion of PMP *banua Blust (1987) compared cognate sets from three putative
subgroups of Malayo-Polynesian: Western Malayo-Polynesian (WMP), Central Malayo-
Polynesian (CMP), and South Halmahera-West New Guinea (SHWNG) as well as from
Oceanic. Languages from the first three subgroups exhibit roughly the same range of glosses
as can be found in Oceanic, with a few additions. For example:

__formgroup__
 WMP: Belau           beluu   ‘country, district, place’
-Philippines:
 WMP: Kapampangan     banwa   ‘year, sky, heaven’
 WMP: Bikol           banwaʔ  ‘town, country’
 WMP: Cebuano         banwa   ‘fatherland, town, village’
-Northern Sulawesi:
 WMP: Sangir          banua   ‘land, district; people; state; sea; weather’
 WMP: Tondano         wanua   ‘village’
 WMP: Malay           benua   ‘large expanse of land, empire, continent; mainland in contrast to island’
 WMP: Old Javanese    wanwa   ‘inhabited place or area, settlement’
-Sumatra:
 WMP: Nias            banua   ‘sky, heaven; thunder; village; homeland; fellow villager; serf’
 CMP: Selaru          hnu(a)  ‘village’
 SHWNG: Numfor        menu    ‘village’

186 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green

: Table 5.1     Distribution of senses of reflexes of *panua by subgroups

__tablenh__
  ‘land (not sea or sky)’                        Adm, PT, MM, SES, NCV, Mic, Fij, Pn
  ‘earth, ground (soil)’                         NNG, Pn
  ‘world (subject to weather, day and night)’    NNG, PT, SES, Fij, Pn
  ‘weather’                                      PT, SES
  ‘island’                                       MM, SES, Mic, NCV, Pn
  ‘country, territory’                           PT, Mic, Fij, Pn
  ‘uninhabited land’                             PT (one language)
  ‘place, area, district, region’                NNG, PT, SES, NCV, Fij, Pn
  ‘village, settlement, hamlet’                  Adm, NNG, PT, SES, NCV, SV
  ‘social division in a village’                 PT (one language)
  ‘house’                                        MM, NNG, PT, NCV, SV
  ‘residents of a village’                       PT (one language)
  ‘community of people’                          NNG, MM, Fij, Pn
  ‘men’                                          MM (one language)
  ‘everybody’                                    NNG, MM (one language in each)
  ‘person, human being’                          NCV (one language)
  ‘confederation of clans’                       Fij
  ‘garden, plot of garden land’                  MM, NCV, SV (but rare in each)
  ‘taro swamp’                                   SV (one language)
  ‘field’                                        Pn (one language)
  ‘shrine-territory’                             SES (one language)
  ‘grave’                                        Pn (one language)


    If POc *panua had a single meaning, what was it? If it was polysemous, as its reflexes in
many daughter languages are, which senses did it have? What paths led to the diverse senses
found in contemporary languages?

    In tackling these questions one meets a number of methodological problems, starting with
the descriptive data. It must be said that the primary data, the definitions of *panua reflexes
given in bilingual dictionaries and wordlists of contemporary Oceanic languages, are often
deficient. Most sources do not offer systematic definitions. Instead, the ‘definitions’ are
typically single word glosses – serving as rough translations equivalents in the European
target language. (This problem is not particular to dictionaries of Oceanic languages. It is
systemic in that bilingual dictionaries are typically designed to be translation aids rather than
to provide analytic definitions.) And such single word glosses as ‘land’, ‘earth’, ‘country’ and
‘people’ are themselves imprecise, because each has more than one sense. For example, the
entry for land in The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary gives many senses, of which the
following are relevant to our concerns:

                                                                       Settlement patterns 187


   1) the solid part of the earth, as opposed to sea, water.
   2) ground or soil, esp. having a particular use or properties, e.g. fertile land, farm land.
   3) a part of the earths surface marked off by natural or political boundaries: a country,
      territory, domain.
   4) ground or territory as property, landed property.
   5) the country as opposed to the town.
   6) expanse of country of undefined extent, usu. with modifier, e.g. highland, uplands.

   Cruse (1986:80-81) writes that

__blockquote__
     Linguists who have worked in lexical semantics can be broadly divided into two
     categories: on the one hand there are those who believe that a word form is associated
     with a number (perhaps finite, perhaps not) of discrete senses; and, on the other, there
     are those who believe that the discreteness is illusory.

The second group prefer to think of variant readings of a single lexical form as forming a
spectrum of senses, a continuum without clear boundaries, much like the colour spectrum or
a dialect continuum. However, it is possible to have a foot in both camps. There are domains
where the evidence favours analysis into discrete senses and domains where it favours
analysis in terms of sense spectra. There are standard diagnostics for polysemy. These include
the existence of synonyms, antonyms and contrasting forms restricted to particular senses, the
construction of sentences with qualifying elements that are sensitive to sense differences, and
the restriction of particular senses to occurrence in a small set of collocations or minor
constructions.

   Blust was impressed by the correspondence between the glosses for reflexes of *banua in
Iban, a language of Borneo, and ’Are’are, of Malaita in the SE Solomons. There is an
ethnographically rich dictionary of Iban (Richards 1981) which gives the following
definition:

__blockquote__
     menoa/menua area of land held and used by distinct community, esp. longhouse
     (rumah), including house, farms, gardens, fruit groves, cemetery, water and all forest
     within half a days journey. Use of the menoa is only gained and maintained with much
     effort and danger, and by proper rites to secure and preserve a ritual harmony of all
     within it and the unseen forces involved; home, abode, place, district, country, region;
     menoa laŋit ‘the heavens, abode of Petara and other deities.’

The definition of ’Are’are hanua given by Geerts (1970) mentions a very similar list of
elements. Blust observes that in both Iban and ’Are’are the reflex of *banua

__blockquote__
     refers to an inhabited territory that includes not only the human population and
     dwellings, but also plant and animal forms that contribute to the maintenance of the
     human community. Drinking water is mentioned in both glosses, as well as the burial
     sites of the deceased….

He concludes that PMP *banua (and by implication POc *panua) had a single but complex
meaning.

__blockquote__
     PMP *banua, then, probably referred to an inhabited territory which included the
     village and its population together with everything that contributed to the life-support
     system of that community (Blust 1987:100).

188 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green


: Table 5.2     Eight senses of Wayan Fijian vanua (N)[6]

__table__
     Sense                                                Usage notes
 1 ‘Land, ground, as opposed to sea’ (waitaci),            Contrasts with locative phrases i vōvō,
  ‘water’ (wai, ruwai) or ‘sky’ (lomālagi). near          ‘ashore, on land’ (in contrast to ‘at sea’) and i
  syn. qwele.                                             ata, ‘inland ‘(in contrast to ‘on the coast’).
 2 Land in the sense of land mass, large tract of          This sense may take modifiers indicating
  land, territory, country.                               attributes, such as being fertile, stony,
                                                          uninhabited, mountainous.
 3 Homeland, someones home region or country. Requires a possessive pronoun.


 4 A particular delimited place, spot, area,               Near synonym tiki.
  district, region, zone.
 5 A community, the people belonging to a place, Ara sā sevutia na ledra tovatova i na vanua.
  a land-owning kin-group. Refers to a           ‘They presented the first fruits of their gardens
  collective ‘people’, never to a single person. to the community.’
 6 The chief of a community, the representative            Ei na rugutia vinā me sā somia na aqona ni
  of a community. Only metaphorically, in                 vanua. ‘He's well suited to be made chief.’ (lit.
  compounds such as bilo ni vanua (lit. ‘cup of           ‘He's well suited to drink the kava of the
  the community’), ‘high chief, one who has               community’).
  been formally installed’ and aqona ni vanua
  (lit. ‘kava of the community’), ‘the first cup of
  kava in a ceremony, drunk by the chief’; ‘kava
  ceremony to welcome a visiting chief or for
  installing a new chief’.
 7 A political confederation of clans under a              (Possibly borrowed from Bauan Fijian.)
  chief.
 8 As the subject in certain verbal constructions          qwele, ‘ground, land’; tiki’ place, region’,
  concerning atmospheric, climatic and living             cannot be substituted in these constructions.
  conditions: the world, atmosphere, that which
  is subject to the diurnal cycle, weather and
  climate, e.g. bogi na vanua, ‘be dark, night’,
  qwataqwata na vanua, ‘be dawn’, siga na
  vanua, ‘be daylight, sunny, clear’.

   This complex but unitary meaning, he suggests, is ‘fragmented’ into various more specific
senses. Our view is that a stronger case can be made for treating POc *panua as a highly
polysemous term, whose senses are distinct lexical units, differing from each other in features
of grammar and in their semantic relations (synonymy, antonymy, etc.) to other lexical units.
While the standard tests for polysemy cannot be applied directly to POc we can in principle
apply them to contemporary languages for which the data allow systematic treatment of sense
discriminations.

[6] The orthography of the Wayan Fijian dictionary is retained in the table.

                                                                               Settlement patterns 189


    In Wayan, a dialect of Western Fijian, some eight senses of vanua can be distinguished
(Pawley and Sayaba 2022). Most, if not all of these can be shown to contrast by one or
another diagnostic criterion, as indicated in Table 5.2.

    We can go a fair way towards making sense of the great diversity of glosses in the
daughter languages by assuming that POc *panua had a range of senses corresponding
roughly to those shared by the Fijian languages and certain languages of various other
subgroups, including Muyuw of Papuan Tip, ’Are’are of S.E. Solomonic, Tongan and
Tikopia of Polynesian, and Rotuman.7 These are shown in Table 5.3.

    The senses attributed to *panua do not include ‘settlement’ or ‘village’. Closest to these is
 3(a) ‘territory belonging to a community, inhabited place’. It seems likely that in POc this
broader sense encompassed habitation sites and their residents but that in certain daughter
languages it was narrowed to refer specifically to the cluster of buildings and associated
features that make up a village. This development in turn provided a platform for a further
narrowing to ‘house’ in a number of languages.

    To sum up, the comparative lexical evidence assembled in sections 5.4 and 5.5 does not
tell us whether POc speakers occupied sizeable villages or dispersed hamlets.

: Table 5.3        Probable senses of POc *panua

__table__
       Sense                                                                     Distribution
 1      Land in the sense of land mass, large tract of land, territory,           Adm, PT, MM, SES,
       country. This sense may take modifiers indicating attributes,             NCV, Mic, Fij, Pn
       such as being fertile, stony, uninhabited, mountainous.
 2      A land mass or defined territory and whatever features are an             PT, Mic, Fij, Pn
       integral part of it (forests, lakes, rivers, settlements, etc.).
 3a     Territory belonging to a community, inhabited place.                      PT, SES, Fij, Pn
 3b     One’s homeland, home place.                                               PT, Fij, Pn
 4      Community associated with a territory, people of a community.             NNG, MM, Fij, Pn
 5      Place, area, district, region.                                            NNG, PT, SES, NCV, Fij,
                                                                                 Pn
 6      (in certain multi-word expressions) The world: that which is              NNG, PT, SES, Fij, Pn
       subject to the day-night cycle, weather and climate.


[7] The process that Blust refers to as semantic fragmentation is thus better viewed as a change in
    membership of a family of lexical units as a result of sense transfer rather than the splitting of a single
    complex sense. In reflexes of *panua in daughter languages certain individual senses were retained,
    others were transferred to different lexical forms. For instance, in some languages reflexes of *panua
    have retained the central senses of ‘land (not sea)’, ‘land mass, country’ and ‘homeland, home place’ but
    have lost the peripheral sense of ‘weather’ or ‘world subject to weather.’ Conversely, in Lau fanua, only
    the peripheral sense of ‘weather’ or ‘world subject to weather’ has been retained.

190 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green

: Table 5.4       Some phrasal expressions for world and weather containing reflexes of POc *panua

__table__
         Language      Phrasal expression + gloss                       Notes
 NNG: Manam            anua izama ‘morning, daybreak’                   anua now means ‘village’
 PT:     Motu          hanua-boi ‘night’ (N)
                       hanua idaradara ‘evening glow’                   -dara ‘ascend’
 SES:    Sa’a          sato e kʷaʔalie henue ‘the sun has risen’ (lit.  from POc *panua ‘land ‘+
                       ‘sun rises on (the) world’; kʷaʔali- of heavenly *boŋi ‘night ‘ (hanua now
                       bodies, ‘to rise on s.t.’)                       means ‘village’
 SES:    Lau           fanua sato ‘sunny weather’                       sato ‘sun’. Lau fanua no
                                                                        longer refers to land or
                                                                        settlements but occurs in
                                                                        several compounds
                                                                        specifying weather
                                                                        conditions
 Fij:    Bauan         sā boŋi na vanua ‘it is night time, nightfall’   [is night the world]
                       sā karobo mai na vanua ‘it is twilight’          [is dusk the world]
                       sā siŋa na vanua ‘it is daylight, it is sunny’   [is day/sun the world]
                       ā siŋa-levu na vanua ‘it is midday/the sun is    [is big-sun the world]
                       high’
 Fij:    Rotuman       hanua ræn ‘daylight, dawn’                       [world day]
                       hanua ke pöŋ ‘(until) nightfall’                 pöŋ ‘night’
 Pn:     Rennellese henua pō ‘night time’                               henua ‘land, people of the
                                                                        land’
 Pn:     Tikopia       ku pō te fenua ‘darkness has come’               [has become dark the
                                                                        world]


5.5.2 World and weather

We note in passing that sense 6 attributed to POc *panua, the world of the diurnal cycle and
weather, is present in various Oceanic languages in certain multiword expressions containing
reflexes of *panua. A sample is shown in Table 5.4.

    From this material we can reconstruct a family of POc verbal constructions of the type of
*qaco na panua ‘be(come) daylight, be sunrise’ and *boŋi na vanua ‘be(come) dark,
nightfall’ (where *qaco and *boŋi, otherwise ‘sun’ and ‘night’, are verbs), and a parallel set of
complex nominal constructions of the type of *panua qaco ‘sunrise, sunny conditions,
daytime’, *panua boŋi ‘nightfall, night time’ (vol. 2:40-41, 295).

                                                                         Settlement patterns 191


5.5.3 Land tenure

Ann Chowning has written as follows of the range of variation in historically attested systems
of land tenure in Melanesia.

__blockquote__
      Title to land is usually vested in a corporate group, membership of which is likely to be
      based on descent, residence or some combination of the two….
      The details of systems of land tenure [in Melanesia] differ greatly from society to
      society. Some permit permanent alienation and individual ownership; others do not. It
      is not uncommon to find distinctions between gardening land, village land or house
      sites, and bush land, with different systems of rights applied to each, not to mention the
      rights that apply to sacred places, grave sites, paths, water supplies, sago swamps, and
      fishing areas. (Chowning 1977:39)

The strongest candidate for an early Oceanic term for a landholding corporate group is
*kainaŋa (§4.1.2.6), which has reflexes in Micronesian and Polynesian. Goodenough (1955)
observed that in Micronesian languages this term typically refers to a land-owning matrilineal
descent group. Bender et al. (2003a) offer the following, less precise semantic reconstruction
for PMic:

<
PMic *kayinaŋa ‘clan, folk, tribe, stock’ (Goodenough 1955; Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Trukese             kainaŋ              ‘matrilineal descent group, clan’
 Mic: Puluwat             yayiŋan             ‘clan’
 Mic: Lamotrek            kailaŋ              ‘a named exogamous matriclan’
 Mic: Woleaian            gairaŋe             ‘clan, tribe, tribal division’
 Mic: Ponapean            kɛynɛk              ‘clan, lineage, extended family’ (final -k unexpected)
>

   For PPn we cite the reconstructions proposed by Marck (2010) and Kirch and Green
(2001), which slightly modify those proposed by Koskinen (1960), Marck (2008) and Pawley
(1982, 1985).

<
PPn *kainaŋa (1) ‘descent group, headed by an *qariki “chief”’; (2) ‘the subjects of a chief, the common people’ (§4.1.2.6; Marck 2010); ‘a land-holding exogamous descent group tracing descent from a common ancestor and headed by an *qariki’ (Kirch and Green 2001)[8]
  Pn: Tongan         kainaŋa            ‘populace, people without chiefly rank’
  Pn: E. Uvean       kainaŋa            ‘people not of chiefly rank’
  Pn: Anutan         kainaŋa            ‘clan, membership based mainly on patrilineal descent’
  Pn: Tikopian       kainaŋa            ‘clan, a non-exogamous descent group consisting of exogamous lineages’
  Pn: Rennellese     kainaŋa            ‘subject of a chief’
  Pn: Pukapukan      keinaŋa            ‘maternal sublineage, headed by its oldest member’
  Pn: Hawaiian       |maka ʔainana|     ‘populace, common people (in contrast to those of noble birth)’
  Pn: Marquesan      |mata ʔeinaŋa|     ‘people, the people, subjects’
  Pn: Rarotongan     |mata kainaŋa|     ‘a settlement, the inhabitants of a district’
  Pn: Tahitian       ʔeinaʔa            ‘a body of followers, servants, people united by the same service’
>

[8] Several Eastern Polynesian languages reflect a compound *mata kainaŋa. *mata probably derives from
    PCP *mata (qi) ‘group of people serving a common purpose’, which was evidently preposed to nouns
    denoting kinds of social groups. Compare Bauan Fijian mata-sere ‘choir,’ mata-bete ‘hierarchy of
    priests’, mata-qali ‘clan, social division’, mata-i-valu ‘army.’

192 Andrew Pawley and Roger Green


    PPn developed in the various islands of the Tonga-Samoa area after these were settled late
in the first millennium BC, probably as a dialect network that remained quite cohesive for
many centuries. Marck argues that PPn social organisation probably showed regional
differences, with some smaller, less stratified island communities retaining the original use of
*kainaŋa to refer to unilineal descent groups (as in Anuta, Tikopia, Pukapuka) and larger,
more stratified societies developing cognatic descent groups, leading to a shift in the meaning
of *kainaŋa from ‘descent group headed by a chief’ to ‘subjects of a chief, populace,
commoners’. His arguments resemble those of Burrows (1939) who inferred that early
Polynesian social grouping “consisted of descent groups which occupied and controlled
territories and that this system was transformed repeatedly and in various ways” in different
parts of Polynesia (Kirch and Green 2001:208).

    The term *tau ‘person, human being’ is well attested in both PMP and POc. A number of
compound nominals containing *tau have been reconstructed, including POc *tau mate
‘dead person, corpse, ghost’, *tau paqoRu ‘young adult of marriageable age’ and PEOc *tau
tasi ‘fisherman, expert mariner’ (Pawley 1985; vol.5:39–42). In some compounds *tau has
the sense of ‘owner’ or ‘person intimately associated with an entity’, e.g. POc *tau (ni) waga
‘owner of a canoe’ and PPn *tau fale ‘owner or occupant of a house’. This use of *tau is
often associated with phrasal constructions reflecting the form *tau ni N, where the linker ni
marks an associative relation, e.g. Dobuan, a Papuan Tip language, has such terms as to-ni-
ʔasa ‘owner of a village’, to-ni-butu ‘owner of a feast’, i.e. ‘master of ceremonies’, to-ni-to-
ni-bwaʔa ‘sprites’, lit. ‘little owners of the land’ (Grant 1953) and Molima, another Papuan
Tip language, has to-ni-bwaʔo ‘owner of a garden’ and to-ni-waga ‘canoe owner’ (Chowning
1958).

    The compound *tau panua ‘native of a place, land owner’ is reconstructable for PEOc.
Although no reflexes have so far been noted beyond EOc, it is likely that it was present in
POc. Both the constituents and the construction type are attributable to POc.

<
PEOc *|tau panua| ‘person belonging to a place, land owner’
  SES: Arosi      |au henua|    ‘man born in and belonging to the place’
  SES: Sa’a       eu-henue      (N) ‘householder, neighbour’; (V) ‘be a native of a place, be a resident’
  NCV: Mota       ta-ɣ-vanua    ‘joint owner of a village’ (i.e. ‘one of the land-owning locals’; -ɣ- reflects an earlier construct linker *ki)
  Pn:  Samoan     tau-fanua     (1) ‘commoner (as opposed to chief)’; (2) ‘owner of land, landlord’ (in contrast to tau-fale ‘householder, prospective owner of house under construction’)
  Pn:  Tikopia    tau-fenua     (N) ‘wealthy man’; (ADJ) ‘wealthy’
>

                                                                    Settlement patterns 193


Some Polynesian languages reflect a structurally parallel, functionally equivalent compound,
*taŋata (qi) fanua, in which *tau ‘person, owner’ is replaced by *taŋata ‘person’.

__formgroup__
  Pn: Tongan       |taŋata ʔi fonua|    ‘native, person who really belongs to the country’
  Pn: Tikopia      |taŋata fenua|       ‘man of the land, man of status’
  Pn: Maori        |taŋata fenua|       ‘land owner, native of a place’

From *panua, sense 3, and the compound *tau panua we can draw the unsurprising inference that
POc speakers were divided into communities with recognised territories over which members had
rights.


5.6 Conclusions

Linguistic evidence cannot definitively answer all the questions asked at the outset of this
essay but it can tell us some things about Proto Oceanic speakers settlement patterns and
relation to territory.

    A strong prima facie case can be made that the POc speakers preferred to live close to the
sea. Fishing and reef foraging was central to the economy and there was an extensive
vocabulary relating to canoes and sea travel. Three kinds of buildings can be identified by
name: *Rumaq, main dwelling house, *kamaliR, men’s meeting house and *pale, a less
substantial building, such as a shed for storage or other non-residential purposes. *malaqai
may have referred to a village plaza or public space in a settlement, but the semantic
reconstruction is not secure. A term for canoe shed, *(a-)v(a,o)lau, is reconstructable for PCP
but not for POc. There is no term attributable to POc whose primary sense was ‘village’ or
‘settlement’ and it is unclear whether POc speakers lived in scattered hamlets or substantial
villages; *panua appears to have been used to refer to any inhabited place, as well as to the
whole territory belonging to a community, including land cleared for gardens, and to the
people of a place. The compound *tau panua ‘person belonging to a place, land owner’ is
reconstructable for PEOc and on logical grounds it can be inferred that it was present in POc
but lost in non-EOc languages.

    A term for a land-owning descent group, *kainaŋa, is attributable to Proto Remote Oceanic, being reflected
in both Micronesian and Polynesian languages but not in Western Oceanic, SE Solomonic or
the Admiralties. As such, this term can be associated with the bearers of Lapita culture who
moved into Remote Oceania but not with the Early Western Lapita tradition found in the
Bismarck Archipelago.



6               Recreation: music, song, dance and games

6.1 Introduction[1]

In Oceanic societies, music, song and dance are far more than recreation in the western
sense although their enjoyment is often a prerequisite. Their performance spills over into
many areas, into the performance of rites marking significant events, into the casting of
spells and other forms of magic, into preparation for war, and as an expression of group
solidarity and pride. Songs may serve to bolster effort, as in long-distance paddling by canoe
or in hauling heavy logs. Dances, particularly war dances, may serve to instil fear in others.
They are possessions that may be traded. Story-telling serves to memorise and pass on
shared knowledge to the next generation. Such activities function to both express and
preserve cultural values as well as serving to strengthen social cohesion.

    Games form a somewhat different category, undertaken by children and young adults
primarily for pleasure.

    Music, song, dance and games may not have been recognised as nominal categories by a
Proto Oceanic speaker[2]. Nevertheless, for the sake of convenience, I have divided discussion
of the role of these activities to cover instrumental music (§6.2); song (§6.3); dance (§6.4);
and games, i.e. activities other than music and dance, the primary function of which is
entertainment (§6.6). An amount of overlap, particularly between song and dance, is
unavoidable.


6.2 Instrumental music

This section includes sound-making instruments used for purposes other than entertainment.
Drums serve mainly to accompany dances, while the larger slitgongs may also be used to
signal messages. Quieter instruments like flutes, panpipes, jew’s harps and musical bows,
are all played mainly for personal enjoyment. It is noteworthy that these are precisely those
instruments to which love magic properties are ascribed (Fischer 1986:156).

[1] Particular thanks are due to Alexandre François for comments and numerous additions to the data.

[2] No terms have been reconstructed for ‘music’ or ‘games’, for example, while we cannot be sure that
    reconstructions for ‘song’ and ‘dance’ are generic. Activities are more likely to be expressed verbally.

196 Meredith Osmond


6.2.1 Trumpet, conch

In most locations the conch trumpet functions as a signalling device rather than as a musical
instrument. It transmits messages, announces occasions like celebrations (Tok Pisin
singsings) and deaths, and may serve as a war trumpet. Conditions under which it can be
sounded are typically predetermined, and only certain persons are permitted to blow it
(Fischer 1986:135-149). The shell used is generally the Charonia tritonis, although Cassis
shells may be similarly used.

<
PMP *tapuRiq ‘conch shell trumpet’ (ACD) (See vol.1:106, vol.4:183)
POc *tapuRiq ‘triton shell: Charonia tritonis; a trumpet of this’
 Adm: Mussau               taue           ‘triton shell’
 NNG: Takia                taur           ‘conch shell/horn (used for sending messages)’
 NNG: Manam                tauru          ‘conch shell; used as a horn for calling village meetings with the Kaunsel’
 NNG: Bariai               taule          ‘shell trumpet, conch’
 PT:    Kilivila           tauya          ‘triton shell; trumpet of this’
 MM: Sursurunga            taur           ‘shell type blown to send messages, triton shell’
 MM: Tolai                 tavur          ‘triton shell’
 SES: Lengo                tavuli         ‘triton shell’
 SES: Sa’a                 ehuri          ‘shell trumpet, blown to summon people’
 SES: Arosi                ahuri          ‘conch shell, triton; trumpet of this, blown only on solemn occasions, e.g. at a death’
 TM: Buma                  teveliko       ‘triton; conch shell traditionally used as a trumpet, esp. when sending out public signals’ (François)
 NCV: Lonwolwol            taviu          ‘conch shell (and sound)’ (vowel metathesis)
 NCV: Lewo                 tapuru         ‘shellfish trochus spp.’
 NCV: Lakon                tau            ‘conch shell, Charonia tritonis’ (François 2013)
 SV: Sye                   (n)tovu        ‘triton shell’
 Mic: Kiribati             tau            ‘triton conch, trumpet shell’
 Mic: Ponapean             sewi           ‘conch shell, trumpet’
 Mic: Carolinian           sawi           ‘conch shell trumpet’
 Mic: Woleaian             tawi           ‘conch shell, trumpet’
 Fij:   Wayan              tavui          ‘triton shell: Pacific or Triton’s Trumpet’
 Fij:   Bauan              davui          ‘trumpet shell or triton’
>

   A second POc term for the conch shell trumpet, *buu, can be reconstructed. We do not
know whether or how its meaning differed from *tapuRi.

<
PCEMP *buu ‘conch shell trumpet’ (ACD)
POc *buu ‘conch shell trumpet’ (ACD)
 NNG: Uvol             bu        ‘triton shell trumpet’ (Laade 1999:160)
 NNG: Maenge           bū        ‘triton shell trumpet’
 SES: Kwaio            bū        ‘conch shell’
 NCV: Lonwolwol        bu        ‘sound of the (holed) conch shell being blown, as a signal’
 Mic: Kiribati         pu        ‘conch, sea-shell horn, trumpet’
PPn *pū ‘triton shell trumpet’
 Pn:  Niuean           pū        ‘univalve mollusc shell; trumpet’
 Pn:  Samoan           pū        ‘name given to molluscs belonging to genera Tritonium and Cassis, the shells of some of which are used as shell trumpets’
 Pn:  Nukuoro          bū        ‘conch shell trumpet’
 Pn:  Tuvaluan         pū        ‘shell trumpet, used to call important meetings’
 Pn:  Tikopia          pū        ‘trumpet, traditionally, large univalve shell’
 Pn:  Tahitian         pū        ‘trumpet’
 Pn:  Hawaiian         pū        ‘large triton conch shell (Charonia tritonis); any wind instrument’
 Pn:  Maori            pū        ‘volute univalve mollusc of the winkle type’
>

                                                                            Recreation 197


6.2.2 Flutes and panpipes

Flutes described in Oceanic communities may be end-blown or side-blown, mouth-blown or
nose-blown. The flute type most widely distributed is the end-blown notched flute, made
from a length of bamboo about 25–30 cm long with from one to three fingerholes. It is
found in Mussau, throughout the Bismarck Archipelago, North Bougainville and Vanuatu,
with some specimens also recorded from the Rai Coast (Fischer 1986:90).

    Side-blown flutes belong overwhelmingly to a category known as paired or sacred flutes.
The flutes lack finger holes and are played in pairs, one longer than the other. They can also
be used for communicating with spirits of the dead. Their distribution supports Papuan
rather than Austronesian ancestry (McLean 1994:23). No terms have been collected.

    With the exception of the paired side-blown flutes, which are powerful fertility symbols
used in garden magic and to frighten women and uninitiated youths with weird sounds, the
flutes are associated with gentler, more peaceful purposes, such as making love charms, and
attracting women. Hence they are normally played by men and played alone.

    Panpipes are end-blown bamboos of varying or graduated length fastened together, either
in a flat row or, less commonly, in a bundle. They are found throughout Melanesia including
the Admiralties, Bismarck Archipelago, Solomons, Vanuatu and Fiji, but in Polynesia were
found only as far as Tonga and Samoa, places where they are now obsolete (Buck 1927:173,
McLean 1994:98). Laade (1999:154-159) describes the varieties of panpipes and the social
observances followed by panpipe players in Maenge, SE New Britain. There they are played
by men only, always individually, to attract a woman, or for some nostalgic memory. In
contrast, in the Solomons, there are elaborate ensembles played by men and boys, with
panpipes consisting of sets of up to twelve bamboos. However, this may be a modern
development.

    Most reconstructed terms for flutes and panpipes are either terms for kinds of bamboo or
from the verb ‘to blow.’

198 Meredith Osmond

<
POc *kopi ‘bamboo; bamboo flute’ (vol.1:108)
  PT: Gumawana        ko-kopi       ‘flute’
  MM: Halia           kohi          ‘raft pan pipes, 3 or 4 bamboos’ (Chenoweth 1976); ‘small bamboo flute’ (Allen et al. 1982)
PPn *kofe ‘bamboo sp.’ (POLLEX) [3]
  Pn: Niuean          kofe          ‘flute; musical instrument of any sort’
  Pn: Tongan          kofe          ‘green bamboo’
  Pn: Rennellese      kohe          ‘bamboo’
  Pn: Samoan          ʔofe          ‘bamboo, generic term’
  Pn: Luangiua        ʔohe          ‘bamboo whistle’
  Pn: Tikopia         (pū)kofe      ‘bamboo pipe, small instrument of single bamboo, used long ago, blown only by children’
>

  Reflexes of POc *[k,q]auR ‘bamboo’ reflect an extension of meaning from the raw
material to the artefact made from that material.

<
PAn *qauR ‘bamboo sp.’ (ACD)
POc *qauR ‘bamboo; bamboo wind instrument’ (vol.3:400)
  Adm: Mussau        kauru           ‘bamboo’
  NNG: Lukep         kaur            ‘flute; traditional musical instrument made out of bamboo monomono. It has four notes per octave. Historically a man would play the flute when he was hungry and had nothing to eat.’
  NNG: Bilibil       kau(-mahay) ‘bamboo sp., flute, long bamboo wind instrument (2.7m x 5 cm)’
  MM:  Tolai         kaur            ‘k.o. bamboo’
  MM:  Tinputz       kaʔur, waʔur  ‘larger panpipes with mouthpiece, usually of three reeds of different diameter’ (Blackwood 1935:412)
  SES: Sa’a          au              ‘panpipes’ (Tolo in origin, according to Ivens 1927)
  SES: Arosi         ʔau(uhi-uhi)    ‘panpipes of bamboo’ (ʔau ‘bamboo’, uhi ‘blow’)
  SES: ’Are’are      ʔau             ‘bamboo’; ‘generic for music and musical instruments; panpipes’
  SES: To’aba’ita    qau             ‘piece of bamboo that has been cut and used for a certain purpose, e.g. flute, panpipe’
  TM:  Teanu         okoro           ‘bamboo’; ‘certain bamboo artefacts’; ‘heavy bamboo, used as stamping tubes’ (François 2021)
  NCV: Mota          au              ‘bamboo’
  NCV: Paamese       (e-)au          ‘bamboo; knife; slitgong fixed in ground’
  NCV: Namakir       ʔo              ‘bamboo; panpipe’
  NCV: Nguna         (na-)au         ‘wild cane, reed; flute, mouth organ’
cf. also:
  SES: Tolo          hau             ‘bamboo’; ‘panpipes made of bamboo’
>

[3] PPn *kofe is one of a number of instances in which POc *-i became PPn *-e. Others are POc *buli >
    PPn *pule ‘cowrie shell’, POc *ta(m)puki > PPn *puke ‘mound’.

                                                                                Recreation 199

<
POc *upi, *ipu ‘blow; native flute’ (vol.1:107)
 NNG: Hote            (y)uv             ‘blow’
 NNG: Uvol            iu                ‘blow, thus generic for flutes and panpipes; generic for all bamboos’
 PT:  Kiriwina        (y)uvi            ‘blow’
 PT:  Motu            ivi(likou)        ‘a reed instrument, a flute’
 MM:  Petats          pīu               ‘festival; panpipe; blow a bamboo flute: festival in which bamboo flutes are used’ (see also Blackwood 1935:412)
 MM:  Teop            piuvu             ‘bamboo flute; a native dance; blow, exhale’
 MM:  Roviana         ivu               ‘blow, as a conch shell’
 MM:  Roviana         iv-ivu(ana)       ‘a native flute’ (-ana NOMINALISER)
 SES: Bugotu          ifu               ‘blow, of fire or panpipes; panpipes’ (exp. ivu)
 SES: Kwaio           ufi               ‘play panpipes’
 SES: Sa’a            uhi               ‘blow with the mouth upon an object’
 SES: Arosi           (ʔau)uhi-uhi      ‘panpipes of bamboo’ (ʔau ‘bamboo’, uhi ‘blow, breathe’)
 TM:  Teanu           vi                (VT) ‘blow (on to, into s.t.)’
 NCV: Mwotlap         ip                ‘blow (pipe, conch shell)’
 NCV: Mwesen          uv                ‘blow (pipe, conch shell)’
 Fij: Wayan           uvi               ‘(sub. e.g. fire, flute) be blown with the mouth’
 Fij: Wayan           uvi-              (VT) ‘blow s.t. with the mouth’
 Fij: Bauan           uvu(ða)           (VT) ‘blow with the mouth’
 Pn:  Tongan          ifi               (VT) ‘blow with the mouth’
>

<
POc *pi(g,k)o ‘bamboo wind instrument’
 MM: Nakanai           vigogo          ‘a bamboo flute’
 NCV: Mota             viɣo            ‘native panpipes’
>

   Nose flutes are rare in New Guinea, but prominent in Micronesia, Polynesia, and Fiji.
However, McLean suggests that the Micronesian instruments may have been borrowed
from the Philippines (1994:101). In a detailed and thorough investigation into the existence
of nose flutes in Melanesia other than Fiji, Ammann (2007:1–12) shows that long-accepted
reports of nose flutes in New Caledonia have been shown to be erroneous and finds no
evidence that they existed in Vanuatu or the Solomons. Various references have been made
to their existence in the Admiralties, including Friederici (1912) from Mouk [Manus] and
Pak, and Nevermann (1933:381), and there is an illustration of an Admiralties end-blown
bamboo nose flute held in the Auckland Museum (Moyle 1989:47), but Ammann (2007:9)
considers none of them verifiable. He concludes:

__blockquote__
     References to the existence of nose flutes in Melanesia are often based on
     unacknowledged references to earlier publications or on hearsay. The earliest
     references are the most suspect, especially because none of the authors states that he
     heard and saw the flute being played for more than just a few notes. From the many
     references on nose flutes in Melanesia, only a few seem to be of substance, especially
     those from Manus, but even there, the references are not unequivocal.

200 Meredith Osmond

    Oceanic reflexes of PAn *tulani ‘bamboo nose flute’ refer to a range of blown
instruments, but Bauan Fijian dulali means ‘nose flute’, supporting the hypothesis that POc
*tulali had this meaning, which became a generic for blown instruments as the nose flute
fell out of use in western communities.

<
PAn *tulani ‘bamboo nose flute’ (ACD)
PMP *tulali ‘bamboo nose flute’ (ACD)
POc *tulali ‘bamboo nose flute’
  NNG: Maenge           tulala      ‘notched flute, raft panpipes; generic name for bamboo’ (Laade 1999:153–154)
  PT:  Dobu             tuna        ‘jew’s harp’
  MM:  Sursurunga       tulal       ‘flute-like instrument. This is a musical instrument that’s blown, made from special bamboo with holes drilled and a small notch at the blowing end’
  MM:  Tangga           tulal       ‘flute, made form a special kind of bamboo, played by both sexes’
  MM:  Patpatar         tulal       ‘bamboo flute’
  MM:  Ramoaaina        tulal       ‘music; musical pipe; to make music’
  MM:  Nehan            tulal       ‘very small musical pipe, bamboo flute’
  Fij: Bauan            dulali      ‘Fijian nose flute’
  Mic: Marshallese      cilel       ‘triton shell, conch, trumpet’
>

   Polynesian reflexes of POc *paŋus ‘blow one’s nose’ are used in reduplicated form to
refer to the nose flute.

<
POc *paŋus, *paŋus-i- ‘blow one’s nose’ (vol.5:303–304)
PPn *faŋu-faŋu ‘nose-flute’ (POLLEX: PPn *faŋu ‘breathe, blow through nose’)
  Pn:  Tongan         faŋu-faŋu     ‘nose flute’ (faŋu ‘blow one’s nose’)
  Pn:  E Uvean        faŋu-faŋu     ‘bamboo nose flute’
  Pn:  Samoan         faŋu-faŋu     ‘wind instrument, bamboo nose flute’
  Pn:  Tokelauan      faŋu-faŋu     ‘flute’
  Pn:  W Futunan      faŋu(jia)     ‘play panpipes’
cf. also:
  Mic: Puluwatese     yaŋin         ‘nose flute’ (yafoŋ ‘nose, deferential’)
  Mic: Chuukese       āŋún          ‘nose flute, used in former times by young men to serenade young women’ (Diettrich 2007)
  Fij: Rotuman        faŋ-faŋu      ‘nose flute’ (Pn borrowing)
PPn *faŋo ‘bamboo nose flute’ (from PPn *faŋo ‘blow or speak through the nose’)
  Pn:  Tongan         faŋo-faŋo     ‘nose flute’ (Martin 1817)
  Pn:  W Futunan      faŋo          ‘pipe, flute’
  Pn:  Mele Fila      faŋo          ‘any musical instrument, but esp. mouth organ’
  Pn:  Maori          faŋo          ‘having nasal sound’
  Pn:  Hawaiian       hano          ‘humming sound, nose flute’
>

                                                                             Recreation 201


6.2.3 Jew’s harp

In New Guinea the jew’s harp is always made of bamboo. They are mostly played by young
men, particularly in courtship. McLean notes that the typical New Guinea-type jew’s harp is
found throughout New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago, Admiralties, Solomons, parts of
Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Rotuma. In Micronesia, where instruments are found only in
the west, the shape is different and McLean (1994:98) suggests that they may have entered
the area from the Philippines, independently of New Guinea. Fischer writes that its widest
distribution is in New Guinea and island Melanesia, with its southernmost occurrence
“apparently Florida [Gela] … and that a reported instrument from New Caledonia is
uncertain in its origin but definitely imported” (1986:48). He describes the jew’s harp as “an
instrument of love magic, of courtship, or, with muted sound, of entertainment and simple
communication between lovers” (p.49).

   McLean (1994:95) quotes Marcuse (1975) as proposing that jew’s harps may have
originated in southern China or south-west Asia. A bamboo form, apparently identical with
the instrument in New Guinea is still played by the Mosua people of southwestern Yunnan
Blust notes (1995b:496) that it is a basic traditional musical instrument “among many
Formosan aborigines and elsewhere in island Southeast Asia”.

   Although few terms have been located, evidence is sufficient to permit a POc
reconstruction.

<
POc *b(u,o)go-b(u,o)go ‘jew’s harp’ (vol.1:110)
 Adm: Lindrou        bugubug         ‘mouth drum’ (Nevermann 1933:383)
 NNG: Mapos Buang    bgog            ‘jew’s harp; usually made from bamboo’
 MM: Petats          pokpoko         ‘jew’s harp’ (Blackwood 1935:413)
>

   In Samoa (and presumably elsewhere in Polynesia), the so-called jew’s harp is
constructed from a short length of coconut leaflet, one end of which is gripped in the teeth.
One hand holds in contact along the leaflet a length of coconut midrib while the other hand
twangs the free end of this midrib (Moyle 1988:42). It has something in common with the
jew’s harp from Gaua in Vanuatu (no name in the local language) described by François and
Stern (2013), which is also made from coconut leaf and stem.

<
PPn *qutete ‘jew’s harp’ (*quti ‘bite’ + *tete ‘shiver, tremble, vibrate’)
  Pn:    Tongan           ʔutete            ‘jew’s harp’
  Pn:    Samoan           utete             ‘jew’s harp’
  Pn:    E Futuna         utete             ‘jew’s harp’
>

6.2.4 Bow

Musical bows are stringed instruments made from a piece of bent reed or bamboo with one
end held in the mouth which then acts as a resonator. They are found in Melanesia from
north New Britain through parts of the Solomons to Vanuatu (Chowning & Goodenough
2016:345, Blackwood 1935:413, Codrington 1891:339, Lewis 1951:177, Fischer 1986:71).
Few terms have been collected, none cognate.

202 Meredith Osmond


6.2.5 Rattles

McLean (1994:14) lists rattles made from diverse materials including seeds and seed pods,
various nuts, fruit, snail and seashells, pig’s and dog’s teeth, crayfish shells and crab claws.
The purpose of most is to accompany dance, although Seligman (1910:292) describes seeds
of Pangium edule being used as rattles attached to nets in wallaby drives in the Roro
speaking area of southern PNG. They are commonly worn as anklets, where the sound is
enhanced by the regular stamping action of most dances, but are sometimes worn also on
the wrist. Although non-cognate terms have been collected from Kove and Mamusi (NNG),
Kiriwina (PT) and Nakanai (MM), the only reconstruction made is a PEOc term. This is
also the term for the tree, Pangium edule, the fruit of which is used for dance rattles in the
SE Solomons and Vanuatu.

<
PEOc *paRage ‘tree sp., Pangium edule; dance rattles’ (vol.3:336)
  SES: Tolo          valage        ‘type of large seed pod worn to make noise when dancing’
  SES: Kwara’ae      falake        ‘Pangium edule’ (Whitmore 1966)
  SES: Lau           falake        ‘seeds tied on legs in dancing; sp. of tree’
  SES: Kwaio         falage        ‘rattle’
PNCV *vaRage ‘tree sp., Pangium edule, fruit used as dance rattles’(Clark 2009)
  NCV: Mota          varake        ‘tree; shells of the fruit tied to the ankles as rattles in dances’
  NCV: Raga          vaŋge         ‘Pangium edule’
  NCV: NE Ambae      vake          ‘ankle rattle tree, Pangium edule’
  NCV: Pt Sandwich   (vi)vaŋg      ‘dance rattles’
cf. also:
  NNG: Kove          paloko        ‘anklets worn by dancers’
  MM:  Nakanai       golo-golo     ‘ankle rattles, used in dances’
>

6.2.6 Hourglass or kundu drum

The hourglass drum, known as kundu in Tok Pisin of PNG, is of wood with a lizard or
snakeskin membrane covering one end. It is hourglass-shaped with a narrow waist to which
a handle is often attached. The main use of these drums is to provide a rhythmic
accompaniment to dances. They are beaten by hand, each person carrying his own
instrument. McLean reports that kundu drums are not known east of Bougainville apart
from eastern Micronesia (1994:4), and the cognate set below bears this out. The NNG
cognates have evidently broadened their meaning to cover drums in general. Harding
reports that “drums are probably manufactured over a wide area, but the Tami Islands, Arop
and Karkar Islands are recognised centres for the manufacture of superior hardwood
[hourglass] drums” (Harding 1967:41). Kundu drums are widely used throughout
non-Austronesian-speaking communities of New Guinea, and it is likely that they are Papuan in
origin.

                                                                           Recreation 203

<
PWOc *kud(u,e) ‘hourglass drum’ (vol.1:109)
 NNG: Kilenge      kure            ‘slitgong drum, hourglass drum’
 NNG: Kove         kure            ‘hourglass drum, slitgong’
 NNG: Mamusi       kuru(miso)      ‘generic for kundus, large and small, with and without handles’ (Laade1999:179)
 MM: Vitu          kude            ‘(hour-glass) drum’
 MM: Bulu          kude            ‘(hour-glass) drum’
 MM: Nakanai       kude            ‘hourglass drum’
 MM: Patpatar      kudu            ‘drum’
 MM: Tolai         kudu            ‘a long drum, the end of which is covered with the skin of an iguana’
 MM: Tinputz       kuntu           ‘hand drum’
>

6.2.7 Slitgong or garamut

A slitgong or garamut (Tok Pisin) is a hollow log with a narrow slit along one side which
produces a deep resonating sound that can be heard at a considerable distance when beaten
with a stick. Slitgongs are used for signalling, for ceremony and to accompany song and
dance. They may range in length from as little as 40 cm to four metres or more, although
most are between 1.5 and two metres long (McLean 1994:52). Size is to some extent
dictated by available logs, but for signalling purposes the larger the better. Playing the
slitgongs has been highly developed in the Solomons where kundu drums are unknown.
Stella (1990:49-51) describes the situation in Banoni (central Bougainville) where nine or
ten garamuts of various sizes are played in large ensembles kept in special houses. These
garamuts are always sounded as a group, not individually, and they are sounded for specific
events, never without a cause. Playing patterns carry identifiable messages such as calling
people to assembly, announcing an important death, counting of pigs at a feast, or
announcing that someone has fallen from a tree. Blackwood (1935:409-410) describes the
signals used to carry particular messages in the northern tip of Bougainville, but here only
one garamut is used. On Karkar Island off the north New Guinea coast a single garamut is
beaten to signal the advent of the new moon and an ensuing night of celebration (Malcolm
Ross pers. comm.). In Arosi (SE Solomons), they are played in sets of three, equivalent to
base, tenor and treble, but the purposes for which they are played are not clear. Fox (1978)
describes the advantages of several tones as enabling coded messages in words to be sent
and received over considerable distances. Fox also mentions that in Arosi the base gong
serves as accompaniment for four-line rhyming songs. In central and southern Vanuatu,
slitgongs stand grouped in upright position. Polynesian slit drums differ from Melanesian
ones in having a wider opening, making them more trough-like (Fischer 1986:33). Fischer
writes “it appears that the Polynesian instruments are, independent of Melanesia, a purely
west Polynesian phenomenon” (p.35).

    McLean writes: “In New Guinea the slitgong is pre-eminently an instrument of north
coast seagoing and riverine peoples. Although it is by no means confined to Austronesian
populations they come immediately to mind as purveyors of the instrument” (1994:52).
Blust notes that the slitgong is attested in Taiwan (quoting Chen 1988:79-80). On this
evidence, together with his own observance of a specimen in Yogyakarta in the early 1980s,
Blust (1995b:497) thinks it likely that the slitgong has a history dating back at least to PMP
times.

204 Meredith Osmond

   Three POc reconstructions are proposed for ‘slitgong’: *koŋkoŋ, *garamut and *rali.
POc *koŋkoŋ has reflexes denoting the slitgong in Biliau in NNG and in SES.

<
PAn *kuŋkuŋ ‘slitgong’ (ACD)
POc *koŋkoŋ ‘slitgong’ (Blust 1995b:496)
  NNG: Biliau        koŋkoŋ          ‘bamboo bell (slit bamboo gong which is beaten)’
  SES: Bugotu        koko            ‘wooden gong’
  SES: Gela          koko            ‘wooden gong, usually called a drum’
  SES: Tolo          koko            ‘traditional drum’
  SES: To’aba’ita    oʔo             ‘traditional slit wooden drum, used for sending messages and as a musical instrument’
  SES: Sa’a          ʔoʔo            ‘wooden gong’
  SES: Sa’a          |para ni ʔoʔo|  ‘set of three gongs’ (para ‘fence, row, set of things’)
  SES: Arosi         ʔoʔo            ‘wooden gong, made in sets from a hollowed tree, and used to send messages by a code so that practically any message can be sent’
  SES: Arosi         bara-i-ʔoʔo     ‘set of slitgongs’
cf. also:
  MM: Halia          koŋkoŋ          ‘jew’s harp, played by men and women at any time’ (Chenoweth 1976:14)
  MM: Hahon          koŋkoŋo         ‘musical bow’ (Blackwood 1935:413)[4]
>

    Regular reflexes of POc *garamut occur in Mussau and in MM languages, while NNG
reflexes all fail to reflect the first vowel as expected -a-. This may be because the first
syllable of a three-syllable word like *garamut was reduced, as it is in the Ramoaaina reflex
below. The northern Vanuatu reflexes under ‘cf. also’ are at best irregular, as they point to
the PNCV form *kore, glossed ‘musical instrument’ by Clark (2009) as some reflexes mean
‘flute’ or ‘pan pipes’. The expected PNCV reflex of POc *garamut, however, would be
†*karamu.

<
POc *garamut ‘slitgong’
  Adm: Mussau               ɣalamutu             ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Kove                 ɣilamo               ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Bing                 giram                ‘garamut, log drum’
  NNG: Biliau               giram                ‘garamut, log drum’
  NNG: Manam                giramo               ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Kairiru              giram                ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Gitua                gilamu               ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Yabem                gelom                ‘signal drum, made from a large log’
  NNG: Numbami              gilami               ‘slitgong’
  NNG: Hote                 golom                ‘garamut drum’
  MM: Nakanai               galamo               ‘slitgong’
  MM: Bola                  garamo               ‘slitgong’
  MM: Tolai                 garamut              ‘slitgong’
  MM: Ramoaaina             gəramut              ‘slitgong’
  MM: Sursurunga            garap                ‘(bamboo slit) drum; beat a garap drum’
  MM: Halia-Haku            garamuc              ‘slitgong’
  MM: Teop                  karamusu             ‘slitgong’
  MM: Tinputz               kāmus                ‘drum: slit drum’
cf. also:
  NCV: Mota                 kore                 ‘horizontal slitgong’ (François 2005)
  NCV: Lo-Toga              kor                  ‘horizontal slitgong’
  NCV: Mwotlap              nɔ-kɔj               ‘horizontal slitgong’
  NCV: Kiai                 kore                 ‘slitgong’
>

[4] From Blackwood’s description this is a jew’s harp: ‘a flat strip of cane strung like a bow. It is played
    by holding one end between the teeth, with string towards the face, so that the mouth acts as a
    resonator, while the string is plucked with the fingers towards the other end of the bow. It is used by
    women only, and solely for amusement, never for ceremonial purposes or at dances.’

                                                                                            Recreation 205


    The PT terms in the following set are assumed to have been borrowed from Polynesia.
McLean (2008:44) notes that teachers from the London Missionary Society took the Cook
Islands pate to Samoa for use as a church bell. Its name and associated use may have been
carried by missionaries from there to parts of New Guinea in the 19th century.

__formgroup__
    PT: Tawala         pate     ‘bell/drum’
    PT: Gumasi         pate     ‘a drum’
    Pn: Samoan         pātē     ‘small wooden hand gong used for summoning children to school etc.’
    Pn: Tuvalu         pate     ‘small slit drum’ (Koch 1984)
    Pn: Rarotongan     pate     ‘k.o. drum from hollowed log, used to give time in dancing (also called tokere), beaten with one stick’ (Buck 1927:355)

    POc *rali ‘slitgong’ is reflected in the Admiralties and Fiji.[5]

<
POc *rali ‘slitgong’ (ACD: *drali)
 Adm: Ere            dral            ‘slitgong’
 Adm: Likum          can             ‘slitgong’
 Adm: Lindrou        dran            ‘slitgong’
 Adm: Hus            nhal            ‘slitgong’
PCP *lali ‘wooden drum or gong’
 Fij: Bauan          lali            ‘native wooden drum beaten with two sticks’
cf. also:
 Pn:  Tongan         lali            ‘wooden drum (Fijian style)’
 Pn:  Samoan         lali            ‘middle sized wooden gong, drum’
 Pn:  Tuvalu         lali            ‘bell; wooden gong’
>

[5] The ACD reconstructs this as *drali on the basis of the Admiralties forms, but the latter reflect Admiralties
    secondary nasal grade, not the primary nasal grade of POc (Ross 1988:335, 338).

206 Meredith Osmond


The Central Pacific forms above show assimilation of the first liquid to the second, as Bauan
Fijian does not permit /rVl/ sequences (Blust 2000b:187). McLean (pers. comm.) suggests
that the Polynesian terms have all been borrowed from Fiji (hence their listing under ‘cf.
also’). Two further PPn forms are reconstructable.

<
PPn *nafa ‘a wooden drum’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Niuean        nafa     ‘small wooden drum shaped like a canoe, with a narrow slot on one side’ (McEwen 1970)
  Pn: Tongan        nafa     ‘drum’
  Pn: Pukapukan     nawa     ‘small wooden gong’
  Pn: Samoan        nafa     ‘native slit drum, used in rhythmic accompaniment to song and/or dance’ (Pratt 1911)
  Pn: Tikopia       nafa     ‘large bowl-shaped trough (sometimes canoe hull serves)’
>

<
PPn *pasu ‘drum, to drum, thump’
  Pn:   Niuean          pahu            ‘drum’
  Pn:   Tongan          pahu            ‘to thump’
  Pn:   Rarotongan      paʔu            ‘drum formed from a hollowed block and covered with sharkskin’
  Pn:   Tahitian        pahu            ‘drum; thumping blow’
  Pn:   Maori           pahū            ‘wooden gong’
  Pn:   Hawaiian        pahu            ‘drum’
>

6.2.8 Stamping tubes

Stamping tubes are lengths of bamboo with one end open, and all but the bottom node
removed. They are sounded by dropping the closed end vertically against the ground or a
hard surface like a stamping board. Fischer (1986:7) notes widespread distribution including
“E New Guinea, Malaita, Fiji, W Polynesia and Hawaii”. Stella (1990:39) reports their use
from Banoni (NW Solomons) where they are called cucubini. François (2021) records them
from Vanikoro (Reefs-Santa Cruz) as woi okoro ‘to stick bamboos’—to pound heavy
bamboos vertically and repeatedly onto the ground, to mark bass rhythms while singing. He
notes that they are also found in New Caledonia (pers. comm.). François and Stern (2013)
record their use in northern Vanuatu. They were also mentioned by James Cook in his
journals, who saw them used in Tonga in 1777 in groups of four or five to accompany dance
(Cook & King 1785, vol.1:292-3). There they were known simply as kofe (bamboo). No
reconstruction has been made.

                                                                                       Recreation 207


6.2.9 Bullroarer

Bullroarers are found in Melanesia as far east as Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji. In
Polynesia their place is taken by the leaf whizzer which is invariably a toy. The bullroarer is
“a flat lens-shape to double-pointed rhomboid-shaped piece of wood with a hole in one end
through which a string is drawn. … The instrument is whirled round the head, producing a
humming sound” (Fischer 1986:80). Used only by men, it is associated with initiation,
secrecy, deception of women and spirit voices. It is used ritually in both Australia and New
Guinea. McLean suggests that the current distribution of bullroarers in New Guinea is a
result of borrrowing from Australia (1994:43). The bullroarer recorded by François and
Stern (2013:119) in northern Vanuatu is described as “a toy rather than a genuine [musical]
instrument, and is used just for entertainment.” It is made from a coconut frond with the
midleaf removed, which is whirled round the head. The double rotation of the instrument,
simultaneously above one’s own head and on its own axis, results in a loud, deep humming
sound.

   Although a handful of terms have been collected, none are cognate. Informants generally
are extremely reluctant to speak of the instrument, and may resort to diversionary tactics
when asked its name.


6.3 Song

Singing is predominantly choral and traditionally associated with dance, although hymn
singing may now have overtaken traditional dance as the most frequent performance of
song.
Songs, like dances, are regarded throughout Melanesia as property, and can be bought and
sold like any other commodity (§6.3.10).6 Because they can be traded and because they are
open to innovation, reconstructing terms for particular songs and dances is not a productive
exercise. However, the forms, as opposed to the content, are more or less stereotyped, and it
is terms for these which offer our best chance of reconstruction.

    François (2013:74-5) writes that in Vanuatu,

__blockquote__
      Musical arts form not only a link between past and present but also, by extension,
      between the living and the dead, between humans and spirits. … A fair proportion of
      musical forms in Vanuatu are bound by the oath of secrecy and are the exclusive
      property of a few men, by virtue of their privileged ties with the world of the
      Ancestors. Some songs, dances, instruments, rhythms or melodies are therefore
      inaccessible to children or to women, or to any other person who has not acquired the
      relevant rites.

    Throughout Micronesia, music is predominantly vocal rather than instrumental. Diettrich
et al (2011:20) write that

__blockquote__
      The vocalization of poetry, whether in oratory, song, or formal story-telling,
      communicates social and cultural values and is a powerful expression of sentiment in
      everyday life. …The oldest vocal music displays many melodic shapes, from lyrical
      chants to rhythmically intoned speech, but many indigenous melodies exhibit a
      narrow range of pitches employed in monophonic and occasionally polyphonic
      textures.

[6] This contrasts with the practice in Polynesia where song and dance are considered as beyond price, not
    to be demeaned by being treated as commodities to be bought and sold (McLean 1999:392).

208 Meredith Osmond


   Sung poetry in Micronesia is typically accompanied by expressive body movements.
Diettrich et al. (p.21) describe a genre known as wuur, a type of vocal music performed as
group seated dances using hand and arm movements punctuated by hand claps.

6.3.1 General term

The following is reconstructed as a general term for ‘sing’, and ‘song’. Its POc meaning
may have been more specific, but it is rare to find reflexes defined in more than general
terms. In many cases terms will be both noun and verb.

<
PCEMP *wari ‘sing, song’ (ACD)
POc *wari ‘sing, song’
 Adm: Nali           wali(y)           ‘sing’ (< POc *wari-a VT)
 Adm: Loniu          weʔi(y)           ‘sing’ (< POc *wari-a vt)
 NNG: Wab            ware              ‘sing’
 PT:  Dobu           wari              (N, V) ‘song, sing’
 PT:  Molima         wali              ‘sing, song’
 Pn:  Pukapukan      vai               ‘k.o. chant’ (reflects *waRi)
cf. also:
 NNG: Maeng          walu              ‘spells or charms for gardening, fishing, hunting, curing ills, sex, weather’ (Laade 1999)[7]
 PT:  Bwaidoga       kʷeli             ‘song, hymn’
>

Bwaidoga is shown under ’cf. also’ as it appears to be a loan from an Oceanic language in
which POc *w- had become kʷ-, perhaps, as the gloss ’hymn’ suggests, via missionaries
speaking a SE Solomonic language of northern Malaita. However, a source word has not
been found.

   POc *kanam may refer to a particular song or kind of song, but on the basis of reflex
meanings below it is impossible to be more specific. There is an ambiguity in the
reconstruction, as the SES terms reflect POc *kana or *kanaC, where *-C is a consonant.
The NNG terms suggest that this consonant was *-m but final consonants are also lost in the
two NNG languages, Takia and Gedaged, implying POc *kanamV, where *-V is a vowel.
The data do not allow a resolution of this ambiguity.

<
POc *kanam ‘sing, song’
 NNG: Takia         kanam         ‘a specific ritual dance in which the people chant and dance to drums’[8]
 NNG: Gedaged       kanam         ‘name of a specific dance and melody performed at a feast in the daytime; mimics fish, fowl, snakes, wasps and sexual intercourse’
 SES: Lau           kana          ‘to hum; to sing old songs’
 SES: Sa’a          kana          (VI) ‘to sing’; (N) ‘song’
 SES: ’Are’are      kana          ‘sing in incantations to a spirit to learn a sickness cure’
cf. also:
 PT:    Motu        ane           ‘song, hymn’ (ane abi-a ‘to sing’)
 SES: Kwaio         gana          ‘sing’ (reflects *g-)
 SES: Kwaio         gana-fali     ‘k.o. customary singing’ (fali ‘branch, division’)
 SES: To’aba’ita    kana          ‘k.o. traditional song’; (VI) ‘sing’ (reflects *g-)
 SES: Arosi         gana          ‘to sing’ (reflects *g-)
>

[7] Women have walu for childbirth, pregnancy, raising children etc.

[8] It was later adopted by the Lutheran church in the Madang area as the term for song or hymn.

                                                                             Recreation 209

<
PMP *ŋuŋ, *ŋu(ŋ)ŋuŋ ‘buzz, hum’ (ACD)
POc *ŋuŋu ‘hum’
 SES: Lau             ŋū                  ‘hum, chant, sing’
 SES: Arosi           ŋū                  ‘hum’
 Pn:  Tongan          |ŋūŋū, hiva ŋūŋū|   ‘to hum’ (hiva ‘sing’)
 Pn:  Rennellese      ŋūŋū                ‘speak quietly, hum’
>

6.3.2 Dance songs

Dance songs have particular roles and functions. For instance, Laade gives a detailed
account of the categories of song and dance performed at Maenge on the south coast of New
Britain, listing more than fifty by name (1999:130-142). Many are known to have been
borrowed. Some are for daytime, others for night. Standing up dance songs are sung until
midnight, followed by sitting down songs without dancing. Some are ‘occasion’ songs sung
to mark such events as the blackening of teeth, supraincision of boys and piercing of the
septum of girls, while others are war or victory songs. Others such as sasaŋa are described
as ‘pure entertainment’ (Laade 1999:148). Events such as the opening of a men’s house or
end of harvest time may justify a night of singing and dancing. These are typically
performed with hourglass drum accompaniment. Dance songs are further differentiated by
gender, and sometimes also by age, with song parts and dance roles for young men, older
women and so on.

   Terms for dance songs may sometimes refer to both the song and its associated dance.
Because song and dance are dealt with under separate headings, inclusion of reconstructions
into one or the other is sometimes arbitrary.

<
POc *raŋi ‘a song to accompany dance’; ‘to sing, song, melody’ (Pawley 1976)
 NNG: Manam         raŋ               ‘song’
 NNG: Takia         (i)raŋ            ‘a festival normally held during a full moon’[9]
 NNG: Mapos Buang   ran               ‘women’s dance’[10]
PPn *laŋi ‘sing, song’
 Pn:  Tongan        laŋi              ‘singing or song, esp. accompanying a native dance’
 Pn:  Samoan        laŋi              ‘sing; song’
 Pn:  Tikopia       raŋi, aŋa          ‘air of dance song’
 Pn:  Maori         raŋi              ‘tune, air, portion of a song’
 Pn:  Tahitian      rai(fa)           ‘native song’
cf. also:
 NCV: Mota          leŋa              ‘a women’s dance’
 NCV: Raga          leŋa              ‘k.o. dance, usually performed by men’
 NCV: Uripiv        na-leŋ            ‘a traditional dance’
 NCV: Nguna         leɣa              ‘to sing, song’
>

210 Meredith Osmond

<
POc *bwaku (V) ‘to sing, dance’
 Adm: Seimat              pak                    (VI) ‘sing, dance’
 Adm: Seimat              paku-a                 (N) ‘song, dance, chant’
 NNG: Uvol                pau                    ‘to sing’
 NNG: Uvol                pau-ŋa                 ‘song’ (Laade 1999:117)
 NNG: Poeng               vau                    ‘to sing’
 NNG: Maeng               bau-ŋa                 ‘song’
 NNG: Bariai              bau                    ‘to sing’
 NNG: Bariai              bau-ŋa                 ‘song’
 NNG: Gitua               bʷau                   ‘to sing’
 NNG: Kove                vou                    ‘to sing’
 MM: Nakanai              bau, bau-bau           ‘to sing, sound (of drum)’
 MM: Ramoaaina            pak                    (VT) ‘compose a song, arrange a dance’
>

   In the central Caroline Islands people perform wuur as part of a long sequence of dance
songs during special community gatherings (Diettrich et al. 2011:23).

<
PChk *uru ‘play, dance’ (not in Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Puluwatese      wur             ‘to play’
 Mic: Woleaian        uẓu             (N) ‘dance, play, game’; (VI) ‘dance, play’
 Mic: Carolinian      ur              (N, VI) ‘traditional means of recreation incl. dances and games’
cf. also:
 Mic: Carolinian      ukkuru          (N) ‘game’; (VI) ‘play a game’
 Mic: Marshallese     kkure           ‘play, game, drama’
>

   The term below appears to be limited to Polynesia.

[9]  Thomas (n.d.; see Appendix 1) glosses this as ‘a festival normally held during a full moon in which
     there is singing and dancing, however drums are not used. It is one of the rare times when young men
     and women can hold hands in public. They gather in a large circle, hand in hand, moving back and
     forth, swinging their hands while joyously singing. They will sing various types of fun songs, love
     songs. Many of the songs have been handed down from generation to generation. No one outside of
     the clan may sing these songs, with the exception of those who have purchased the rights. Others will
     write songs especially for that occasion.’

[10] Rambok & Hooley (2010) gloss this as ‘dance; with the characteristic stroking motion of the feet that
     the women use and which is different to that normally used by the men.’

                                                                             Recreation 211

<
PPn *siwa ‘sing and dance’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Tongan         hiva             (VI) ‘to sing’; (N) ‘singing, song, singer; choir’
  Pn:  Pukapukan      yiva             ‘a type of chant’
  Pn:  Samoan         siva             ‘to dance’; (N) ‘dance’ (John Jackson as quoted by Erskine 1853:416); ‘dance accompanied by song’ (Pratt 1911)
  Pn:  Tikopia        siwa            ‘dance said to be a dance of the spirits’
  Pn:  E Uvean        hiva            ‘song’
  Pn:  W Futunan      siva            ‘a traditional style of dancing’
  Pn:  Tokelauan      hiva            ‘dance’
  Pn:  Maori          hiwa            ‘lightheartedness as shown in singing, laughing; wakeful, alert; charm recited over newborn child’
cf. also:
  NCV: Lo-Toga        hawa            ‘dance (generic)’
  NCV: Mota           sawa            ‘perform a manly dance’
  NCV: Mwotlap        haw             ‘perform a manly dance’
  NCV: NE Ambae       sawa            ‘k.o. dance’
  Pn:  Tahitian       heiva           ‘general term for any amusement, sport, singing, archery etc.’ (Ellis 1831:204)
  Pn:  Tuamotuan      heva            ‘k.o. lament’
>

6.3.3 Part songs

One popular song form is the part song, with narrator/introductory soloist and group
responders for chorus. In a number of songs mentioned by Laade (1999:117), performed at
Maenge, Lote and Mamusi, the chorus is repeated identically several times, whereas
changes occur in the ‘counting’ by the soloist. ‘Counting’ means that in each new stanza a
key word – always a name, either of a person or clan, village, animal, plant – is altered,
often so as to refer to incidents or known people. Hogbin describes a song from Longgu
(SES) sung by males at a girl’s face-marking which similarly consists of soloist and chorus
(Hogbin 1964a:24). Physical activity such as paddling a canoe over long distances or
hauling a heavy log may also be accompanied by singing or chanting, with the dual purpose
of synchronising effort and relieving the spirits. These too are usually in the form of
statement and response. One such hauling chant with call and response is emweir, from
Chuuk, described by Diettrich (2007:50).

212 Meredith Osmond

<
PMP *saRup ‘to sing in unison’ (ACD)
POc *saRu(p) ‘sing in unison’
 NCV: Mota             saru              ‘begin a song with many voices together’
 Fij: Wayan            ðau(ri)-          (VT) ‘start off a song, lead off the singing’
 Fij: Bauan            ðau(ri)           ‘to sing the meke [dance song] to which the matana dance’
 Pn:  Tongan           tau               ‘chorus, refrain’
 Pn:  Niuean           tau               ‘act together, at the same time’
cf. also:
 SES: Gela             hulu              ‘a tune, compose a tune, start a song’
 SES: Arosi            suru(ʔi)          (VT) ‘to sing’
 SES: Sa’a             sulu              (VI) ‘sing, make music’
>

6.3.4 Children’s chants

Children will often sing or chant as accompaniment for particular games. Some of these
chants have been recorded in detail. See particularly Ivens 1927:93-108 for Sa’a and Ulawa,
Fox 1924:191-202 for Arosi, Koch, 1984:161-190 for Tuvalu. Although a number of early
ethnographers recorded the particular chants that accompanied the making of string figures,
and in some cases attempted translations, many are described by their own speakers as
untranslatable, perhaps because they have been borrowed from a language unknown to the
player, have become distorted through transmission over time, or are simply meaningless
jingles of the “fol de rol” variety. Handy (1925:10) suggests that “so hazy is the native
memory regarding the ancient legends and tales whose events and characters are referred to
in a fragmentary way in these sing-song jingles, that few of them could be explained”.
Cognate terms have been located only in Polynesia.

<
PPn *fanaŋa ‘story intended for entertainment and usually containing repetitions of a short chant’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:     Tongan         fanaŋa          ‘fictitious fable or story’
  Pn:     E Futunan      fanaŋa          ‘fairytale’
  Pn:     Pukapukan      wānoŋa          ‘a story, tale’
  Pn:     Samoan         fāŋono          ‘tale with a song’ (Pratt 1911)
>

<
PNPn *pese ‘sing; song, chant’
 Pn: Rennellese       pese            ‘clapping song’
 Pn: Samoan           pese            ‘generic term for sing, song, music’
 Pn: Tokelauan        pese            ‘sing’
 Pn: Tikopia          pese            ‘sing, chant; song’
 Pn: Rarotongan       peʔe            ‘a rhythmic chant, usually commemorating some historical event’
 Pn: Tahitian         pehe            ‘song, sing’
 Pn: Tuamotuan        pehe            ‘song’
 Pn: Tuamotuan        pehe-pehe       ‘rhythmic recitative’
 Pn: Manihiki         pehe            ‘rhythmically recited text accompanying children’s games’
 Pn: Mangaian         peʔe            ‘chant, recite a chant, esp. historic/epic’
 Pn: Marquesan        pehe            ‘game played with string’
>

                                                                                 Recreation 213


6.3.5 Incantations

Solo singing is associated with the private sphere and consists chiefly of charms or magic
spells, sung or recited in secret by an individual. Incantations are sung or chanted, the
performer accompanying his incantation with necessary rituals. In Bwaidoga, as described
by Jenness & Ballantyne (1928:127),

__blockquote__
     There are incantations for the sunshine and the rain, for raising the wind and for
     making it subside again, for calming a stormy sea, for ensuring success in hunting
     and in fishing, for producing disease and sickness and again for healing those; in fact
     there is not one single sphere of man’s activity in which an incantation cannot help
     him.

Individual songs mentioned by Laade (1999:148) for Maenge include walu, spells or
charms for good results in gardening, fishing, pregnancy, childbirth etc. Diettrich (2007:48)
writes that in Chuuk, “according to according to Krämer’s ethnography (1932, based on
fieldwork 1908–10) .. what listeners do not hear … are the many chants associated with
different types of rooŋ ‘special knowledge’ such as preparing medicines, controlling the
environment, war strategy, and other types, many of which were associated with magic or
spiritual power.” This was highly secret knowledge. In Samoa, incantations were listed by
Moyle as (i) for protection in battle, (ii) good luck in activities, (iii) cure of physical
ailments. The possibility of success required exact recitation of the text and an actual
performance of the ritual acts (Moyle 1988:73). Incantations were in effect sacred songs. An
important function of music in Polynesian life, as pointed out by Handy (1927:208) is to add
power to incantations and prayers.

    A number of phonologically similar low-level reconstructions for terms meaning
something like ‘make an incantation’ are possible, but it has proved impossible to combine
them. (See §8.2.1).

6.3.6 Commemorative, traditional lore

A function of songs or chants generally shared by preliterate societies lies in using them to
commemorate and pass down traditional lore, including stories of significant events, deeds
of heroes both past and mythical, genealogies, and creation myths. Many serve a moral
purpose. As chants they serve both as aids to memory and instruction. The tradition of
chanting for this purpose is now most pronounced in Polynesia, where different languages
have adapted a range of more general terms to refer specifically to chants. Reflexes of POc
*roŋoR ‘hear’, often reduplicated, have extended their meaning in the Chuukic languages of
Micronesia and in Eastern Polynesia to cover chants of traditional knowledge.

214 Meredith Osmond

<
POc *roroŋoR ‘to sound, be audible’ (cf. POc *roŋoR ‘hear’, vol.5:499–503)
  MM:  Tolai         raroŋo          (VI) ‘to sing as water before boiling, or to sound as running water’
Proto Remote Oceanic *[ro]roŋoR (V) ‘sing; chant, recite traditional lore’; (N) ‘traditional lore’
  Mic: Chuukese      rōŋ             ‘secretive cultural knowledge’ (Diettrich 2007:48)[11]
  Mic: Woleaian      ẓoŋo            ‘traditional lore; knowledge that passes down from father to son’
  Mic: Woleaian      ẓoŋī-a          (VT) ‘sing, recite, relate, verbalise s.t.’
PPn *loloŋo ‘sing, song’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Niuean        |loloŋo (tuai)| ‘traditional songs, chants’ (tuai ‘ancient’)
  Pn:  Tongan        loloŋo          ‘singers collectively providing music at a meʔe- tuʔupaki’ (k.o. dance)
  Pn:  Rennellese    gogoŋo          ‘song of praise or thanks to a god’
  Pn:  Pileni        loŋo            ‘sing, song’
  Pn:  Maori         roroŋo          ‘repeat the commencement of a song’
  Pn:  Tahitian      roroʔo          ‘begin to sing’
  Pn:  Tuamotuan     roroŋo          ‘chant of glory in praise of a hero’ (Burrows 1933:50)
  Pn:  Marquesan     ʔono-ʔono       ‘bards’
  Pn:  Mangarevan    roŋo-roŋo       ‘chants accompanied by beating of drums’
  Pn:  Rapanui       roŋo-roŋo       ‘scholars who sang the old chants at festivals and during religious ritual’ (Buck 1964:243)[12]
cf. also:
  NCV: Mota          roŋo-rav        ‘men’s dance’ (lit. ‘evening song/dance’) (A. François, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Mwotlap       nɔ-jɔŋɛp        ‘men’s dance’
  Mic: Marshallese   roro            (N, V) ‘chant’
>

   Several of the terms referring to traditional knowledge in Polynesian languages are terms
describing associated action or method of delivery of such knowledge. The Tuamotus use
faŋu ‘old chants recording myths and concepts of creation’ (Buck 1964), ‘solemn or sacred
chants’ (Burrows 1933), presumably from PPn *faŋu ‘breathe or blow through the nose’.
Pukapukans, Rennellese, Rarotongans and Mangarevans use a term for their ritual chants
derived from PPn *kapa ‘flap, of wings or stretched out arms’.

<
PPn *kapa ‘flap, of wings or stretched out arms’ (PNPn _*kapa_ ‘dance to accompany ritual chant’; cf. vol. 4:267)
  Pn: Tongan           kapa       ‘stretch out the arms’
  Pn: Pukapukan        kapa       ‘k.o. chant or dance associated with the underworld’
  Pn: Rennellese       kapa       ‘sacred ritual circle dance and chant’
  Pn: Tuamotuan        kapa       ‘dance with action song’
  Pn: Mangarevan       kapa       ‘k.o. ritual chant’
  Pn: Rarotongan       kapa       ‘flap, flutter (wings, arms), esp. to perform the arm and hand gesures that accompanied the old songs and chants’
>

[11]  e.g. chants for summoning breadfruit, preparing medicines, controlling the environment.

[12] Burrows (1933) says that roŋo-roŋo also referred to the tablets themselves , but Buck calls the tablets
     kouhau (kou ‘rod’, hau ‘hibiscus’).

                                                                                  Recreation 215


6.3.7 Storytelling

Storytelling, especially of narratives passed down through the generations, was an important
activity in perhaps all traditional Oceanic-speaking societies. In some communities certain
stories were the property of a particular family line, and only its leading elder was permitted to
tell them. The POc term for telling a story, *takunu ‘tell, narrate’, effectively refers to a whole
speech event rather than a single speech act. All EOc reflexes have -u- in the first syllable, but
this seems to be the result of vowel assimilation, as the Bali root is -taɣuni and the Maringe
root tonu, i.e. < *taunu < *takunu.

<
POc *takunu ‘tell a story, narrate’
 MM:  Bali            va-taɣuni        ‘tell, narrate’ (va- CAUSATIVE)
 MM:  Maringe         tou-tonu         ‘tell story’
PEOc *tukunu ‘tell a story, tell news’
 SES: Bugotu          |tuɣuni poto|    ‘to tell a folklore tale’ (poto ‘folklore tale’)
 SES: Gela            tu-tuɣu          ‘tell, report, tell news’
 SES: Gela            tuɣuni           (VT) ‘tell, say, tell about’
 SES: Tolo            tu-tuɣunu(na)    ‘story, tale’
 SES: Longgu          nu               (VT) ‘tell a story’
 SES: To’aba’ita      uʔunu            (N) ‘story, traditional or not’; (VI) ‘tell a story about’
 SES: Lau             ūnu              ‘to tell, tell a folktale; to gossip, talk’
 SES: Lau             ūnua             (N) ‘folk story’
 SES: Kwaio           unu              ‘tell (a story)’
 SES: ’Are’are        uʔun-a           ‘tell, relate, narrate’
PNCV *tukunu ‘story, tell a story’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Nokuku          (tuk)tukun       ‘murmur, complain, speak evil; story, to talk’
 NCV: Paamese         |tūnu [rūn]|     (V) ‘chat, tell stories, yarn’
 NCV: Nese            tuɣ-tuɣun        ‘tell story’
 NCV: Atchin          tutuɣun-en       ‘k.o. story’
 NCV: Namakir         tukunu           (N) ‘story, tale’
 Fij: Wayan           tukuni-          (VT) ‘report, mention or relate s.t., tell or talk about s.t.’
 Fij: Bauan           tukun-           (VT) ‘tell, relate, announce’
 Pn:  Tikopia         [tuku-]tuku(ŋa)  (N) ‘customs’
>

   PPn evidently had a term *tala ‘tell stories; tale, story’. Listed under ‘cf. also’ below are
what Pawley & Sayaba (in prep.) suggest is a Fijian borrowing from a Polynesian source, a
comment supported by the fact that reflexes of PPn *tala-noa have an obvious etymology,
*tala ‘tell a story’ + *noa ‘worthless, ordinary’, but Fijian has only the composite form.

216 Meredith Osmond

<
PPn *tala ‘tell stories; tale, story’
  Pn:  Tongan           tala           ‘tell, relate’
  Pn:  Samoan           tala           ‘tell; story; tale, legend; report; account, statement’
  Pn:  Tokelau          tala           ‘story, news, report’
  Pn:  East Uvean       tala           ‘narrate, narration’
  Pn:  Pukapuka         tala           ‘speak, say, relate’
cf. also:
  Fij: Wayan            talanoa        ‘tell stories, talk for pleasure’
  Fij: Bauan            talanoa        ‘chat, tell stories’
PPn *tala-noa ‘talk uselessly’
  Pn:  Tongan           tala-noa       ‘talk informally, tell stories or relate experiences’
  Pn:  Samoan           tala-noa       ‘chat; make conversation’
>

   The Proto Nuclear Polynesian noun *[ka]kai ‘traditional story’ below was evidently a
nominalisation of an erstwhile verb PCP *kʷai ‘say, tell’, itself a reflex of POc *kʷa, *kʷai-
‘say, tell’, reconstructed in §12.3.1.

<
PNPn *[ka]kai ‘traditional story’
  Pn:  Rennellese         ka-kai        ‘culture hero’
  Pn:  Tokelauan          ka-kai        ‘legend, folk tale’
  Pn:  Nukuoro            kai           ‘legend, story’
  Pn:  Tikopia            kai           ‘traditional tale’
  Pn:  Tahitian           ʔa-ʔai        ‘legend, story’
  Pn:  Maori              kai           ‘riddle, puzzle, toy’
  Pn:  Marquesan          kai           ‘play all kinds of games’
  Pn:  Rapanui            kai-kai       ‘string games’
cf. also:
  NCV: Mota               ka-kae        ‘to speak, talk, tell a story’
>

6.3.8 Lullabies

Lullabies are another kind of solo singing. Laade (1999:117) describes paŋamomo as a
Maenge lullaby, but comments that any slow song (e.g. Uvol uŋalele and mititi) can be sung
as a lullaby or for self-entertainment in the garden. A number of terms have been recorded
from a wide range of subgroups, resulting in just one reconstruction. Some are possibly
names for particular tunes rather than a generic term.

<
POc *oli-oli ‘a lullaby’
 NNG: Mamusi           ol-ole             ‘lullaby’
PNPn *oli-oli ‘a chant’ (POLLEX) (cf. PPn *oli ‘move to and fro, move rhythmically’)
 Pn:  Rennellese       ogi-ogi            ‘worship, comfort a child’
 Pn:  Tikopia          ori-ori            ‘recite formula of thanks by abasement; funeral dance song acknowledging deceased man of rank’
 Pn:  Maori            ori-ori            ‘chanted lullaby’
 Pn:  Nukuoro          oli-oli            ‘put to sleep by singing lullaby’
 Pn:  Tuvalu           oli-oli            ‘prayer for good fishing catch’
 Pn:  Hawaiian         oli-oli            ‘a chant not danced to’
>

                                                                              Recreation 217


6.3.9 Love songs

Love songs form another group of solo songs. They are sung or chanted to make a member
of the opposite sex enamoured and the advances of the charmer irresistible, and are
accompanied by specific ritual acts. Again, no reconstructions have been made.

6.3.10 Lamentation

In Oceanic societies the death of a person is usually marked by loud lamentations. POc
*taŋis (vol.5:321–322) has the general meaning ‘to cry’, or more explicitly ‘make a sound
appropriate to one’s character’. Thus it includes both animal and human sounds, and may
also be extended to cover sounds made by musical instruments.

<
PAn *Caŋis ‘to weep, cry; mourn; beseech’ (ACD)
PMP *taŋis ‘to cry’
POc *taŋis, *taŋis-i ‘cry, wail, lament, for humans; for animals to make a sound appropriate to their character; for musical instruments to sound’
  Adm: Lou             teŋ-teŋ          ‘cry, weep’
  Adm: Seimat          taŋi             (VI) ‘cry, lament (used of any sound made by any animal’
  NNG: Maeng           tan-taniŋ        ‘sad songs speaking of sad events’ (‘cry’)
  NNG: Uvol            tan-taniŋ        ‘songs with sad themes and tunes, story songs’
  NNG: Gedaged         ta               (VI) ‘cry, bawl, weep, sob, wail, whimper, scream’
  PT:  Motu            tai              (VI) ‘to cry, howl (of dogs)’
  MM:  Minigir         taŋis-i          ‘cry’
  MM:  Tolai           taŋi             ‘cry, weep, wail, make a noise as of water shaken in a bottle; to sing of birds and musical instruments’; (N) ‘sound’
  MM:  Banoni          tanisi           ‘musical function of crying; laments’ (Stella)
  SES: Bugotu          taŋi             ‘cry, cry aloud, lament, wail’
  SES: Lau             āŋi              ‘cry; produce a sound, eg bird, trumpet, thunder’
  SES: To’aba’ita      aŋi              (VI) ‘cry; produce its characteristic sound’ (also of musical instruments)
  SES: Arosi           aŋi              ‘to cry, sound (almost any sound, bell, bird, swish of water etc.)’
  NCV: Mota            taŋi             ‘weep, cry with reference to both tears and sound; cry of birds, animals; sound of musical instruments’
  NCV: Mota            taŋis            ‘cry for’
  NCV: Tamambo         taŋi-si          ‘cry, mourn for’
  SV:  Sye             toŋi             ‘cry for’
  Mic: Marshallese     caŋit            ‘cry for s.o.’
  Fij: Bauan           taŋi             ‘to give out sound; of humans, to cry, weep, lament; of animals, to cry, mew, crow etc.’
  Pn:  Tongan          taŋi             ‘cry, weep, make a characteristic sound’
  Pn:  Pukapukan       taŋi             ‘a death chant; lament’
  Pn:  Pukapukan       taŋi-taŋi        ‘a boasting chant’
  Pn:  Samoan          taŋi             ‘cry, weep, make a characteristic noise; song included in fāŋoŋo, a genre of spoken fictional narrative’
  Pn:  Samoan          taŋi-tau-tala    ‘a mournful dirge at a funeral, telling of misdeeds which caused the death’ (lit. ‘to speak while crying’)
  Pn:  Maori           taŋi             (VI) ‘give forth a sound; weep, utter a plaintive cry; sing a dirge’; (N) ‘sound; lamentation, dirge’
  Pn:  Rarotongan      taŋi             ‘any noise or sound, but especially of weeping’
  Pn:  Tikopia         taŋi             ‘cry, wail, sing mourning song’
  Pn:  Hawaiian        kani             ‘cry out, sound’
>

218 Meredith Osmond


6.3.11 Song creation and ownership

Fortune (1932:251) describes the situation in Dobu.

__blockquote__
     Every Dobuan is a song-maker. Any interesting event calls forth a number of songs.
     There is very little imitation. The form is more or less stereotyped as in our sonnet
     form. There is much emphasis on originality of content. The songmaker is proud of
     his creation, proud of its originality, and he has rights to prevent others from using his
     song, at least for a while. He must give his permission before his song is used for the
     dance.

Very many songs accordingly die a quick death.

   This concept of ownership is recorded elsewhere in Oceania. In Vanuatu, for instance,
Ammann (1997) writes that “Each important song in Vanuatu belongs to either one person
or several persons of the same lineage. Songs are not allowed to be performed without the
permission of the owner”. François and Stern (2013:90) write that in northern Vanuatu
traditional songs are composed in a specific, poetic language distinct from ordinary speech,
and the ability to compose a song in this register is reserved to very few. All poetry is sung,
and the artist who composes the poem also chooses the melody.

                                                                             Recreation 219

   Few sources distinguish between the words and the music. Fortune comments on
Dobuan songs that “There is no concept of rhyme, only occasional assonance” (1932:305).
A single PPn reconstruction has been possible for ‘tune’.

<
PPn *fati ‘tune, melody’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:     Tongan          fasi             ‘tune, melody’
  Pn:     E Futunan       fati             ‘tune, refrain of a song’
  Pn:     Samoan          fati             ‘tune, melody’
  Pn:     Tokelauan       fati             ‘melody, tune’
>

   In a widespead and thorough survey of Polynesian music, McLean (1999:384) writes
that “in most communities it appears that anyone could compose songs”. He adds, though,
that sometimes, composition of more important songs devolved to specialists, and in some
areas there were named classes of specialist composers.

   A PPn *reconstruction, *fatu, has the dual meaning ‘compose a song’ and ‘weave’.
Mclean suggests that “the weaving image seems particularly apt for composition involving
adaptation or the combining together of elements from earlier songs. Or perhaps it refers to
the fitting together of tune and text like the warp and weft of weaving” (1999:385).

<
PPn *fatu ‘weave, compose (e.g. a song)’ (PMP *batuR, POc *patu(R) ‘plait, weave’; see vol.1:81-82)
  Pn: Tongan       fatu         ‘compose a song; begin making a mat’
  Pn: E Futunan    fatu         ‘compose a song’
  Pn: Rennellese   hatu         ‘compose a song; fold, bend, lash’
  Pn: Pukapukan    watu         ‘compose song, chant etc.; make, as as wreath’
  Pn: Rarotongan   ʔatu         ‘compose music, poetry; put together, as a wreath’
  Pn: Hawaiian     haku         ‘compose, invent; braid, as a lei, plait, as feathers’
>


6.4 Dance

Villages traditionally have cleared spaces, which are used for dancing and other communal
activities. They may be referred to by reflexes of POc *m(a,e)laqai ‘open space in a
settlement’ or POc *mwalala ‘cleared land, but not built on or planted’ (vol.1:63-64).

    Although dance, like song, is open to innovation and borrowing, a number of features
recur. All dances are group dances. A dance is typically a celebration, usually joyful
although there are dances to commemorate the dead or mark some kind of mortuary
ceremony, and dances to mark rites of passage. There are night dances and daytime dances.
There are also war dances, with men brandishing shields and clubs. In New Guinea, most
dances are accompanied by kundu drums (§6.2.6). Flutes and panpipes may accompany
dances in the southeast Solomons, where kundu drums are unknown. Singing
accompaniment is common, often performed by one sex while the other dances. Sexes
usually dance separately, and sometimes dancers are differentiated by age, with older men
or women performing separate roles from their younger counterparts. A recurring motif is
the representation of an animal or bird’s movements. Dances may be accompanied by
clapping and stamping.

220 Meredith Osmond


    Blackwood describes the dance of Petats speakers (Buka, northwest Solomons), where
there is only one form, kōma, used for all occasions, both ceremonial and social. There are
three movements, varied at the pleasure of the dancer. They are tshok-tshok, advancing and
retreating to and from the circle of men, with a balancing step first on one foot and then the
other, gumsu, standing on one spot and rocking up and down with bent knees in a sort of
jigging movement, and pi, which is a series of hops on the left foot only, with the right foot
raised, its toe pointing to the ground. The general word for the women’s dance is sōʔol
(1935:414-5).

    Throughout Micronesia, the expressive use of the body as an accompaniment to sung
poetry is a fundamental and highly valued aspect of performance (Diettrich et al 2011:20).
They continue: “Many dances in Micronesia display standing or sitting positions, groupings
separated by gender, an emphasis on particular attire and adornments, and the expressive use
of hands, arms, and sometimes feet to produce synchronous rhythmic accompaniments.”
They describe a genre known as wuur, a type of vocal music performed as group seated
dances using hand and arm movements punctuated by hand claps (2011:21).

    Firth (1985) notes that “whereas types of dance performance [are] relatively limited (cf.
matavaka, mori, ŋore, tusoko13 etc) and seldom augmented, the number of dance songs is
vast and continually being added to.”

    Although wordlist compilers have listed dozens of terms for the names of particular
dances, few generic terms for the activity have been identified, probably because dancing is
not considered as distinct from its music or associated celebration. Some reconstructions are
simply action verbs ‘to hop’, ‘kick’, ‘stamp’, ‘clap’ and so on.

6.4.1 Reconstructions

Several POc terms for ‘dance’ can be reconstructed, but the meanings of their reflexes are
too varied for a more precise gloss to be reconstructed.

<
POc *sagar (N,V) ‘dance’
 PT:   Molima         sagali        (1) ‘drum’; (2) ‘major mortuary ceremony’ (apparently borrowed from a Suauic language)
  PT:  Saliba         saga          ‘to dance’
PPn *saka ‘dance’
  Pn:  Tongan         haka          (N) ‘hand action while singing’; (VI) ‘move the hands rhythmically, esp. while singing’
  Pn:  Tongan         haka-ʔi       (VT) ‘sing or chant with appropriate hand movements’
  Pn:  E Futunan      saka          ‘dance with hand and foot action’
  Pn:  E Uvean        haka          ‘dance’
  Pn:  Rennellese     saka          ‘song without instruments or clapping’
  Pn:  Pukapukan      yaka          ‘a style of dancing’
  Pn:  Samoan         saʔa-saʔa     (V) ‘dance’
  Pn:  Luangiua       saʔa          ‘mourning song; song sung when s.o. is dying’
  Pn:  Tikopia        saka          ‘perform rites in traditional religious system’
  Pn:  Maori          haka          (N) ‘dance, song accompanying a dance’; (V) ‘dance, sing a song to be accompanied by a dance’
  Pn:  Tuamotuan      haka          ‘line of men facing line of women. Movements include stamping, hip and shoulder movements and various actions of arms and hands’
cf. also
  NNG: Uvol           sasaŋa        ‘action songs with miming of certain themes sung by a mixed chorus with drums while men dance’ (Laade 1999:147)
  SES: Gela           saki          ‘to go on one leg as a bird, to hop’
>

[13] matavaka ‘common type of traditional dance, also called canoe bow dance with rhythmic waving of
     head and hair'; mori 'a dance form of multiple phases and complex procedures, performed by men with
     wooden dance bats (paki)'; ŋore ‘dance type characterised by sung chorus, no sounding board; two
     forms, with and without clapped hands (mako po)’; tusoko ‘k.o. dance, slow, circling, in small groups
     with hand clapping and gestures’

                                                                           Recreation 221

<
POc *mako (N) ‘dance’; (V) ‘perform a dance’
 NNG: Sissano (Arop)   moʔo         ‘festival; dancing and singsing’
 SES: To’aba’ita       mao          ‘k.o. dance; one group sits on ground and sings, others dance around them. No panpipes.’
 SES: Sa’a             mao          (VI) ‘to dance, generic term’
 SES: Kwaio            mao          ‘dance’
 SES: ’Are’are         mao          ‘to dance, a dance’
 SES: Arosi            mao          ‘to dance’
 SES: Arosi            (hai)mao     ‘dancing’ (RECIPROCAL)
 SES: Arosi            ma-mao       ‘a dancing place’
 SES: Arosi            mao-mao      ‘to dance; to turn round in the wind’
 SES: Lau              mao          ‘to dance’
 SES: Lau              mao-ma       ‘a feast; feast and dancing’
 TM:  Teanu            -mako        ‘to dance’
 TM:  Tanema           -mako        ‘to dance’
 TM:  Tanema           mako(ne)     (N) ‘a dance’
PNCV *mako ‘boys’ dance’ (François 2013)
 NCV: Mota             maɣo         ‘boys’ dance’
 NCV: Dorig            maɣ          ‘boys’ dance’
 NCV: Lakon            maɣ          ‘boys’ dance’
 Pn:  Tongan           mako         (N, VI) ‘(perform a) native dance’
 Pn:  Pukapukan        mako         ‘k.o. chant; to chant’
 Pn:  Rennellese       mako         ‘dance, dance song; to dance’
 Pn:  Tikopia          mako         (N) ‘dance, generic’
cf. also:
 Fij: Rotuman          maka         ‘to sing, dance, intone or recite, accompanied by rhythmical bodily movements’
 Fij: Bauan            meke         (N) ‘generic term for various native dances’; (V) ‘perform a dance’
>

222 Meredith Osmond

<
POc *lagar ‘dance accompanied by singing’
 MM: Tolai             laŋgāra         (VI) ‘to dance and sing’; (N) ‘a dance accompanied by singing’
 MM: Ramoaaina         lagar           ‘dance’
 MM: Patpatar          lukara          ‘feast with traditional dancing’
 NCV: Mota             laka            ‘to kick up the heels as in dancing; to dance’
 NCV: Mota             laka-laka       ‘to rejoice, dance; a dance, merry-making’
>

<
PNCV *sale ‘jump, dance’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota             sale           ‘to leap’
 NCV: Raga             hala           ‘wave hands in dancing’
 NCV: Ninde            yale-yale      ‘singsing’
 NCV: Nguna            sale           ‘to dance’
cf. also:
 SES: Bugotu           sale            ‘to sing, a song’
>

<
PCP *se(q)a ‘k.o. dance’ (POLLEX)
 Fij:    Rotuman          sea            ‘native song’
 Fij:    Wayan            sea-sea        (N) ‘a standing dance with song performed by a line or lines of women’; (V) ‘perform such a standing dance’
  Fij:   Bauan           sea-sea         ‘k.o. meke danced with fans by women’
  Pn:    Tikopia         sea             ‘k.o. dance and associated song with elaborate hand and foot movements’
>

   The verb for ‘clap’ or ‘slap’, traceable back to PAn, is also used in PPn as a noun
referring to a paddle-shaped instrument used in some kinds of dances, presumably involving
slapping movements.

<
PAn *pakpak ‘to clap, sound of clapping or flapping’ (ACD)
POc *baki ‘strike one against another, knock, clap’ (vol.2:272)
PPn *paki (N) ‘paddle-shaped instrument used when dancing’; (V) ‘slap’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Tongan            paki            ‘paddle or flat club used in a dance’
  Pn:   E Futunan         paki            ‘paddle-shaped instrument used when dancing’
  Pn:   W Futunan         paki            (V) ‘slap, strike with open hand’
  Pn:   E Uvean           paki            ‘dance bat’
  Pn:   Pukapukan         paki            (V) ‘clap hands, strike’
  Pn:   Rarotongan        pa-paki         (V) ‘slap, hit, smack’
  Pn:   Tikopia           paki            ‘dance bat, long flat rectangle with handle’
  Pn:   Tikopia           pa-paki         (V) ‘slap’
  Pn:   Anutan            paki            ‘paddle-like instrument usd in certain dancing’
  Pn:   Maori             paki            (VT) ‘slap, pat, clap’
  Pn:   Maori             pa-paki         (N) ‘game played by two players clapping hands in unison to a chant’
>

                                                                              Recreation 223


   In the following set, *a > o is a change conditioned by labiovelar *pw.

<
POc *pwaja(R) (VI) ‘clap hands’
POc *pwajaR-i (VT) ‘slap with open hand’ (vol.5:470)
 Adm: Mussau            posala               (VT) ‘slap with an open hand’
 Adm: Mussau            posalā               (VI) ‘clap’
 Adm: Baluan            |(yek) pot|          ‘slap, hit with open hand’ (yek ‘hit’)
 Adm: Baluan            |(yek) potpot|       ‘clap hands’
 NNG: Sissano           -pot                 ‘clap, beat’
 NNG: Sio               -poⁿza               ‘slap, clap one’s hands’
 NNG: Bariai            poda                 ‘slap’
 NNG: Mangseng          (so)pðal             ‘slap’
 NNG: Mangseng          (so)po-pðal          ‘clap hands’
 PT:  Gumawana          pʷasi                ‘clap’
 PT:  Bunama            (lima)pwasi          ‘clap hands’
 PT:  Sinaugoro         foro                 ‘slap, hit’
 MM:  Madak             pasa                 ‘clap’
 MM:  Sursurunga        posar, posri         ‘slap, clap, hit with open palm’
 MM:  Patpatar          pasar                ‘slap; beat drum’
 MM:  Ramoaaina         par                  ‘clap; slap, hit; play (hourglass drum)’
 MM:  Minigir           pasari               ‘hit’
 MM:  Nehan             posala               ‘slap, esp. on the back of the head’ (-l- for †-r-)
 MM:  Solos             pasan                ‘hit’
 MM:  Teop              panana               ‘slap, hit’
 MM:  Babatana          po-posara            ‘clap hands’
 SES: Kwaio             fodal-i              ‘slap’
PNCV *voza ‘clap, slap, strike’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota              wosa                 ‘slap, smack, clap’
 NCV: Raga              vosa                 ‘slap (with one hand) once, clap hands together once’
 NCV: Raga              voha-i               ‘strike, throw, shoot’
 NCV: Tamambo           voja-i               ‘strike, slap’
 NCV: Tamambo           |voja-voja-i (lima)| ‘clap, pat’
 NCV: Big Nambas        -usa                 ‘slap’
 NCV: Nguna             wosa+e-a             ‘clap (hands or flat objects)’
 NCV: Nguna             wosa-wosa            ‘clap one’s hands’
 Fij: Wayan             voða-, voða-ki       ‘slap s.t. with open hand or hands together’
cf. also:
 SES: Tolo              pica-pica            ‘clap hands together’
 SES: Tolo              picali-              ‘spank; hit, slap or tap with open hand’
 SES: To’aba’ita        fida-fida            ‘clap one’s hands in applause’
 SES: To’aba’ita        fidal-i              ‘slap hard’
 SES: Arosi             hida                 ‘slap’
>

224 Meredith Osmond

   In some dances the dancers stamp their feet on the ground. The general POc term for
stamping one’s foot was *butu, and the Bugotu, Mota, Mwotlap, Marshallese and
Tuamotuan reflexes make specific reference too dancing.

<
POc *butu (VI) ‘stamp foot, tread, kick’
POc *butuR-i- ‘stamp on, tread on, trample’ (vol.5:474)
 Adm: Seimat          putu-i              (VT) ‘stamp, kick’
 PT:  Saliba          utu                 ‘to step’
 SES: Bugotu          bū-butu             ‘stamp the foot in dancing, tread hard’
 SES: Bugotu          butul-i             ‘trample, kick’
 SES: Gela            butu-butu           ‘kick with the feet, in swimming’
 SES: Gela            butul-i             (VT) ‘kick backwards, as a horse’
 SES: Longgu          butu-butu           ‘(heart) beat; do things to show that you are looking for a fight (e.g. stamping feet, to prepare to punch s.o.)’
 SES: Tolo            butu                ‘kick’
 SES: Tolo            butul-i             ‘step on’
 SES: To’aba’ita      bū                  ‘step on the ground, put one’s foot on the ground’
 SES: ’Are’are        pū                  ‘hit, stamp, tread, rely on, stand firm’
 SES: Sa’a            pū                  (VI) ‘to tread, stamp, stand firm, rely on’
 SES: Kwaio           bū                  ‘tread, step’
 SES: Arosi           pū                  ‘tread, stamp, rest, stand firm, rely on’
 SES: Arosi           pūl-i               ‘pounce, on, of birds, strike with the talons’
 NCV: Mota            put                 ‘stamp on the ground (in anger, in singing)’
 NCV: Raga            butu                ‘stand strongly’
 NCV: Mwotlap         ᵐbit                (VI) ‘tap the ground with one’s foot, esp. to begin a dance session’
 NCV: Port Sandwich   ᵐbyr-ᵐbyr-in-i      ‘trample underfoot’
 NCV: Neve’ei         bit                 ‘step on, in’
PMic *pʷutu ‘step, tread, apply one’s foot’
 Mic: Kosraean        fut-fut             ‘kick’
 Mic: Kosraean        futu-ŋ              ‘kick, stomp (s.t.)’
 Mic: Marshallese     bʷic-bʷic           ‘kick, a dance’
 Mic: Chuukese        pwu                 ‘place one’s foot’
 Mic: Chuukese        pʷūr-i              ‘step on, tread on’
 Mic: Puluwatese      pūr-i               ‘stamp or tread on’
 Mic: Carolinian      bwū-bwu             ‘to stamp, stand on’
 Mic: Carolinian      bʷū-ri              ‘step, stomp, tread on (s.t.)’
 Fij: Bauan           butu                ‘stamp, tread’
 Fij: Bauan           butu-ka             ‘stamp or tread on’
 Fij: Wayan           butu-ki             ‘stamp or tread on s.t., trample s.t.’
 Pn:  Tuamotuan       putu                ‘dance with hand-clapping’
>

                                                                            Recreation 225


6.4.2 Water dances

There are occasional mentions of a rhythmic activity performed by women standing in
waist-deep water and making music by hitting the surface with the hand. Non-cognate terms
have been collected from Dobu (bwetu), Teop (vasipau), To’aba’ita (giigilo), Longgu (tio-
tio) and Lakon (wes-paŋ). Chenoweth (1976:3) has recorded a similar activity in the non-
Austronesian language of Binumarien in the Eastern Highlands of New Guinea where
women slap the water rhythmically to accompany their singing when they swim in the river.
These activities have probably arisen independently. François and Stern report that when
performed in Banks Islands, these have become popular with tourists and as a result have
gained in sophistication (2013:101).

6.4.3 Body decoration

Public dances provide an opportunity for participants to go to considerable effort in
decorating their bodies. While everyday dress may include regular oiling of the body and
the wearing of combs, bracelets, arm and leg bands (see vol.1:101), a dance may be an
excuse to go further, painting the face and body with clay or lime and wearing elaborate
head-dresses made from feathers, animal fur and various flowers and leaves. POc *wali
‘paint, smear, rub on’ has been reconstructed in addition to POc *pani ‘apply oil or paint to
the body’ (vol. 1:101).

<
POc *wali ‘paint, smear, rub on’ (ACD)
 MM: Nakanai               vali              ‘apply paint, feathers etc. to head or body’
 Fij:   Bauan              wali              ‘to anoint’
 Pn:    Tongan             vali              ‘paint or smear (house, sore etc)’
 Pn:    Niuean             vali              (VT) ‘paint, smear’
 Pn:    Samoan             vali              (V) ‘paint’; (N) ‘paint, dye’
>

   In places, masks are worn by dancers, sometimes representing animals or birds whose
movements are echoed in the dance, and sometimes to inspire terror (see Hogbin 1970 for
Wogeo, Valentine 1965 for Lakalai, Powdermaker 1933 for Lesu). The Qat [kpwat] dance
masks of the Banks Islands serve as the visual representation of the ancestral dead. These
highly intricate and often spectacular headdresses are sometimes called ‘spirits’ (tamate in
Mota). They are worn exclusively by men who have passed certain initiation rites (François
2013).


6.5 Difficulties in reconstruction

Although a number of detailed descriptions exist of the role of song and dance in Oceanic
societies today, many describing recurrent features, relevant terms tend not to be stable.
Both song and dance are recognised as outlets for creative activities, activities where
invention is admired and sought after. The following examples from Vanuatu and Samoa
illustrate.

226 Meredith Osmond

    In Vanuatu as described by Crowe (1996:147),

__blockquote__
     singing, dancing and playing instruments are all in the realm of oral tradition, which
     includes mnemonic formulae… Rather than being conservative (unchanging),
     Vanuatu oral tradition is dynamic and adapting. One operating principle is ‘getting
     away with breaking the rules’, referring to a deeper ‘rule’, being ‘capacity to
     reinvent’. Thus ritual forms can undergo gradual but visible alteration over time.
     Much traditional music and dance is in a constant state of change.

    Moyle describes the situation in Samoa. Most dance songs are created either in response
to or for the purposes of particular occasions. The former tend to be humorous, some to the
point of ridicule. The preservation and in some cases, widespread use of such songs may be
attributable to the popular appeal of the value systems on which their humour is predicated,
and to the freedom with which they may be performed. The particular occasion songs are
more serious and are object-specific, laden with local allusions both historical and
contemporary, mythological and real. The occasion for and location of public performance
are likely to be prescribed. Public knowledge of the dance tends to be geographically
restricted. Such dance songs are unlikely to exist long enough to be passed down (Moyle
1988:234).

    In addition to being open to change, song and dance are held as possessions by
communities throughout New Guinea and Island Melanesia, and are not normally passed
freely, but may be purchased or traded. The Siassi Islanders of Vitiaz Strait [Tuam, Mutu,
Malai] are famed as dancers (report by Neuhauss 1911, 1:73, quoted by Harding 1967:142).
Because they are effectively the hub of a well-established trading pattern from Bilibil on the
north coast to Tami Island southeast of the Huon Peninsula, and from the western tip of New
Britain and the Arawe islands to the south, they have frequent interaction with other
communities. Harding (1967:143) writes that

__blockquote__
     They share some of their dancing complexes or singsings—dances, songs, and
     distinctive regalia—with mainland peoples, such as the Sios, and other complexes …
     with New Britain. Dances are sometimes sold, either in toto or as elements which can
     be incorporated in an existing dance complex of the purchasing group, … Apart from
     the recent borrowing or purchase of dances, the Siassis or other groups do not
     manufacture or create new dances in order to sell them. Rather the Siassis are
     frequently called upon to perform old favourites by the communities with which they
     trade. … Even when trade rather than an invitation to dance is the reason for a Siassi
     visit, it would be a rare occasion if a singsing were not held. … Through their
     performances as dancers, the Siassi traders participate in the ceremonial life of host
     communities, and there is evidence suggesting the diffusion of Siassi creremonial
     forms and paraphernalia following upon this practice.

   In the area of south-east New Britain described by Laade, there are frequent instances of
borrowing of dance songs. He writes (1999:27) that

__blockquote__
     In all these cases [Mengen, Bush Mengen, Uvol, Mamusi], it must be emphasized
     that not single songs but whole genres, or even repertoires, of inevitably dance songs
     are borrowed, which then form a new type within the local traditions. Some of them
     were adopted long ago, others only recently. The songs are usually borrowed in their
     original form and with their original texts even if these are unintelligible.

Although there is no mention of payment, Laade describes these exchanges as part of the
trading of goods (p.25). As a further barrier to reconstruction, he notes that “some songs
(popo, hototinga, maenge, ungalele, manna) have texts in ‘old language’ where literal
translation is impossible. Finally, some songs are said to be composed in ‘spirit
language’ (Laade:122).

                                                                                  Recreation 227


   Jenness & Ballantyne (1928:166) describe a similar situation in Bwaidoga in the
D’Entrecasteaux islands.

__blockquote__
       Many songs are quite unintelligible, even to their singers. They have been handed
       down from one generation to another, often incorporating words that have long gone
       out of use; or they have been brought from some other place and the clue to their
       meaning has not been transmitted with them. Often, too, they are changed and
       mutilated in the transfer, especially if the dialects are somewhat different. Topical
       allusions of course soon cease to carry any meaning.

   Adding to the difficulties of historical reconstruction is the knowledge that many of our
early ethnographic descriptions were by missionaries or followed hot on the heels of
missionary influence. Although some missionaries recognised singing as a readily
acceptable channel for promoting their own teaching, others were horrified by what they
saw and heard, and strove to stamp out songs and dances that they believed were
incompatible with Christian values. The following early description by William Ellis
(1831:199-200) is from Tahiti.

__blockquote__
       Many of their songs referred to the legends or achievements of their gods, some to the
       exploits of their distinguished heroes and chieftains; while others were of a more
       objectionable character. They were often, when recited on public occasions,
       accompanied with gestures and actions corresponding to the events described, and
       assumed a histrionic character. … But they were, with few exceptions, either
       idolatrous or impure; and were consequently abandoned when the people renounced
       their pagan worship.

Later, Ellis (p.229) concludes:

__blockquote__
       Many [of their songs and dances] were in themselves repulsive to every feeling of
       common decency. And all were intimately connected with practices inimical to
       individual chastity, domestic peace and public virtue.


6.6 Games

Early descriptions of games played in New Guinea and the Solomons are few in number
and tend to be limited to children’s games14. Adults would have found recreation in song and
dance, often with feasting, and with activities which served both a productive and
recreational function such as hunting and fishing for bonito. Wars were the main form of
contests of tests of strength.

   As with music and dance, the nature of the games played in a community has been
greatly influenced by Western contact. Even our earliest records of children’s games, such as
in Ellis 1831 for Tahiti, and Erskine 1853 for Fiji, show missionary influence.

[14] Useful examples are Chalmers (1886) for Motu, Böhm (1983) for Manam, Ivens (1927) for Sa’a, Fox
     (1924) for Arosi.

228 Meredith Osmond


6.6.1 General term

Although Blust (ACD) has reconstructed PWMP *qayam ‘plaything, toy, pet’ no Oceanic
reflexes have been located. The following POc reconstruction is based on limited evidence.
Others are proposed at a lower level.

<
POc *mwaja ‘play, have fun’
 PT:    Kiriwina         mwasa(wa)            (N) ‘recreation’; ‘play, have fun’
 SES: Kwaio              masa                 ‘to play’
 SES: Kwaio              masa-ŋa              (N) ‘playing, game’
 NCV: NE Ambae           mwos-mwoso           (VI) ‘to play’
>

<
PPn *ta(a)-kalo ‘to play; a game’ (PPn *tā ‘strike’, *kalo ‘dodge, evade’)
  Pn:    Niuean             takalo            ‘play game of tika; to evade blows; sport’
  Pn:    Samoan             taʔalo            ‘to play’
  Pn:    Samoan             tāʔaloŋa          ‘any individual game’
  Pn:    Tikopia            tākaro            ‘game, sport, recreation in general sense’
  Pn:    Anutan             tākaro            ‘the game of making string figures’
  Pn:    K’marangi          dāgala            ‘to joke, to play’
  Pn:    Tokelauan          takalo            ‘playing (of a game)’
  Pn:    Maori              tākaro            ‘engage in single combat; wrestle; play; sport’
  Pn:    W Futunan          takaro            ‘play, wander’
>

<
PNPn *tāfao ‘to play’ (POLLEX)
 Pn:    Samoan            tafao               ‘roam, wander, be idle’
 Pn:    Tuvalu            tāfao               ‘to play’
 Pn:    Tuvalu            |(mea) tafao|       ‘plaything’ (mea ‘thingummy, whatsit’)
 Pn:    Pileni            tahao               ‘play’
 Pn:    Sikiana           tāhao               ‘play’
 Pn:    Takuu             tafao               ‘play’
 Pn:    Tikopia           tā-tāfao            ‘play’
>

    Two toys that are mentioned frequently in Oceanic wordlists are the spinning top, made
from a half coconut around which a string is tied, and the pinwheel or toy windmill, made
from coconut fronds and attached to a thin stick such as the midrib of a frond pinnule. These
tend to have local names, or are known by the material from which they are made. No
reconstructions have been possible.

    Younger children simply interact with their environment in random ways, with sticks or
stones or shells. Older children are more likely to mimic aspects of adult behaviour, but in
all instances there will be free adaptation. As with children worldwide, games vary as the
environment varies. There are active games, chasing, swinging on vines, leaping,
swimming, hide and seek, there are games of skill and dexterity, such as aiming at a target,
or juggling, or jacks, there are games of strength such as wrestling. Many of these will be
called simply by an appropriate action verb. One of the few games for which a POc
reconstruction can be made is that of cat’s cradle, the collective name for string figure
games.

                                                                              Recreation 229


6.6.2 Cat’s cradle

String figure games have been played in traditional societies across the world from the
earliest recorded times. They are often accompanied by chants, and may be associated with
story-telling, where to move through the stages of a particular pattern is in effect to tell its
story. At other times they are simply a demonstration of dexterity or an outlet for
inventiveness, sometimes with overtones of ridicule or humour (Osmond 2009:509–514).

<
POc *paRi ‘generic term for cat’s cradle’ (possibly from PAn *paRiS ‘stingray’) (Blust, pers. comm., quoted in Kirch & Green:1991:301)
  PT:  Motu               hari(kau)      ‘cat’s cradle’
PCP *vai ‘cat’s cradle, general term’
  Fij: Bauan              |vei saŋa|     ‘general term for cat’s cradle when using both hands and feet’ (saŋa ‘forked’)
  Fij: Bauan              |vei ðiu|      ‘cat’s cradle with both hands’ (ðiu ‘?’)
PPn *fai ‘cat’s cradle, string games’
  Pn:  Tongan             fai            ‘cat’s cradle’
  Pn:  Pukapukan          wai-wai        ‘cat’s cradle; to make string figures’
  Pn:  Tuamotuan          fai            ‘string games, cat’s cradle’
  Pn:  Tahitian           fai            ‘name of a game played by children; string game, cat’s cradle’ (also ‘meshes of sorcerer’s net’; Handy 1925:6)
  Pn:  Maori              fai            ‘string game, cat’s cradle’
  Pn:  Hawaiian           hei            ‘cat’s cradle’ (also ‘net, snare; to ensnare, entangle’)
>

   The meaning of the bracketed form -kau in the Motu term is unclear but it is included in
several net-related terms in Motu, an association of meaning which is echoed in the Tahitian
and Hawaiian terms. PAn *paRiS ‘stingray’ is, as suggested by Blust, a plausable antecedent
for the generic term for cat’s cradle at POc level. A stingray is roughly diamond-shaped,
echoing what is probably the most common base pattern created in cat’s cradle.

6.6.3 Juggling, ball-catching

Other POc reconstructions include activity verbs that can be applied but not limited to play,
and miniature weapons. They include:

<
PMP *cikep ‘catch with the hands’ (ACD)
POc *sikop ‘catch with the hands’
 MM:  Bola             siko               ‘catch s.t. thrown at you’
 Fij: Bauan            ðiqo(-ma)          ‘catch, lay hold of, chiefly of things thrown’
 Pn:  Tongan           hiko               (N, VI) ‘juggle with two or more balls or lemons etc.’
 Pn:  Tongan           hikof-i            (VT) ‘pick up with tongs’
 Pn:  Rennellese       siko               ‘catch, as a ball or wave’
 Pn:  Tikopia          siko-siko          ‘string figures’
 Pn:  Emae             sikof-i-a          ‘catch in midair’
 Pn:  Mele-Fila        sikof-i-a          ‘catch in the hands’
 Pn:  Anutan           iko                ‘roll up string; transfer string figure to another person’s hands’
 Pn:  Maori            hiko               ‘snatch’
 Pn:  Nukuoro          sigo               ‘catch (a ball)’
cf. also:
 Fij: Rotuman          hiko               ‘juggle, catch balls’ (Polynesian loan)
>

230 Meredith Osmond


6.6.4 Darts

A dart or small spear might be used in hunting birds or lizards, but is commonly used in
games of skill. POc *tibʷa(ŋ) ‘dart, arrow’ is reflected as PCP *tigʷa, PPn *tika. The
subsequent history of POc labiovelars (*pʷ, *bʷ, *mʷ) is not well understood (Lynch 2002),
but in at least some cases they became labialised velars (*kʷ, *gʷ, *ŋʷ), losing their
labialisation in Proto Polynesian (*k, *k, *ŋ) as happened here.

<
POc *tibʷa(ŋ) ‘dart, arrow’ (not a fighting weapon) (vol.1:225)
  PT:  Tawala            diba               ‘small pretend spear’
  PT:  Motu              diba               ‘arrow’
  NCV: Raga              tibwa              ‘shoot’
  NCV: Mota              tibwa              ‘to shoot, not in fighting; a blunt arrow, bird arrow’
  NCV: Mwotlap           tēbw               (VT) ‘throw a sharp projectile against s.t., using an instrument (catapult, rifle)’
  NCV: Mota              nē-tēbw            (N) ‘stunning arrow, with smooth rounded end, used to stun birds’ (François, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Atchin            cip                ‘blunt arrow’
PCP *tigʷa ‘dart, to throw a dart’
  Fij: Bauan             tiga               ‘reed dart, used in game’
  Fij: Wayan             tige               ‘throw reed or dart horizontally, controlled by end of forefinger, with aim of making dart skip up when it hits the ground’
PPn *tika ‘dart, darts game; to throw a dart’
  Pn:  Tonga             sika               ‘dart, to throw darts’
  Pn:  Niuean            tika               ‘javelin, dart, spear’
  Pn:  Pukapukan         tika               ‘game of throwing darts’
  Pn:  Samoan            tiʔa               ‘dart’
  Pn:  Samoan            tāga-tiʔa          ‘javelin-hurling’ (Moyle 1989:20)
  Pn:  Tikopia           tika               ‘k.o. arrow thrown in game’
  Pn:  Rarotongan        teka-teka          ‘throw darts’
  Pn:  Maori             teka               ‘game of dart-throwing’
>

                                                                                Recreation 231


    Erskine (1853:455), quoting from an account by John Jackson who spent two years in
Fiji and elsewhere from 1840, describes the game of tika [tiŋga] as it was played before
western contact.

__blockquote__
     They used to amuse themselves in the morning by the game called tika or titika,
     which is played by first dividing themselves into two equal parts, one division
     standing at the end of the square, and the other division at the other end. There is a
     mark or stick stuck at each end, each party throwing at the opposite mark with the
     tikas, which are slight reeds with a piece of wood attached at one end to make them
     heavy. They throw these things an incredible distance.


6.6.5 Shooting with bow and arrow

Bows and arrows tended to be light-weight, the arrows made from the midrib of sago or
coconut leaf and bows from cane. They were typically used for shooting birds or other
targets for sport, rather than in warfare.

<
PAn *panaq ‘throw s.t. at a target; shoot with bow and arrow’ (ACD)
POc *(p,pʷ)anaq ‘bow’
POc *(p,pʷ)anaq, *(p,pʷ)anaq-i- ‘shoot’ (vol.1:225)
  NNG: Manam          pana               ‘small bow used to hunt small animals, lizards, birds etc.’
  NNG: Mapos Buang    vaneh              ‘shoot’
  MM: Tolai           panak              ‘bow for shooting’
  MM: Mono Alu        (fa)fana           ‘go to kill birds or fish with bow and arrow’
  SES: Gela           vana, vana-hi      ‘shoot with bow and arrow’
  SES: Sa’a           hana               ‘shoot’
  NCV: Mota           vene               ‘shoot with a pointed arrow’
  NCV: Lonwolwol      fen                ‘shoot with bow and arrow’
  Mic: Kiribati       pana               ‘shoot at fish with band of rubber and long arrow’
  Fij: Bauan          vana               ‘shoot, with arrow’
PPn *fana ‘shoot with arrow’
  Pn:  Tongan         fana               ‘to shoot (e.g. birds)’
  Pn:  Rennellese     hana               ‘to shoot, as arrow’
  Pn:  Tikopia        fana-fana          ‘shooting competition, with bow and arrow, at banana tree target’
>

6.6.6 Lower level reconstructions

There is substantially more information on games played in Fiji and Polynesia than in the
rest of Oceania (Erskine 1853 on Fiji, Ellis 1831 on Tahiti, Best 1925 on Maori, Buck 1927
on the Cook Islands, Moyle 1988 on Samoa, Koch 1984 on Tuvalu). Consequently, a
number of PPn or PCP reconstructions have been made. Unlike games described in New
Guinea and the Solomons, those for which detailed descriptions exist in the Central Pacific
are often played by adults and have a greater level of sophistication. There is more emphasis
on competition and point-scoring. Perhaps there was more time for leisure in these parts,
with gardens requiring less attention, and perhaps increased contact with western values.

232 Meredith Osmond


6.6.6.1 Disc-throwing game

The following account from John Jackson is also quoted by Erskine (1853:455):

__blockquote__
     In the afternoon they [the Fijians] have a game inside the house called lavo. The lavos
     are made of coconut shells of different sizes, varying from the size and shape of a
     shilling to larger than a crown or dubloon. This game is played on a smooth mat. A
     party being seated at each end, they throw the lavo with a quick jerk from the hand,
     so as to make the first rest on the opposite edge of the mat; they then endeavour to
     knock the one on the edge clear off the mat, that striking it taking its place; and if they
     succeed in doing this once, that counts one, and so on.

<
PCP *lavo ‘game played with discs’
  Fij: Bauan       |(i) lavo|    ‘disc-shaped seed of the _wālai_ vine’
  Fij: Bauan       |vei lavo|    ‘game played with a mat and _wālai_ fruit’
PPn *lafo ‘tossing game (like quoits) played with asymmetrical discs’ (Kirch & Green:2001)
  Pn:  Tongan      lafo          ‘k.o. disc-throwing game’
  Pn:  Samoan      lafo(ga)      ‘traditional game played with a set of concave discs cut from coconut shells’
  Pn:  Tuvaluan    lafo          ‘a disc-tossing game’
>

PPn *lafo and the next reconstruction may refer to the same game, the latter sometimes
referring to the action, or as in Tuvalu, to the disc used. More commonly the disc is called
tupe.

<
PPn *teka ‘roll, rotate, spin’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Tongan          teka          ‘roll, rotate, revolve’
  Pn: Pukapukan       ta-teka       ‘roll’
  Pn: Samoan          teʔa          ‘throw, as in the game of teʔaga, bowl as in cricket’
  Pn: Samoan          teʔa(ga)      ‘the name of a game involving the throwing of special discs with characteristic arm action’
  Pn:  E Futunan      teka          ‘bowl a ball, rotate a wheel’
  Pn:  Tuvaluan       teka          ‘a spinning disc used in a game’
>

<
PPn *tupe ‘disc used in game of *lafo’
  Pn: Tongan           tupe        ‘disc made of coconut shell used in game of lafo’
  Pn: Pukapukan        tupe        ‘shell disc; game of disc pitching; to pitch a disc’
  Pn: Samoan           tupe        ‘disc used in lafoga game’
  Pn: Tikopia          tupe        ‘pitching game throwing beans’
  Pn: Rennellese       tupe        (V) ‘throw’
>

                                                                                   Recreation 233


6.6.6.2 Hurling the spear

<
PPn *welo ‘thrust, as in spearing’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Tongan              velo                 (VT) ‘thrust, insert, fish with a spear’
  Pn: Niuean              velo                 ‘throw’
  Pn: Samoan              |velo le tiapula|    ‘hurl the taro top, game accompanied by song’
  Pn: Pukapukan           velo                 ‘spear, thrust into’
  Pn: Pukapukan           velo-velo            ‘game of hurling javelins’
  Pn: Tokelauan           velo                 ‘hurl, throw, as a javelin, dart; play darts’
  Pn: Tuvalu              |velo mata-mata|     ‘spear-throwing game’
  Pn: Maori               wero                 (1) ‘to pierce’; (2) ‘throw a spear’
>

6.6.6.3 Surfing

Our earliest description of surfboard riding comes from Joseph Banks who described it in
Tahiti in 1769 (Beaglehole 1962:283):

__blockquote__
     In the midst of these breakers 10 or 12 Indians were swimming who whenever a surf
     broke near them dived under it with infinite ease, rising up on the other side; but their
     chief amusement was carried on by the stern of an old canoe, with this before them
     they swam out as far as the outmost breach, then one or two would get into it and
     opposing the blunt end to the breaking wave were hurried in with incredible
     swiftness.

but the riding of waves has probably existed since humans first swam in the ocean. The term
for a surfboard is typically a reflex of POc *baban ‘board, plank’ (see vol.1:58 for cognate
set). Sa’a has hapa totola ‘surfboard-riding’, lit. ‘carrying board’ (hapa an irregular reflex of
*baban), and Ivens (1927:95) lists a chant sung by Ulawa children bathing with hapa
surfboards.

<
PPn *faka-seke ‘slide deliberately, surf’ (POLLEX) (*seke ‘slide, glide’)
  Pn: Tongan            fakahe-heke      ‘slide along deliberately, skate or ski’
  Pn: Samoan            faʔaseʔe         ‘ride the surf’
  Pn: Maori             whakaheke-heke   ‘to surf’ (kōpapa ‘surfboard’)
  Pn: Tahitian          faʔaheʔe         ‘surf with board’ (papa fāhē ‘surfboard’)
  Pn: Tuvalu            fakaheke-heke    ‘surf-riding’
  Pn: Tuvalu            seke             ‘travel with wave (on canoe or surfboard))’
  Pn: Hawaiian          heʔe             ‘slide, slip, surf; flee’
  Pn: Hawaiian          |heʔe nalu|      ‘ride a surf board’ (lit. ‘wave slide’)
>

6.6.6.4 Scoring points

<
PCP *kai ‘points scored in a game’
  Fij:   Bauan             kai              ‘points scored in a game’
PPn *kai ‘points scored in a game’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan            kai              ‘score a point in a game or a run in cricket’
  Pn:     E Futunan        kai              ‘score points in a game’
  Pn:     Pukapukan        kai              ‘point or score in a game’
  Pn:     Samoan           ʔai              ‘points scored in a game’
  Pn:     Tikopia          kai              ‘to score in a game, esp. a dart match’
  Pn:     Hawaiian         ʔai              ‘points scored in a game’
>

234 Meredith Osmond


6.7 Conclusion

Games for Proto Oceanic speakers would have been largely limited to the unorganised and
spontaneous activities of children. The concept of recreational activities other than those of
young children as a separate category that contrasts with work is a relatively recent
innovation. Although many languages now include a term for ‘game’, ‘sport’, ‘recreation’ or
similar, no reconstructions are possible at a level higher than PCP. Communities have
adapted or extended the meaning of existing terms to refer to the various ways in which
these concepts can be considered. Puluwatese, for instance, makes use of a term likoto
meaning ‘teasing, mischief’; to include ‘games’. Mota has ora-ora ‘to play, sport’ from ora
‘to keep under control’. Others emphasise the entertainment aspect, and extend it to story-
telling and other kinds of traditional lore.



7               The spirit world

7.1 Introduction[1]

Oceanic peoples in pre-contact times shared their world with ghostly spirits, both human and
non-human in origin. In particular, it was thought that a dead person could continue to exist
as a ghost or disembodied spirit, typically as a protective guardian spirit. In Manus in the
Admiralties an ancestral ghost was physically represented by the skull of the householder’s
father, which occupied a niche over the entrance to the house (Fortune 1935:1). In Mekeo
(PT), a sorcerer kept with him the relics (bones, teeth, hair) of his patrilineal ancestors, with
whom he was in constant communication (Stephen 1987:57). In Sa’a and Ulawa (SES),
dwelling houses held a relic case containing the skull or jawbone or lock of hair or tooth of
the departed, to which offerings were made (Ivens 1927:178). Invocations made in the
performance of magic addressed the ancestors and sometimes included them by name
(Stephen 1987:59, Hogbin 1964a:87). In pre-contact Oceania it was the ancestors who were
responsible for maintaining the conditions under which the community flourished. A moral
code was implicit, even if unlabelled. If you followed the code your garden flourished, your
children grew well, your fishing trips were successful. Deviation from this code resulted in
ancestral displeasure, manifested in misfortune, illness or death.

    Also frequenting the Oceanic world were spirits which have never inhabited a human
body. At times the distinction between ghosts of the ancestors and non-human spirits has
become blurred. Terms in some languages are general terms for spirits of both kinds. Non-
human ghosts might adopt human shape, but would also be recognised in other creatures and
in inanimate objects. They were sometimes merely mischievous, but generally to be feared.

    Oceanic peoples also believed in the existence of the soul as something which resides in a
living body but has some kind of continuing existence after the body dies when its role
merges with that of ancestral spirit. There was a widespread belief among Oceanic speaking
communities that this life force or soul was free to leave the living body in dreams and, by
virtue of its non-corporeal nature, commune with the spirits. As Firth put it, “dreams are
valuable circumstantial evidence for the reality of the spirit world” (1967:165).

[1] I am as always grateful to Malcolm Ross for advice on the finer points of sound correspondences as well as
    additions to the data.

236 Meredith Osmond


7.2 Ancestral spirit

The concept of ancestral spirit is traceable back to PAn *qaNiCu ‘ghost, spirit of the
dead’ (ACD). POc *qanitu ‘spirit of the dead’ is widely supported, its central meaning at times
subsumed in a range of interpretations including any supernatural beings, ghosts, evil spirits,
the soul, and, in places, the Christian God.

<
PAn *qaLiCu ‘ghost, spirit of the dead; owl’ (ACD)
PMP *qanitu ‘ghost, ancestral spirit; nature spirit; corpse; owl; various plants’ (ACD)
POc *qanitu ‘ancestral spirit, spirit of the dead’
  Adm: Wuvulu         aniʔu            ‘spirit of the dead’
  NNG: Kove           anitu            ‘ghost; evil spirit’
  NNG: Gitua          anut             ‘God’
  NNG: Gedaged        nitu-n           ‘soul, separate in nature from the body; shadow; image, likeness’ (inalienably possessed) [2]
  NNG: Takia          ŋutu-            ‘soul, spirit’
  PT:  Motu           (mase-)anitu     ‘die from disease, not a violent death’ (mase ‘die’)
  MM:  Vitu           ɣanitu           ‘(dead) spirit’
  MM:  Bola           anitu            ‘ghost’
  MM:  Tangga         kinit            ‘corpse; bush spirit of ghost; soul after death’
  MM:  Mono Alu       nitu-            ‘spirit of dead person’
  MM:  Maringe        n-anitu          ‘spirit, ancestral spirit, ghost, forest spirit; spiritual power; any unfamiliar, frightening presence’
PMic *anitu ‘god, spirit’ (Bender et al., 2003a)
  Mic: Kiribati       (te)anti         ‘a god, spirit, ghost’
  Mic: Kiribati       anti-na          (V) ‘deify, hold or worship as a god’
  Mic: Marshallese    anic             ‘ghost, spirit, phantom; God’
  Mic: Marshallese    anic-nic         ‘spell, enchantment; magic, sorcery, witchcraft’
  Mic: Kosraean       inut             ‘god, spirit, ghost’
  Mic: Ponapean       eni              ‘ghost, usually considered malicious’
  Mic: Ponapean       ani              ‘guardian spirit, ghost of an ancestor’
  Mic: Mokilese       eni              ‘demon, ghost’
  Mic: Chuukese       ənɨ, anɨ         ‘god, spirit, spirit of the dead, ghost’
  Mic: Puluwatese     yanɨ             ‘ancient god’
  Mic: Woleaian       yalʉsʉ           ‘ghost, spirit, god; chant directed to a god of spirit’
  Fij: Wayan          anitu            ‘spirit, ghost, supernatural being’
PPn *qaitu ‘ghost, spirit of dead person’ (POLLEX)[3]
  Pn:  Tongan         ʔeitu(matupuʔa) ‘proper name of certain supernatural being’
  Pn:  Niuean         aitu             ‘ghost, supernatural being’
  Pn:  Rennellese     ʔaitu           ‘worshipped deity, god, esp. the district gods; Lord, Jesus; worship a deity’
  Pn:  Samoan         aitu            ‘ghost, spirit; descendents of the original gods’
  Pn:  Samoan         aitu-a          (V) ‘be haunted’
  Pn:  Nanumea        aitu            ‘family spirit in animal form which helped the family by providing omens and making predictions; ghost; fairy’
  Pn:  Rarotongan     aitu            ‘god, deity, spirit’
  Pn:  K’marangi      eitu            ‘spirit, ghost; monster; ancient deities’
  Pn:  Maori          aitu            ‘sickness, calamity; demon’
  Pn:  Maori          aitu-ā          (ADJ) ‘of ill-omen, unlucky; unfortunate, in trouble’; (N) ‘misfortune, trouble, disaster, accident; omen, particularly evil omen’
cf. also:
  NNG: Mangap         kon             ‘ghost, spirit of the dead’
  NNG: Yabem          katu-           ‘his shadow, picture, soul, ghost, spirit’ (directly possessed)
  MM:  Nakanai        (la)-hitu       ‘all ghosts of the dead both recent and ancestral’
  SES: To’aba’ita     ano             ‘spirit of a deceased person’
  SES: Longgu         ano-a           ‘spirit of ancestor or dead person’
  SES: Sa’a           ano-a           ‘a portent, omen, vision, apparition’
  SES: Arosi          ano-a           ‘an apparition, appearance of a ghost’
  Fij: Rotuman        ʔaitu           ‘god, object of worship; shark, stingray or other creature regarded as the habitat of a god’ (Pn loan)
>

[2] Initial *qa- appears to have ben reanalyzed as an optional prefix in Gedaged, Takia and Mono Alu.

[3] Loss of -n- irregular.

                                                                           The spirit world 237


    POc *tau-mate ‘corpse’, literally ‘dead person’, is reconstructed in vol.5:45. In view of the
following reflexes, its meaning may have included ‘spirit of the dead’.

<
POc *tau-mate ‘corpse; spirit of the dead’
 MM: Hoava                   tomate        ‘spirit of the dead’ (Tryon & Hackman 1983:327)
 MM: Roviana                 tomate        ‘corpse; ghost or spirit’
 MM: Kubokota                tomete        ‘spirit of the dead’
 Mic: Puluwatese             hōmæ          ‘bad ghost of departed person’
>

A comparable PNCV reconstruction varies the first element, with *tau replaced by either
*qata ‘person’ (vol.5:47) or *qata ‘soul, spirit’ (vol.5:205) (see also François 2013:214).

<
PNCV *qata-mate ‘ghost; spirit of dead person’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota                tamate           ‘dead man, ghost; dead man in separation from his body’
 NCV: Lakon               ætmæt            ‘ghost, spirit of dead person’
 NCV: Raga                atmate           ‘dead man, ghost; soul’
 NCV: Nokuku              temate           ‘spirit’
 NCV: Paamese             temate           ‘evil’
 NCV: Nguna               (na-)atamate ‘spirit of the dead; devil’
cf. also:
 NNG: Mangseng            tamata          ‘spirit, demon’
>

238 Meredith Osmond


Other low-level reconstructions include:

<
Proto New Guinea Oceanic *bara(q)um ‘spirit of dead person’
  NNG: Dami             balaū         ‘ghost, spirit, phantom’
  NNG: Yabem            balom         ‘spirit of deceased persons, ghosts of the dead’
  NNG: Bukawa           balom         ‘spirit; bullroarer’
  PT:  Gumawana         baloma        ‘a spirit of a person’ (generic)
  PT:  Kilivila         baloma        ‘spirit of the dead’
  PT:  Kilivila         bili-baloma ‘spirits of ancient dead’
cf. also:
  PT:  Bwaidoga         balaumo         ‘an evil spirit, never human’ (Jenness & Ballantyne 1920:149)
  PT:  Sinaugoro        balau           ‘spirit of the dead’ (Seligman 1910:193)
  PT:  Motu             lauma           ‘spirit, ghost appearing at night, formerly used only of ghosts of those killed, who appeared in terrible form’
>

   In the Southeast Solomons a term is used that includes all ghosts, including those of non-
human origin. Ivens (1927:16) writes of Sa’a, “In folklore, the akalo of an ordinary person
appears after death, speaks and is spoken to before it departs to Kela of the Dead.” He
distinguishes two kinds: a) the ordinary akalo, the ghost of the dead, and b) the akalo wasi,
the wild ghost whose abode is the forest and who is dreaded (p.178). The latter are invoked
for black magic. In Kwaio the wild ghost is an adalo kwasi.

   The first vowel of the Proto Southeast Solomonic form is uncertain, as Gaudalcanal-Gelic languages reflect *-i-,
but Malaita-Makira languages (which lose *t-) reflect *a-.

<
Proto Southeast Solomonic *t(i,a)dalo ‘ghost, spirit’
Proto Guadalcanal-Gelic *tidalo ‘ghost, spirit’
  SES: Gela         tidalo       ‘soul of a distinguished dead man; guardian spirit of the home of the dead; relic of the dead’
  SES: Bugotu       tidaðo       ‘ghost, amulet’
  SES: W G’canal    tidao        ‘ghost, spirit’
Proto Malaita-Makira *adalo ‘ghost, spirit’
  SES: Longgu       agalo(i)     ‘devil, spirit (good and bad); soul’ (Hill n.d.); ‘general term for spirit’ (Hogbin 1935)
  SES: To’aba’ita   akalo        ‘ghost; ancestral spirit; magic, sorcery’
  SES: Kwara’ae     akaol        ‘ghost, spirit’ (metathesis)
  SES: Kwaio        adalo        ‘ghost, ancestral spirit’
  SES: ’Are’are     akaro        ‘spirit whose abode is in the forest’
  SES: Sa’a         akalo        ‘ghost, spirit’ (Ivens 1927); ‘soul of a living man, ghost of an ordinary person’ (Codrington 1891:260)
  SES: Arosi        adaro        ‘ghost; corpse; spirit, demon; soul which leaves the body the fourth day after death and continues to live near the village’
  SES: Kahua        ataro        ‘ghost, spirit’
  SES: Owa          ataro        ‘devil, demon, spirit, evil spirit’
  SES: Lau          agalo        ‘disembodied spirit living on earth; ghost in spirit world’
>

                                                                          The spirit world 239


    The etymon reflected in the cognate set below may also have meant ‘person’s spirit’,
living or dead, as attested by its Manam usage (see below) but the glosses collectively are
vague. There are irregularities in the correspondences which make it difficult to reconstruct
the POc form. They suggest that some forms must be borrowings, but the direction of
borrowing is unclear. The Admiralties forms disagree on the final vowel of the root, but the
PAdm form was apparently directly possessed (vol.5, §3.1.1), supporting the hypothesis that
the form denoted the spirit of a person. Among the PNGOc forms, the Manam and Poeng
reflexes point to POc *-b- as the last consonant, Lukep, Mangseng and Sinaugoro to *-w-.

<
POc (?) *mʷa(l,r,R)(i)awa- ‘spirit, living or dead’
PAdm *mʷalaw(i,a)- ‘spirit, perhaps of the dead’
  Adm: Levei                 moluwi-ŋ        ‘spirit’
  Adm: Lou                   moloa-n         ‘spirit of the dead’
  Adm: Nyindrou              malawi-n        ‘spirit, reflection’
  Adm: Titan                 mwalua-n        ‘spirit, ghost’
Proto New Guinea Oceanic *mʷaria(b,w)a- ‘spirit, perhaps of a person’
  NNG: Manam                 mariaba         ‘person’s spirit’ (Wedgwood 1934–35:71)
  NNG: Lukep                 mariawa         ‘bush spirit’
  NNG: Mangseng              meleun          ‘spirit’
  NNG: Poeng                 maliava         ‘spirit’
  PT:    Sinaugoro           mulava          ‘ghost’
>

7.3 Soul as life force

Widespread among Oceanic peoples was belief in a life force that was part of a person’s
essential being, yet immaterial and separable from the physical body. Close translation is
‘soul’, although the Oceanic concept has some properties that do not accord with the broad
western concept. A number of Oceanic reflexes of POc *maqurip ‘be alive, life, flourish; be
in good health’, additional to those reconstructed in vol.5:210, justify the addition of ‘soul,
life force’ to the POc gloss.

240 Meredith Osmond

<
PAn *qudip ‘life; alive’ (ACD)
PMP *ma-qudip ‘living, alive; grow, flourish; fresh; heal, cure, revive, recover’; (N) ‘vital principle, soul, spirit; flame’ (ACD)
POc *maqurip (V) ‘be alive, live, flourish; be in good health’; (N) ‘soul, life force’
  SES: Owa              maurifa-na    ‘life of s.o., soul of s.o.’
  NCV: Kiai             mauri         ‘live, life, soul’
  Pn:  Rennellese       maʔugi        ‘life principle or spark, way of life, soul’
  Pn:  Pukapukan        mauli         ‘soul, spirit’
  Pn:  Tikopia          mauri         ‘spirit, life principle; vitality of man or animal’
  Pn:  Anuta            mauri         ‘live, be alive; life, soul’
  Pn:  Rarotongan       mauri         ‘soul, life principle of man, spirit of a deceased person’
  Pn:  Takuu            mauri         ‘spirit, shade, soul’
  Pn:  Maori            mauri         ‘life principle, source of the emotions’
>

Among properties attributed to the soul was its ability to temporarily leave a sleeping body, as
evidenced in dreams, and communicate with the gods. The soul could also be seen as both
agent and patient in acts of magic. It was particularly vulnerable to attack from those who
wished harm to its owner. Michele Stephen, an anthropologist who had the rare opportunity
of instruction in the traditions of magic and sorcery in Mekeo by “one of the most
knowledgeable and powerful magicians in the whole region” (1987:53), learned that from a
Mekeo perspective, all magic involved control of the soul of the intended patient. She was
taught that (Stephen 1987:62)

__blockquote__
     the stated aim [of the magic] is twofold: a) to draw out and attract the soul, or dream-
     image, of the subject (oge e ilaʔa); b) to send out the soul, or dream-self, of the
     practitioner (lalauga e papealai), which then acts upon the subject’s soul. The
     principles underlying love magic, hunting magic, weather sorcery and war magic as
     my instructor so frequently impressed upon me – are exactly the same – to attract and
     then control the soul of the victim.

   The soul thus had a pivotal role in matters of life and death. In many parts of Oceania,
severe illness was interpreted as theft of a person’s soul or life force by either a spirit or
sorcerer, with recovery dependent on its retrieval. The following examples illustrate.
   As Fortune (1935:10) describes it in Manus, if a ghost wishes ill to a mortal he takes the
soul-stuff [mwelolo] from the mortal. To overcome an illness it is necessary that the soul be
recovered and restored to its owner.

   When a person is seriously ill in Manam (NNG), theft of the spirit [mariaba] by sorcery is
suspected (Wedgwood 1934-35:296–7). She describes “specialists” who, while in an induced
sleep [dimate], travel to the Land of the Dead to recover the spirit of an unconscious patient.

   In Gedaged (NNG), offerings are made to ancestors who are supposed to have stolen the
soul [nitun] of a sick person (Mager 1952:121).

   In Kove (NNG), Chowning (1989:224) writes that “if sickness in a baby or young child
was diagnosed as having resulted from the capture of the child’s soul [tautau] by a masalai
[TP ‘spirit of non-human origin’], the curer [valu-valu] magically sent his soul, while his
body slept, into the spirit world to locate that of the child and its captor. His task was to
recover the soul, ascertain the cause of sickness and to deal with those responsible.”

                                                                            The spirit world 241


    Valentine (1965:174) describes magical practice in Lakalai (= Nakanai, MM) “by which
men or women fly to the dwelling places of ghosts and ancestors … to rescue souls captured
by ghosts or other spirit beings … According to contemporary practitioners, the soul rescuer
may persuade or trick the ghostly captors into giving up the lost soul, but he often has to
struggle with them and flee for his life with the recaptured soul. If he is successful, the illness
caused by the loss of the soul will disappear.”

    In Nehan (MM), Glennon & Glennon (2006) describe uelhohou [uel- RECIP, hohou
‘sleep’], a fever-curing ritual where the curer searches in sleep for the lost soul of the patient
and the ghost responsible for the sickness so that the reason for the soul’s theft might be
sought and appropriate reparations made.

    Ivens describes incantations used in Ulawa (SES) “when a person was about to employ
the magic sleep [maʔahu isuli] in order to trace anyone, or to find out the cause of an illness”
(1927:325, 345).

    François (2013:232) describes the situation in the Torres Islands of Northern Vanuatu.
“The shaman’s main role is to be a healer. When somebody is sick, this means their soul has
been kidnapped by spirits (PTorres *[a]tamate), and carried away to the other world
(*mbanoi). Only a shaman [*(a)tamate roŋo] has the power – aided by magic leaves – to
migrate to that world, retrieve the lost soul of the person, and lead it back to the world of the
living.”


7.4 Duality of the soul

Oceanic peoples believed in the dual nature of the soul, both present in the life force and
continuing to exist after death. A number of languages express this duality by having separate
terms for the soul that dies with the body and the soul that survives to merge with the role of
ancestral spirit. Examples follow from NNG (Gedaged, Manam), PT (Dobu), MM (Lakalai),
SES (Gela, Kwaio), N. Vanuatu (the Torres-Banks languages) and Pn (Tikopia).

   Gedaged speakers believe a person has two souls: buga ‘shadow soul, guardians of the
customs and morals of a village’ and nitun ‘soul, separate in nature from the body that leaves
the body after death and wanders around’ (Mager 1952:44).

   In Manam the apparent soul (mariaba oaŋka) can go to the place of a person’s dream and
return. The real soul (mariaba kaliŋo) [mariaba ‘person’s spirit’, kaliŋo ‘flesh’] stays with the
person until death. It then goes to Liku in the mainland where all souls live (Böhm 1983:164).

   Malinowski writes (1922:43) that “the Dobuans have also the belief of a double soul – one
shadowy and impersonal, surviving the bodily death for a few days only, and remaining in the
vicinity of the grave, the other, the real spirit, who goes to Bwebweso.” The disembodied
spirit is ʔanu-ʔanunu or maʔa-maʔayau. The part which goes to spirit land is nibowana or
yaru-yarua (Dixon 1928).

   Valentine (1965:166–7) describes the Lakalai of New Britain as speaking of three soul-
like entities, halulu, kalulu and hitu, kalulu evidently a local variant of halulu (from POc
*qanunu). Although he describes some confusion among informants as to the nature of each
he offers the following: halulu refers also to ‘shadow, reflection’. kalulu is the normally
invisible spirit double of the living person that goes forth in dreams. It may be captured by
spirits which cause illness. hitu is generally considered as the form taken by kalulu after
death, referring to spirits of the dead.

242 Meredith Osmond


    In Gela, during a man’s life, his spirit, taruŋa, goes out of him in dreams and returns; at
death it departs the body finally and becomes a ghost, tindalo (Codrington 1891:249).

    Writing from the perspective of the Kwaio, Keesing writes (1982:105) that “most Malaita
peoples conceive of two soul components, one of which goes to a Land of the Dead while the
other remains as an ancestral spirit in the community. These soul components are variously
associated with shadow, reflection and breath.”

    In the Torres-Banks languages, after death, people no longer refer to a person’s soul (PT-B
*ata) but rather to their ghost (*[a]tamate) (François 2013:219).

    The Tikopia believe that a person has a single soul, mauri or ora, which may travel away
from the body during dreams. After death there is a change of terminology and function. Now
it is atua, not ora. This implies its emergence as an entity in its own right, no longer in direct
association with its body. It remains in the vicinity of the body until after the burial, and ends
up in one of several dwelling places, where it remains active (Firth 1967:339).

    POc *maqurip (V) ‘be alive, live, flourish; be in good health’; (N) ‘soul, life force’
reconstructed above, is suggested as the term for the soul belonging to the living person. Two
further terms have been reconstructed for ‘soul’ (included in vol.5, §3.9.1), both referring also
to shadow or reflection, images that to the native mind are evidence of the soul’s existence.
Reflexes of POc *[qa]nunu ‘shadow of person, likeness, reflection; soul that may leave the
body in dreams’ are numerous and widespread. Those of POc *qata ‘soul, spirit; shadow,
reflection’ are almost in complementary distribution, limited to just three subgroups – TM,
NCV and Pn. Only in NCV is there any overlap, with Mota the only language identified with
reflexes in both.

<
PAn *qaLiŋu ‘shadow, reflection’ (ACD)
PMP *qan[i,u]nu ‘shadow, reflection’ (ACD)
POc *[qa]nunu ‘shadow of person, likeness, reflection; soul that may leave the body in dreams’ (vol.5:204)
  Adm:  Wuvulu            anunu           ‘shadow, reflection’
  NNG:  Mangap            kunu-           ‘one’s own shadow, reflection, image, soul, personality’
  NNG:  Manam             anunu(ka)       ‘shadow, image’
  NNG:  Kaulong           enu-            ‘shadow, reflection, image; ghost, soul, (inner) substance’
  NNG:  Aria              ano-            ‘spirit, soul; shadow; breath’
  NNG:  Poeng             kannu-          ‘shadow, reflection (of person); spirit (within a person)’
  NNG:  Mapos Buang       [q,k]enu-       ‘shadow, image; spirit which may leave the body in sleep; ancestor’
  NNG:  Patep             knu-            ‘shadow, image; (person’s) spirit’
  NNG:  Yabem             kanuʔ           ‘darkness, shadow’
  PT:   Kiriwina          ʔanu-ʔanunu     ‘shadow of a person’ (ʔ for exp. k)
  PT:   Molima            ʔanunu-         ‘shadow, reflection’
  PT:   Kukuya            anua-           ‘shadow of a person, image, reflection; centre of feeling or emotion’
  PT:   Bwaidoga          anunu-          ‘soul of a dead man’
  PT:   Iduna             anunu-          ‘shadow, reflection; soul; ancestor ten generations back’
  PT:   Dobu              ʔanu-ʔanunu     ‘soul which stays in the grave’
  PT:   Misima            (ka)kanun       ‘shadow, image’
  MM:   Vitu              hanunu(k)       ‘shadow, reflection’
  MM:   Nakanai           halulu          ‘shadow, reflection’ (Valentine 1965:166)
  MM:   Nakanai           kalulu          ‘soul, separable from the body, can leave the body in sleep’
  MM:   Bola              xanu-           ‘soul, shadow, reflection’
  MM:   Tolai             nono            (VI,VT) ‘to shade, shadow’
  MM:   Nduke             nuni-           ‘shadow’
  MM:   E Kara            ɣəlu-           ‘shadow’ (-l- for exp. –n-)
  SES:  Kwaio             nunu(-)         ‘shadow, image, picture; the shade of s.o. who wanders in dreams and talks to people’ (Keesing 1982:35)
  SES:  Lau               nunu(-)         ‘shadow, shade; likeness, image’
  SES:  Sa’a              nunu-           ‘shadow of persons, reflection, likeness, soul, consciousness’
  SES:  To’aba’ita        nū-, nunu       ‘shadow, reflection, likeness’ (nū preferred with personal suffix)
  SES:  Arosi             nunu-           ‘image, shape, reflection’
PSOc *nunu ‘shadow, image, reflection, soul’ (Lynch 2001)
  NCV:  Mota              nunua-i         ‘the mental impression of sound or force, rather than actual impression, but taken to be real’
  NCV:  Mwotlap           nini-           ‘shadow, reflection’
  NCV:  Nokuku            nun, nuniu-     ‘shadow’
  NCV:  Tamambo           nunu-           ‘shadow, picture, photo’
  NCV:  Raga              nunu-           ‘shadow, picture, representation’
  NCV:  Paamese           ninu-           ‘spirit, soul, shadow’
  SV:   Kwamera           nanu(mu)        ‘spirit, ghost; shadow, reflection; likeness’
  SV:   Sa                nunun           ‘soul, shadow, reflection’
  NCal: Iaai              (ha)nu-         ‘soul, spirit (of dead person), silhouette, appearance’
  Mic:  Kiribati          nunu-           ‘to cover, to shade (incantation)’
>

                                                                                  The spirit world 243

<
POc *qata ‘soul, spirit; shadow, reflection’ (vol.3:205)[4]
 TM:   Teanu                ata            ‘soul, spirit’ (François 2009:107)
 TM:   Lovono               ala            ‘soul, spirit’
 TM:   Tanema               ae             ‘soul, spirit’
PNCV *qata- ‘soul, spirit’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV:  Mota                 ata-           ‘soul, spirit’
 NCV:  Hiw                  ata-           ‘soul, spirit’
 NCV:  Lehali               n-ɛta-n        ‘soul (of s.o.)’ (François 2013:211)
 NCV:  Namakir              ʔata-          ‘(man’s) spirit’
 NCV:  S Efate              (n)at          ‘soul, spirit’
 NCal: Iaai                 hate           ‘mark, shadow’
 Fij:  Rotuman              afa            ‘make a mark or impression’
PPn *qata ‘spirit, soul; shadow (not shade), reflection, image’ (POLLEX)
 Pn:   Tongan               ʔata           ‘shadow, reflection, image’
 Pn:   Niuean               ata            ‘shadow, reflection’
 Pn:   Rennellese           ʔata           ‘shadow, reflection’
 Pn:   Samoan               ata            ‘shadow, reflection, duplicate’
 Pn:   Samoan               ata-ata        ‘reflections’
 Pn:   W Futunan            ata            ‘soul, image’
 Pn:   W Uvean              ata            ‘reflection, spirit of (dead) soul’
 Pn:   Tikopia              ata            ‘shadow, reflection, representation of person or spirit’
 Pn:   Maori                ata            ‘shadow, reflection; spirit, soul’
 Pn:   Hawaiian             aka            ‘shadow, reflection, image’
cf. also:
 NNG:  Yabem                katu-          ‘his shadow, picture, soul, ghost, spirit’
>

[4] POc *qata(r) ‘soul, spirit; shadow, reflection’ was reconstructed with POc final *(-r) in vol.5:205,
    following Dempwolff’s (1938:60) PMP *qantad. In vol.5 the PMP term was wrongly glossed
    ‘appearance, mark’. Dempwolff glosses it ‘be visible’. With this gloss it is an unlikely antecedent of
    POc *qata ‘soul …’. The latter is distinct from the homophonous POc *qata ‘person’ (vol.5:46).

244 Meredith Osmond


In most Polynesian languages, reflexes of PPn *qata refer primarily to ‘shadow, reflection’
while a reflex of PPn *qaŋa-qaŋa is the more usual term for ‘soul, spirit’.

<
PPn *qaŋa-qaŋa ‘soul, spirit’
  Pn: Tongan      ʔaŋa-ʔaŋa         ‘corpse, dead body of person’
  Pn: Niuean      aŋa-aŋa           ‘spirit (both life spirit and supernatural spirit)’
  Pn: Tuvalu      aŋa-aŋa           ‘soul’
  Pn: Samoan      aŋa-aŋa           ‘soul or disembodied spirit which at death leaves the body and proceeds to the Hadean regions under the ocean called Puloto’ (Turner 1884:16)
  Pn: E Uvean     aŋa               ‘character, quality, nature’
  Pn: K’marangi   aŋ-aŋa            ‘body’
>

7.5 Non-human spirits

In a world which recognised the existence of ancestral spirits, perhaps it is not surprising that
people also identified non-human supernatural beings. Ethnographies have numerous
examples of such beings, with a wide range of form and function. In Wogeo, supernatural
beings called nanaraŋ occupied the island before the arrival of men (Hogbin 1935a:377).
They were not ancestors, but were responsible for establishing the local culture. In Dobu and
parts of the Trobriands were reported flying witches who brought death and disease
(Malinowski 1922:76, Fortune 1963). In Nakanai taua were believed to inhabit the bush and
the sea and exist also in trees and rocks (Chowning & Goodenough 2016). In Petats on Buka
Blackwood (1935:543) describes halelehan, spirits of non-human origin who sometimes
adopt animal form. They are not regarded with such intense awe and fear as are the spirits of
the dead [amat]. In Sa’a and Ulawa, the akalo wasi lived in the forest, were of murderous
instinct and were dreaded (Ivens 1927:181). In the Torres-Banks languages of northern
Vanuatu were a range of spirits including vui, described by François (2013:219) as ‘the
eternal spirits of the place, who are present even before mankind, and still inhabit the forest.”
Polynesians believed in a pantheon of gods who peopled their legends and creation myths,
and to whom offerings were made. A number of these languages have now used the term
originally applied to their gods, to refer to the Christian god.

                                                                                 The spirit world 245


   POc *qatuan ‘deity, supernatural being’ is supported by cognates from Polynesia and a
single term from Emira. Additional Polynesian evidence lies in the existence of prefixes to
terms for creatures or phenomena associated with danger and the supernatural, e.g. Tongan
ʔotua-kui ‘whirlwind, waterspout’, Maori atua-piko ‘rainbow’, and Samoan atua-loa ‘k.o.
centipede with poisonous bite’ (vol.4:420).

<
PMP *qatuan ‘deity’ (ACD)
POc *qatuan ‘deity, supernatural being’
  Adm: Emira          otuana      ‘spirits’ (Chinnery 1925:158)
PPn *qatua ‘supernatural being’; ‘deity’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Tongan         ʔotua       ‘object of worship, deity, god’
  Pn:  Niuean         atua        ‘god, spirit, ghost’ (now used exclusively for God; for ghost, aitu is used)
  Pn:  Samoan         atua        ‘god; divine, god-like; the original gods’
  Pn:  Rennellese     ʔatua       ‘God, spirit, deity; to worship as a god’
  Pn:  Tikopia        atua        ‘supernatural being in general; spirit, ghost; the soul of a dead person’
  Pn:  Nanumea        atua        ‘household deity’
  Pn:  Anutan         atua        ‘spirit being’
  Pn:  Maori          atua        ‘God, demon, supernatural being, ghost; object of superstitious regard; anything malign, disagreeable; strange, extraordinary’
  Pn:  Hawaiian       akua        ‘God, goddess, spirit, ghost, devil, image, idol, corpse; divine, supernatural, godly’
cf. also:
  Fij: Rotuman        ʔatua       ‘dead person, corpse, ghost’ (ghosts are very material to Rotuman mind) (Pn loan)
>

   Also reconstructed is POc *tubuqan ‘supernatural being’. It appears to be derived from
POc *tubuq ‘grow’, and to be identical with *tubuq-a(n) ‘body, substance’ (-an nominaliser)
(vol.5:79–80),5 but with a specialised meaning, disassociated from the human body. Simet
(1991) discusses the Tolai term tubuan at length. It refers not just to the mask but to the man
who wears it, who assumes supernatural powers. The term is also used in Sursurunga and
Tolai to label the male secret society in which tubuan activities take place.

[5] In vol.5:80 this is reconstructed as *tubu-a(ŋ). The MM reflexes above show that the final consonant
    was *-n and that the term is reconstructable with this meaning as far back as POc.

246 Meredith Osmond

<
POc *tubuqan ‘supernatural being’
 MM:  Tolai              tubuan          ‘leaf mask; masked dancer’ (Meyer 1961)
 MM:  Barok              tubuan          ‘potent masked figure and associated dance’
 MM:  Sursurunga         tobuən          ‘supernatural being; the male secret society associated with this being’
PEOc *tubuqa ‘spirit being (possibly guardian spirit)’
 SES: To’aba’ita         ðūfā           ‘one’s protective, guardian spirit’
 NCV: Nguna              na-tupua       ‘spirit’
PPn *tupuqa ‘supernatural being’
 Pn:  Tongan             tupuʔa         ‘ancient, venerable’
 Pn:  Niuean             tupua          ‘giant, evil spirit, demon; ancient gods’
 Pn:  Samoan             tupua          ‘idol, image’
 Pn:  Anutan             tupua          ‘spirit’
 Pn:  Pukapukan          tupua          ‘demon, ogre, creature, monster’
 Pn:  Tuvalu             tupua          ‘god; pre-christian wooden gods’
 Pn:  E Futunan          tupuʔa         ‘stars marking months of year’
 Pn:  W Futunan          tupua          ‘image, idol, sign’
 Pn:  Tikopia            tupua          ‘traditional supernatural being, spirit; deity, esp. spirit never having been soul of living person’
 Pn:  Tokelauan          tupua          ‘idol, guardian spirit’
 Pn:  Tuamotuan          tupūa          ‘supernatural being’
 Pn:  Tahitian           tupūa          ‘supernatural beings’
 Pn:  Maori              tupua          ‘goblin, demon, foreigner, one versed in magic’
 Pn:  Hawaiian           kupua          ‘supernatural being, being with natural power’
cf. also:
 Fij: Lau                tupua          ‘spirit or ghost’ (Pn loan: P. Geraghty, pers. comm.)
>


7.6 Conclusion

Terms related to matters of belief and the spirit world have been subjected to a considerable
degree of reinterpretation, particularly since the introduction and widespread adoption of
Christianity. Defining the reconstructions is not helped by reliance in the cognate sets on the
English term ‘spirit’, a word whose multiple meanings can refer to all of the concepts
discussed here – ancestor spirit, non-human spirit and soul both as animating spark and as the
part of a person that survives after death6, resulting in a degree of cross-contamination of
meaning in wordlists.

   We can be confident that POc *qanitu (from PAn *qaniCu ‘ghost, spirit of the dead’)
referred to ‘ancestral spirit’. POc *qatuan (from PMP *qatuan ‘deity’) may have referred
more broadly to any supernatural being, whether human or non-human in origin. Evidence
that there are distinct terms for the soul within a living person and the soul which survives
after death has resulted in three POc reconstructions. Clearly there are various ways in which
an abstract quality like ‘soul’ can be conceptualised. POc *maqurip (V) ‘be alive, live,
flourish; be in good health’; (N) ‘soul, life force’, (from PAn *qudip ‘life; alive’) is readily
understood as referring by extension to the animating spark in man. Although *[qa]nunu
(from PAn *qaLiŋu ‘shadow, reflection’) and *qata both refer inter alia to ‘shadow,
reflection’, the former has the added support from three subgroups (NNG, MM, SES) for the
meaning to include ‘soul that may leave the body in dreams’.

[6] The Macquarie Dictionary offers 30 separate meanings for ‘spirit’.

                                                                          The spirit world 247




8             Magic and the supernatural

8.1 Introduction

The practice of magic in Oceanic societies is based on the belief that ultimate power resides
in the ghosts of the ancestors, and that there are people in the community who can summon
this power under certain conditions to achieve particular ends.

    Magic traditionally imbued every aspect of the lives of Oceanic speakers. It was the tool
by which they sought to enhance outcomes in their gardening practices, their fishing, their
state of health, their fertility, their efforts in love and war, and power over their enemies. It
provided an explanation for otherwise inexplicable events, and served as a form of social
control, enforcing prohibitions on certain behaviours. But like all tools, it could be misused
by those with their own motives. It offered a means of reacting, attempting to influence, by
counter-action or retribution, and was used for both good and evil purposes. Sorcery,
sometimes used loosely as a term for any magic, more commonly refers to that performed
to inflict harm on another. In its most extreme form it is magic directed towards the
intended death of a victim (black magic). Where possible, black magic is treated here
separately in §8.4.

    Most approaches made to ancestors, as well as giving thanks and perhaps showing
respect and obeisance, are to seek their good will for future endeavours. Approaches are
invariably made at the start of fresh initiatives such as the breaking of new ground in a
garden, the opening of a new men’s house, the construction and launching of a trading
canoe, preparation for a fight, and preparation for hunting and fishing expeditions. Rituals
on such occasions usually incorporate a sequence of specific spells. For example, in
preparation for a fight, spells may be cast to inspire the warriors with courage, to enable
them to creep upon the enemy unobserved, to cause the weapons to inflict lethal wounds,
and to make the enemy sluggish and weak. In gardening, magic may be called on to
preserve the fences, drive away plant diseases and insects, bring sun or rain, and make the
yams increase in size (Hogbin 1964:86). The ritual is usually so closely identified with the
occasion that to neglect it is to court disaster. In western Oceanic communities such rituals
are typically led by a headman or expert magician. Spells also exist for individuals to seek
good fortune in personal matters, such as attracting a person of the opposite sex, help in
childbirth or success in fishing. At times the request is accompanied by offerings, usually
harvest produce or fish.

250 Meredith Osmond


    Misadventure of all kinds, including illness, accidents such as falling from a tree, failure
of rainfall or even volcanic activity can be interpreted as due to displeasure of the ancestors,
and must be counteracted by magic, often accompanied by some form of payment. An
afflicted person may seek to identify a past act suspected of causing offence, which can
then be atoned. Commonly, misfortune is believed caused by deliberate human action
against another, i.e. sorcery. In this case the victim may have a good idea of someone he or
his close kin have offended, or know of those who hold a grudge against him, and he may
have a good idea of those with the ability to practise sorcery and identify the likely sorcerer.
Those with the skill to cause harm usually have the power to undo their magic.

    A major problem for those of us engaged in historical reconstruction is paucity of
detailed terminology in magical matters. Many early ethnographers were missionaries who
could be expected to discourage any magical beliefs as incompatible with Christianity, and
did little to record what they saw of magic practice. What was recorded was often local
practice reinterpreted to accord with Christian ritual and belief. Also relevant was a natural
reticence when it came to discussing secret and mysterious processes with strangers. If a
secret spell is shared among strangers, its efficacy is believed lost. It may take years for an
outsider living within a community to be allowed to know of such matters. Raymond Firth
who spent a year in Tikopia in 1928–9, learnt much later that the chiefs had given orders
that he was to be told nothing about their gods and ritual practices (1957:8). As well,
communities took care to keep this knowledge to themselves lest it be used by
neighbouring communities against them. So although there is a substantial degree of
commonality in what is known about the general practice of magic in Melanesia, collected
terms tend to be highly restricted in distribution and very generalised in their listed
meaning. Consequently very few POc lexical reconstructions have been possible.

    As an example of the kind of difficulties involved, one of the rare reconstructions
possible is the following. It evidently related to some aspect of magic, but without further
evidence we cannot know if the reference is generic or specific, or whether the implied
actor is human or non-human.

<
POc *masi ‘magic; perform magic’
 NNG: Poeng             masi-a         (V) ‘perform (a magic ritual)’
 NNG: Poeng             masi-ŋ         (N) ‘the act of performing a magic ritual; medicine’
 NNG: Poeng             mas-mas        (V) ‘work magic, supernaturally perform’
 NNG: Poeng             mas-masia      (V) ‘perform magic on’
 NCV: Paamese           masi-ŋe        (N) ‘love magic’
 NCV: V’enen Taut       masi-n         (N) ‘love magic’
PNCV *kai-masi ‘sorcerer’ (Clark 2009) (POc *k(w)ai ‘person belonging to a category’; vol.5:48–50)
 NCV: Paamese           ei-masi        ‘evil spirit’
 NCV: Nguna             (na)kai-masi   ‘sorcerer’
>

   The practice of magic is considered in §8.2, its practitioners in §8.3, and sorcery in §8.4.

                                                              Magic and the supernatural 251


8.2 The practice

Magic practice consists primarily in the recitation of certain spells and performance of
associated ritual. Depending on the kind of magic, it may also involve inclusion of some
substance to transmit the power from the magician to the object to be influenced, and may
be accompanied by offerings.

8.2.1 The invocation

The reciting of a spell effectively invokes the ancestral spirits. It seems that although
anyone may talk to the ancestors, most major areas of concern involve established spells
typically ‘owned’ by a particular person or clan. The wording of a spell is usually of great
importance, having been passed down by previous generations, perhaps originating in a
single named ancestor.

    Malinowski (1948:54) writes of the Trobrianders that “the most important element in
magic is the spell. … In an analysis of any act of witchcraft it will always be found that the
ritual centres round the utterance of the spell. The formula is always the core of the magical
performance.” He echoes Powdermaker (1933:298) who writes that, in Lesu (New Ireland),
the power of the magic lies in the muttered spell. The rite is of minor significance, and
sometimes does not exist, but the spoken words are essential. In Longgu “the verbal
formula of the spell is always rhythmical to facilitate learning and subsequent recall, and, as
absolute accuracy in repetition is considered essential, it often abounds in archaisms”
(Hogbin 1964:86). Similarly, in To’aba’ita, Hogbin (1970a:119) writes that “by far the most
important part of the magic is the spell, and the same word, akaloa, is in fact used for both.
All spells are supposed to have been revealed in dreams to the ancestors by forefathers still
more remote, and their effectiveness is supposed to depend on the accuracy with which
they are repeated.” In Samoa, as described by Moyle (1988:73) “the possibility of success
required exact recitation of the text and an actual performance of the ritual acts.”

    Blackwood (1935:479), however, writes that in northern Bougainville the deed is more
important than the words. “While the deed is often sufficient without the word, the word is
never found alone, but always in conjunction with some act … Further, no great stress
appears to be laid upon the exact reproduction of the form of words.” Firth (1967:203, 206)
writes that, although the essence of the magic is the formula, “there is no belief in Tikopia
that the form of words is so exact that a slip in the recital will invalidate their effect or bring
misfortune upon the reciter … There is a great deal of individual variation in the words
recited.”

    Although the main focus of the spell will be the desired outcome, persons’ names may
be included. In Mekeo, for instance, a spell includes a sequence of names beginning with
the name of the originator and ending with the name of the person who taught the spell to
the adept (Stephen 1987a:59). In Longgu a spell will contain a list of former owners, the list
being proof of the spell’s potency for the present owner; otherwise they would never have
continued to pass it down through the generations (Hogbin 1964:87).

    The structure is repetitious. Longer spells may be in rhythmical language, being easier to
remember, often with figures of speech and far-fetched analogies. Hogbin (1970b:177)
offers as an example a spell from Wogeo to make a canoe sail swiftly which describes it as
travelling faster than the flight of an eagle. The manner of utterance may also be of
importance. Spells are typically uttered inaudibly to prevent anyone else learning them.
Some may be sung.

252 Meredith Osmond


    Although it is possible to locate various terms meaning ‘to invoke supernatural
intervention’ or similar, a POc reconstruction has proved elusive. Codrington (1891:145)
wrote “It is certainly very difficult, if not impossible, to find in any Melanesian language a
word which directly translates the word prayer, so closely does the notion of efficacy cling
to the form employed.” A number of phonologically similar low-level reconstructions are
possible, but it has proved impossible to combine the data into a single cognate set.

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *yaru (VI) ‘invoke a spirit, make imprecations, put a spell on someone over something’
Proto Malaita-Makira *yaruʔ-i (VT) ‘invoke a spirit, make imprecations, put a spell on someone over something’ (Lichtenberk 1994:30)
Proto Malaita-Makira *aruʔ-a (N) ‘magic, spell’
 SES: Longgu      aru            (N) ‘generic term for magic, spell’ (Hogbin 1964)
 SES: Longgu      aru-aru        (V) ‘whisper, murmur, usually behind one’s hands; talk to s.t. like a lime or leaf in your hands as a special protection against spirits so that no one hears what you say’
 SES: To’aba’ita  aruʔ-a        (N) ‘kind of malevolent magic, sorcery’; ‘man or woman who practises this kind of sorcery’
 SES: Lau        aru            (V) ‘practise black magic, harm by magic’
 SES: Lau        aru-a          ‘black magic, sorcery; familiar spirit’
 SES: Lau        aru-aru        ‘practise black magic; poison’
 SES: Lau        aru-i          (VT) ‘use magic on’
 SES: Kwaio      |(wane) aluʔa| (N) ‘a sorcerer, one who keeps another’s leavings for malicious purposes’ (wane ‘man’)
 SES: Kwaio      alu-           ‘prefix for various magic practices’ (e.g. alu-aluʔa ‘magic for raising pigs’)
 SES: Kwaio      aluʔ-i         (VT) ‘talk to adalo in divination; utter a spell in magic; place a magic spell over’
 SES: ’Are’are   aruʔ-i         (VT) ‘to invoke the spirit, to make imprecations accompanied by incantations for recovery from sickness, over food on feasts etc.’ (also aro-a)
 SES: ’Are’are   aruʔ-a         (V) ‘invoke a spirit over hena (lime) or betelnut for cure of a sick person’
 SES: Sa’a       seru-i         ‘use a magical spell over a person or object’
 SES: Arosi      aru            ‘to charm, put a spell’
 SES: Arosi      aruʔ-i         (VT) ‘to charm, put a spell on s.o.’
 SES: Arosi      hai-aru        (N) ‘a charm or spell’
 SES: Owa        aru-aru        ‘do magic, do traditional magic practices’
 SES: Owa        aru-aru-fa     (N) ‘magic’
>

At first glance, the items listed below form an EOc cognate set. Certainly their glosses
justify one. But PNCV *[ta]taro reflects a putative PEOc *taro or, less probably, *taRo.
PPn *[talo]talo, on the other hand, would reflect a PEOc *talo. And ’Are’are aro-a might
reflect either *taro or *talo, so we cannot tell whether it is cognate with PNCV *[ta]taro or
with PPn *[talo]talo. Without making an ad hoc assumption, we cannot reconstruct a PEOc
term from these data.

                                                            Magic and the supernatural 253

<
  SES: ’Are’are              aro-a           (VT) ‘to pray over, invoke the spirits over’
PNCV *[ta]taro ‘pray, wish for’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV: Mota               tataro          ‘to pray; invocation made to the dead’
  NCV: Raga               tataro          ‘pray, prayer’
  NCV: Mwotlap            tataro          ‘to invoke intercession’
  NCV: Nguna              (na)taro        ‘intercession, prayer of request’
PPn *[talo]talo (v) ‘to invoke supernatural intervention; pray’; (N) ‘spell, incantation’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Tongan             talo-talo       ‘to cast lots or employ divination’
  Pn:  Pukapukan          talo-talo       ‘pray, invoke, recant’
  Pn:  Samoan             ta-talo         ‘pray’
  Pn:  Samoan             talo-talo       ‘incantation, prayer’
  Pn:  Tikopia            taro, taro-taro ‘recite traditional ritual formulae, incl. magical formulae and rituals over kava’; ‘utter Christian prayer’
  Pn:  Tokelauan          talo            ‘a signal or request or help sent by waving a canoe paddle or a green coconut frond’
  Pn:  Tahitian           taro-taro       ‘short prayer to the gods’
  Pn:  Hawaiian           kalo-kalo       ‘prayer’
>

8.2.2 The rite

Rituals are intended to incorporate some aspect of the focussed object. The degree of ritual
action required, however, varies with context. In Tikopia, where fishing is concerned, it is
sufficient for a man to utter appropriate words while the casting of a line provides the
necessary action (Firth 1967:201). When the focus is on, for example, success in gardening,
the accompanying ritual may assume the greater significance. Even when similar rituals are
described in the ethnographic literature, there is little linguistically that can be
reconstructed. An exception is with magic associated with treatment of pain or disease. The
spraying of some masticated substance such as ginger mixed with saliva from the mouth on
to an affected body part is evidently a very old and widely practised ritual treatment right
across the Austronesian world. Two similar reconstructions, POc *puRuk ‘to spray spittle
etc. from the mouth for magical purposes’ and POc *puRas ‘spray water from the mouth’
are included in vol.5:362–3. Another practice that has been reported in places as far part as
Motu (Seligman 1910:167), Bwaidoga (Jenness & Ballantyne 1920:139–141), Kove
(Chowning 1989:224), Kwaio (Keesing 1982:118), Gela and Fiji (both Codrington
1891:198) is the manipulation of a body part to isolate something believed to cause the
problem so that it may be seized or spat out. POc *samo(s) ‘stroke, massage’ may include
this activity as part of its wider meaning (vol.5:363).

    Another ritual may be undertaken when a person becomes seriously ill. The illness is
thought due to the patient’s soul becoming separated from his body, apparently due to
sorcery. At such times a curer will enter into induced sleep, thus permitting his own soul to
travel to locate the soul of the unconscious person and return it to the land of the living.
Specialised terms for such magical or induced sleep include:

254 Meredith Osmond

__formgroup__
  NNG: Manam       dimate         ‘induced sleep to enable soul of curer to travel to Land of the Dead to retrieve soul of ill person’ (Wedgwood 1934-5:297)
  MM: Nehan        uelhohou       ‘fever-curing ritual where curer searches in sleep for lost soul of patient’ (uel- RECIP, hohou ‘sleep’) (Glennon & Glennon 2005)
  SES: Ulawa       |maʔahu isuli| ‘magical sleep to trace anyone or find out the cause of an illness’ (lit. ‘sleep and find out’) (Ivens 1927:345)

Further examples of this belief are included in chapter 7, but no reconstructions have been
possible.


8.2.3 Powerful substances

Many spells involve the use of particular substances relevant to the desired effect. Items
chosen are thought to mimic, by their properties, the desired result. Love magic may
include adorning oneself with the leaves of a sweet-smelling shrub such as Euodia
hortensis (PCP *usi) to capture a woman’s affections (Ivens 1927:281, 336). The leaves and
bark of particular plants are important in calling on ancestor spirits, while roots are chewed
for magical purposes. Ginger (POc *laqia ‘ginger, Zingiber officinale) (vol.3:414) is
considered a powerful substance used for both magical and medicinal purposes. Chewing
ginger as part of a spell serves to make the words ‘hot’, that is, to augment their potency
(Hogbin 1970b:180). It is also a common ingredient in the ritual treatment of disease,
generally by the agent spitting the masticated substance on to the afflicted body part. Wild
ginger (Zingiber zerumbet) also known as red ginger, is associated with magic and sorcery
in Marovo and Maringe, and chewed by the magician in Tangga preparing for war (Bell
1935a:261). It was also wrapped in dried banana leaves and burnt in pots by Motu on their
ocean-going canoes to help them go fast and well while on hiri trading voyages (Gwilliam
1982:52).

    Other plants associated with magical practices include turmeric, Curcuma longa (POc
*yaŋo, vol.3:412), used at Morovo and Kwara’ae, and various leaves including those of
Dracaena augustifolia used in Arosi and Sa’a (Ivens 1927:290) and Cordyline fruticosa used
in Buka (Blackwood 1935), Marovo (Hviding 2005:118), To’aba’ita (Hogbin 1970a:106),
Kwaio (Keesing 1982:189) and Tikopia (Firth 1967:182). POc *jiRi (vol.3:418) refers to both
Dracaena augustifolia and Cordyline fruticosa ). Fortune (1963:114–5) lists Cordyline
terminalis, an alternative name for C. Fruticosa, as of ceremonial importance over a wide
area, from the Admiralty Islands, through Milne Bay, New Britain, the Solomons, Vanuatu,
Fiji and Polynesia. Skins of areca nuts, Areca catechu (POc *buaq, vol.3:393) are used in
black magic in Sa’a and elsewhere (Ivens 1927:246).

    Lime (POc *qapu(R) ‘lime, burnt coral or limestone’, vol.2:64) is also used for both
magical and medicinal purposes. Blackwood (1935:477) mentions the many uses of lime
(iav) in Petats. Not only is it added to the mixtures used for a number of medicinal and
magical purposes, it is also efficacious alone, e.g. rubbed on a man who has been struck by
spirits, or a person suffering from a sprain or broken bone. Ivens (1927:195) lists the
ceremonial uses of lime (sahu) in Sa’a as (1) in black magic; (2) to induce magic sleep; (3)
to restore those who were possessed; (4) in exorcism; (5) for protection of the malaohu
[separated for initiation] boys, and of the fighting man against adverse ghosts; and (6) to
protect houses from ghostly attack. It may be rubbed or painted on the skin or item to be
protected.

                                                            Magic and the supernatural 255

    In addition, some magical procedures require objects such as physical relics of the dead.
In Lukep an ancestral relic [bar] like bone or hair is used to communicate with the spirit
world (D’Jernes). A sorcerer in Mekeo will keep with him the relics (bones, teeth, hair)
(faŋa ofuŋa, lit. ‘body dirt’) of his patrilineal ancestors, with whom he is in constant
communication through dreams, signs, divination and his nightly invocation of them to
assist him and watch over the members of his lineage (Stephen 1987a:57). Blackwood
(1935:474) describes small bundles called ēto carried as a general protection by adults in
Buka which contain relics of a dead relative or of an enemy who has been eaten. In Sa’a,
relics of the dead [maŋite] including the skull, hair, fingernail and bone, are kept in a relic
case in the corner of a dwelling house where offerings are made (Ivens 1927:178). The
magical equipment of a sorcerer may also include oddly shaped stones, pieces of bark or
shell, and dried reptile or insect parts (Stephen 1987a:60, Ivens 1927:292), particularly if
they show some physical similarity to a body part on which magic is to be performed. (See
also Seligman 1910:178ff).

8.2.4 Offerings

Although offerings are generally made in atonement for perceived transgressions, they
sometimes accompany a request to the ancestors for good fortune in a future endeavour,
and are also made as a form of thanksgiving following harvest or successful fishing. There
is considerable variation from place to place in the degree to which an offering is developed
into formal ritual. In Manus, where people consider that the main role of ancestral ghosts is
to maintain a moral code by punishing offenders with illness or other misfortune, people
pay only to atone for sin, never to promote good fortune from the spirits or to avoid any
future misfortune. “Payment to wipe off sin is just; payment to keep a ghost from malice, if
it were done, would be simply bribery or tribute” (Fortune 1935:54).

    Although offerings to ancestors appear to be a widespread part of ritual in the southeast
Solomons and Polynesia, evidence for their existence in western Oceanic communities is
very limited. A rare western Oceanic example comes from Malinowski (1935:467). He
notes that although the Trobriand belief in spirits and the part they play was vague and
shadowy, the ancestral spirits were acknowledged during the breaking of new ground in
gardening. While the villagers offer a quantity of special food, usually fish, to the garden
magician as ceremonial payment, a small portion is exposed to the ancestral spirits,
sacrificially and with an invocation.

    Offerings form a significant part of magic ritual in the southeast Solomons both to
ensure good fortune and to atone for perceived transgressions. Hogbin (1964:78) describes
sacrifices made at Longgu, the most important of which were those preceding dispatch of a
fleet of trading canoes, when pigs were offered. Pigs were also sacrificed after an
earthquake to prevent further destruction. Ivens (1927:179) describes offering in Sa’a
known as uraʔiŋe that were made to ghosts to ensure their goodwill. Offerings of porpoise
teeth were tied to the bows of war canoes and on the bows and spears used in divination.
They were also put into the relic case found in each dwelling house that already contained
the skull or jawbone or tooth of the departed householder and to which further contributions
could be made in the event of illness. If desired, a pig might also be burnt in sacrifice on
behalf of the sick (p.180). Sacrifice was also made at the launching of a new bonito canoe
(p.250). In Kwaio, pigs, known as fōta ‘offerings’ are consecrated to ancestors before being
sacrificed in atonement (Keesing 1982:69).

256 Meredith Osmond


<
POc *uraki ‘make an offering to the gods’
 PT:  Kilivila    ula-ula [1]    (N) ‘an offering made to a ghost [baloma] as payment for magic (often fish)’ (Malinowski 1948:182)
 SES: Sa’a        uraʔi       (VI) ‘make an offering to a ghost’
 SES: Sa’a        uraʔi-ŋe    ‘offering made to a ghost; relics include porpoise teeth etc. worn by priest round neck when going to battle; if to a ghost shark, thrown into sea’ (Ivens 1927:179)
 SES: Arosi       uraʔi       (N) ‘sacrifices at Birubiru rock, of money etc.’
 SES: Bauro       uragi       ‘make an offering’
 SES: Owa         uraage      ‘make an offering to spirits by s.o. wishing to die’
>

Bauan Fijian distinguishes between offerings made for atonement, i soro, and those made in
thanksgiving, i madrali.

   In Polynesia Williamson writes (1937:121):

__blockquote__
      Special ceremonial occasions such as births, marriages and deaths were
      accompanied by offerings to the gods. After fishing it was frequently the custom to
      offer share of the catch to the gods, and other important activities such a house-
      building, the launching of large canoes, and warfare were likewise occasions for the
      making of sacrifices.

In the following cognate set, the Tongan, Niuean and Samoan reflexes are examples of the
specialised vocabulary required for food given to the chiefs who were seen as descended
from the ancestral gods.

<
PPn *taumafa ‘ceremonial food; offering to the gods’
  Pn: Tongan         taumafa     ‘food, drink, smoke (regal)’
  Pn: Niuean         taumafa     ‘eat, used to chiefs only’
  Pn: Rennellese     taumaha     ‘dedicate food or hail the gods or ancestors’
  Pn: Samoan         taaumafa    ‘eat (polite)’
  Pn: Tikopia        taumafa     ‘portion of food allocated to a person in a distribution; traditional offering of food to gods or ancestors’
  Pn: W Futunan      taumafa     ‘offering’
  Pn: Maori          taumaha     ‘spell recited when food offered to gods’
  Pn: Hawaiian       kaumaha     ‘offering, sacrifice’
>

[1] Malinowski in fact writes ulaʔula, but he tends to add an incorrect glottal stop between vowels (see
    e.g. buʔa ‘betel nut’ (p.159)). Kilivila phonology lacks a glottal stop.

                                                               Magic and the supernatural 257


   A PEOc reconstruction is tentatively proposed for making offerings in atonement. While
the Sa’a term refers to ancestral atonement, reflexes in other languages may now be more
general terms for compensation.

<
PEOc *soso ‘to expiate, compensate’
  SES: Longgu       toto             ‘pay compensation’
  SES: Sa’a         toto             (VT) ‘propitiate a ghost with sacrifice; pay a fine’
  SES: Sa’a         |toto akalo|       ‘a sacrifice burnt whole or killed and thrown away, pig, dog, cuscus, to remove ceremonial defilement’
  SES: ’Are’are     haʔa-toto(a)     ‘propitiate’ (haʔa CAUSATIVE)
  SES: Kwaio        toto             ‘compensate, pay a fine’
  SES: Lau          toto             ‘pay a fine’
  SES: Arosi        toto             ‘to pay a fine, give money to be reconciled’
  SES: Owa          toto-mara        ‘pay compensation to’ (mara ‘?’)
  Fij: Bauan        soso-ya          (VT) ‘to give in exchange, replace; atone, expiate’
  Fij: Bauan        i-sosoi          (N) ‘thing given in exchange; reparation, expiation’
>

8.2.4.1 First fruits

The giving of thanks for the harvest is widely noted as a way of maintaining good relations
with the ancestors, and ensuring their support in future endeavours. That mention of first
fruits is rare in western Oceanic may be an accidental by-product of our ethnographic
sampling, or may be because first fruits are typically not accorded significant ritual there. In
Bwaidoga, at harvest, each man would simply place one of his largest yams in the back of
his hut to rot, in order to pay the spirits (Jenness & Ballantyne 1920:126). In Kilivila where
every stage of gardening activity is preceded by ritual, the garden magician, prior to the
gathering of taro and kuvi (large yams), cuts off the top of a taro plant in each holding and
places it in his house rafters as an offering to the ancestral spirit. In the third day following,
each man pulls up a few taro plants and digs a few yams. These ‘first fruits’ are brought to
the village where some are displayed and others placed on the graves of recently dead
relatives (Malinowski 1935:166). In Madak, New Ireland, where each man carries out
elaborate ritual while cultivating his own taro garden, “a small first fruits feast can be held
to celebrate the garden” once the taros are ready (Eves 1998:210).

    In the southeast Solomons, Fiji, Polynesia, Micronesia and parts of Vanuatu, the offering
of first fruits to the ancestors is typically carried out by priests or village elders on behalf of
the community rather than by individuals, as is often the case in western Oceanic
communities. Codrington (1891:132) notes that in Gela and Sa’a, when canarium nuts were
ripe, no-one might partake until sacrifice of the first fruits. (In Gela the term for ‘first fruits’
is hinava.) In Ulawa, people were free to dig their yams only after the first fruits had been
offered by the priest. This offering is called toli uhi [lay/place yams] (Ivens 1927:363).
Similarly in Kwaio, when taro and yams were cultivated, a priest was required to make an
offering of first fruits from the garden to the ancestral owners, before the living owner of
the garden could partake of the food (Keesing 1982:119–121). Separate rituals were
undertaken for each. Keesing’s Kwaio dictionary (1975) lists fafiʔalo ‘the shrine, ritual
complex etc. involving presentation of first fruits of taro to the spirits’. To’aba’ita differs in
that it is the male owner of a new garden rather than the priest who takes one small taro and
roasts and eats it by himself: this opens the garden, allowing it to be harvested by other
family members. This is the ceremony of gwa lusu abu ‘first fruit of taro’ (Lichtenberk
2008:172). lusu is also the term for ‘first fruits’ in Lau.

258 Meredith Osmond


   Durrad (1940:398) describes the gardening activities on Lo in the Torres Islands in
northern Vanuatu.

__blockquote__
     The time for digging [the yams] is decided upon by the village elders, and there is a
     certain amount of ceremonial associated with the lifting of the first yam, which is
     offered as a sacrifice to the ancestral gods. When this first yam has been lifted, and
     the ritual connected therewith finished, everyone can lift his yams as he requires
     them.

   Petersen (2009:196) describes the situation in Micronesia.

__blockquote__
     The most extensive, conspicuous and consequential of all Micronesian religious
     practices are the first fruits rituals. Although known by a wide variety of names – for
     example, Lamotrek maulmei (Alkire 1974), Chuuk wumwusomwoon (Goodenough
     2002:262–5), Marshalls’ ekan (Carucci 1997:168), Pohnpei nohpwei, and Kiribati
     inagu (Lundsgaarde 1978:71) – they are nearly identical throughout the region.

Although first fruits presentations and feasts may be directed specifically towards the
chiefs, ultimately they are a form of homage to the spirits, a way of safeguarding the land
from the force of storms and drought. In Micronesia the first fruits rites are performed in
stages throughout the seasons for most staple food crops, this as a way of being ever-
mindful of the protection of the spirits (Petersen 2009:196).

   In Moala (Fiji) the yearly tribute of first fruits was given to the chief “that the land might
be prosperous” (Sahlins 1962:319). “In the old days the presentation of first fruits (sevu)
was of great magical and religious as well as political significance” (p.343). The village
priest, bete, traditionally directed the collection of the yams before they went to the chief.
The latter was required to contribute his own yams because the recipient was ultimately the
god.

   Williamson (1937:121) reports that the periodic offering of first fruits was widespread
throughout Polynesia. In Futuna, the main ritual season began with a major feast and with
the offering of the first yams to the gods (Kirch 1994:275). The Maori offered a portion of
the first fruits of each season – fish, fowl, and vegetable – to the departmental gods; of birds
to Tane, of fish and seaweed to Tangoroa, and cultivated foods to Rongo (Best 1934:69).

   Kirch & Green (2001:274, Fig. 9.5) include PPn *quinati (?) ‘first fruits rituals’ in their
diagrammatic summary of the ancestral Polynesian ritual cycle, but that meaning may be a
narrower example of a more general PPn term for any allocated portion of food.

<
PPn *qinati ‘share, allocated portion of food’; ‘first fruits rituals?’ (Kirch & Green 2001)
  Pn: Tongan      ʔinasi     ‘share, allotted portion, quota’; ‘presentation of food to the Tuʔitonga [supreme chief] in a way that came to be regarded as inconsistent with the Christian religion’ (in old Tonga)
  Pn: Rennellese  ʔinati     ‘food share’
  Pn: Samoan      inati      ‘part, portion, share, first fruits’
  Pn: Tokelauan   inati      ‘group of people who receive a share from a community-owned asset; the share received’
  Pn: Maori       inati      ‘portion, share of food at a feast’
>

                                                           Magic and the supernatural 259


8.3 The practitioners

Anyone in a community would be able to call on their ancestors for such matters as success
in love or fishing. But communities generally have recognised purveyors whose assistance
may be bought for more serious concerns. Spells are typically handed down from parent to
child, and spell owners who have a reputation for successful outcomes, particularly in areas
such as childbirth or control of the weather will be much sought after.

    A difficulty in dealing with the role of practitioners in magic lies in the somewhat
indiscriminate use in ethnographies and wordlists of the terms ‘priest’ and ‘sorcerer’, and
the related role of shaman. All may have a claimed special ability to communicate with the
gods. Although sorcery is concerned with doing harm, some so-defined sorcerers have
powers that serve positive ends. Stephen (1987a:44) writes that in Mekeo “a sorcerer may
well spend far more of his time in healing than in doing harm.” In contrast, those serving as
priests in the southeast Solomons and Polynesia do not deal in harmful magic. They fill a
pre-determined role in the community, often inherited, and have regular ritual duties to
undertake. Effectively, their duties are to maintain communication with the ancestors and
ensure their blessings. In return, they may be accorded certain privileges. A shaman,
sometimes referred to as a spirit medium, usually fills a lesser role, underpinned by the
ability to fall into a trance, during which he may transmit answers from the spirits as to
certain queries, perhaps identifying the source of a wrong-doing. It should be noted
however that these roles are not clearcut. The ability to perform while in a trance is also
noted in people including the sorcerers in Mekeo and those serving as priests in Fiji and
Polynesia (see Stephens 1987a, Williams & Calvert 1859 and Williamson 1937 below).

    In western Oceanic communities there is little evidence of a specialised priestly role
such as is found in the southeast Solomons and Polynesia. Superior practice of magic
appears to lie in western Oceanic either with the headman or with specialist magicians like
the garden magician of Kilivila, who fills a role in the hierarchy second only to the chief,
with duties that also serve social and administrative ends (Malinowski 1935:66). In Wogeo,
for instance, the kokwal (hereditary clan headman) “has a far more extensive knowledge of
magic, including sorcery, than other people. … Apart from the kokwal there is little or no
specialisation.” His area of expertise is with matters that concern the whole village, such as
weather magic and for success in trading (Hogbin 1935a:319). In Mekeo there are, among
practitioners of harmful magic of all kinds, departmental experts who can summon stronger
spirits than non-specialists and are in command of more powerful medicines (Hau’ofa
1981:240). In Dobu, although ownership of incantations is tightly held by family lines,
reputation may be built upon demonstrated skill in a particular area (Fortune 1963:135).
Chowning (1973:65) writes that “it is true that Melanesia generally lacks full-time
specialists of any sort. On the other hand, part-time priests, often the heads of kin groups,
who make sacrifices to ancestral ghosts are not uncommon in eastern Melanesia.”
Presumably she is here including the southeast Solomons.

260 Meredith Osmond


    In the southeast Solomons are communities which include within their descent groups a
person who officiates at the offering of sacrifices to the gods. Wordlists typically gloss the
native term for such people as ‘priests’. In northern Malaita they are referred to as fata-abu
(‘speak sacred’) (Keesing 1982:11). In Kwaio each descent group has a ‘shrine-man’ (wane
naa baʔe) [baʔe ‘shrine’], ideally agnatically descended from the founding ancestors, who,
although not a full-time religious specialist, acts as the principal officiant in sacrifices to
ancestors (Keesing 1982:19, 87–91). Hogbin (1970a:106) writes that in To’aba’ita “each
cemetery has its own priest [aofia] who has to give his approval before any offering can be
made to the spirits of the persons buried there. The office is held by hereditary right, being
transmitted from father to son, but it is by no means a full-time job, and apart from his
special position at ceremonies the priest lives the life of an ordinary man.” Lau also has
aofia whose duties are to officiate at sacrifices (Fox 1974). In Sa’a, the priest (ora-ora)
officiates at the sacrifice of burnt offerings made to ancestors, and shares some of the
privileges due also to the priest, such as being exempt from the obligation to make a return
for gifts received. As in To’aba’ita and Kwaio, the position is hereditary (Ivens 1927:8,
242).

    Codrington (1891:127) writes of Vanuatu:

__blockquote__
     There is no priestly order, and no persons who can properly be called priests…. If the
     object of worship … is one common to the members of a community, the man who
     knows how to approach that object is in a way their priest and sacrifices or them all;
     but it is in respect of that particular function only that he has a sacred character.

   Although there is little information on the practice of magic in Micronesia, Linton
(1926:175, 176) notes that “in all the groups there were individuals who combined the
duties of priest and shaman, serving the gods, curing the sick and working magic. …
Throughout Micronesia offerings were made and rites performed at uncarved stones
believed to be the dwelling places of spirits.”

   Fijians had bete, men with special powers for communicating with the gods. Williams
(Williams & Calvert 1859:178) writes that they “exercise a powerful influence over the
people, an influence which the Chiefs employ for the strengthening of their own, by
securing the divine sanction for their plans.” The priesthood was generally, but not
invariably, hereditary, a vital part of a bete’s role being the ability to communicate the
wishes of the god he serves while in a trance. As Williams puts it (p178), he needed to
“shake well and speculate shrewdly.”

   Kirch & Green (2001:249) write that “the evidence is compelling that in ancestral
Polynesian societies the principal ritual leaders were simultaneously the main secular
leaders, the *qariki.” However, a separate functional class of priests indicated by PPn
*taaula, developed largely in hierarchically elaborated societies like those of Tonga, Samoa
and Hawaii.

   Williamson (1937:288) describes the religious function of the taaula

__blockquote__
     as being personally to organize and reinforce the religious beliefs and sentiments of
     the people. They were the holders of the ancient traditions, who were well versed in
     the impressive legends of the gods and creation. Ritual too was their province, and
     they directed ceremonial behavior along lines pleasing to the gods and spectacular to
      the worshippers, common participation in which served to keep alive religious
      sentiments. When inspired by the gods they manifested abnormal or unusual forms
      of behavior which provided visible evidence of their close communion with
      supernatural forces. … By making sacrifices and directing ritual they pleased the
      gods, and made them favourably inclined towards their worshippers; by prayer and
      intercession they sought for blessings or the aversion of evil.

                                                                Magic and the supernatural 261

<
PPn *taaula[-qatua] ‘priest, medium, shaman’ (POc *qatuan ‘deity, supernatural being’)
  Pn: Tongan         taula        ‘priest or priestess’
  Pn: Niuean         taula-atua   ‘shaman or priest of heathen times’
  Pn: Rennellese     tauga        ‘a medium, one possessed; a prophet’
  Pn: Pukapukan      taula-atua   ‘a person who can perform miracles or foresee the future’
  Pn: Samoan         taula(aitu)  ‘priest, only with reference to the old religion’ (Williamson 1967:407) (POc *qanitu ‘spirit of the dead)
  Pn: Rarotongan     taura-atua   ‘sorcerer, priest of the ancient gods’
  Pn: Tikopia        taura-atua   ‘traditional spirit medium’
  Pn: Maori          taaura       ‘priest who accompanies an army’
  Pn: Hawaiian       kaaula       ‘prophet, seer’
>

   Some Eastern Polynesian languages use reflexes of *tafuŋa, a variant form of PPn
*tufuŋa ‘expert, skilled craftsman’ to refer specifically to those with priestly duties.

__formgroup__
    Pn: Tahitian      tahuʔa       (1) ‘expert craftsman’; (2) ‘specialist in magic, primarily a spirit medium and curer’
    Pn: Tuamotuan     tahuuŋa      ‘expert; priest’
    Pn: Maori         tohuŋa       (1) ‘skilled person’; (2) ‘wizard, priest’
    Pn: Hawaiian      kahuna       ‘priest, minister, sorcerer, expert in any profession’


   In practice, most magic is performed by men, since nearly all the tasks for which it is
appropriate are those normally done by men. Women priests were not unknown in
Polynesia. However, the magical procedures of protection and healing are often more
highly individualised than those of production, and across the Oceanic world these may
often be performed by women.

8.3.1 Role of trance

The ability of some people to fall into a trance-like state as a means of accessing the spirit
world is reported from many communities. Ethnographers may refer to such practitioners
as shamans or spirit mediums. They may enter a state of disassociation or semi-
consciousness, usually ritually induced, as a form of self-hypnosis, perhaps preceded by
prolonged fasting. In this condition they are recognised as possessed by the god, and
believed capable of super-human powers. A person’s utterance is then thought to be the
direct voice of the ancestor or god.[2] Elsewhere, the role of shaman varies greatly.

[2] For an extreme example in Fiji, see Williams 1982:224.

262 Meredith Osmond


Sometimes a medical condition expressed by semi-consciousness or other abnormal
behaviour will be interpreted as due to the possession by spirits.

   Fortune (1935:9) summarises belief in Manus. “The Manus have the familiar concept of
… a certain kind of soul or vital essence in the living, … the concept that in trance or
swoon this soul or essence approaches the ghosts.”

   In Mekeo, it is the sorcerer himself who, like a shaman in some respects, communicates
with the spirits in visions, trance and dreams, although he avoids the more overt displays of
spirit possession often associated with the latter (Stephen 1987a:66–67).

   Keesing writes (1982:108) that although in Kwaio there is no culturally defined role for
a person with shamanistic powers, “the rare man with such psychic bent … is attributed
special sacredness in life.”

   Across Micronesia there are spirit mediums – individuals through whom the spirit of the
dead are able to speak to the living, while the living are, in turn, able to petition ancestral
spirits for information and assistance (Petersen 2009:195).

   Sahlins (1962:359) describes those he calls well-rounded shamans (dau ðaka wai) in
Moala Fijian “who not only cure, sorcerize and counter-sorcerize, but also find lost things
and foretell events.”

   In Fijian and parts of Polynesia, certain people identified by their ability to enter trance-
like states are known by terms reflecting Proto Central Pacific *waga (or PNPn *waka-
qatua):

<
PCP *waga ‘spirit medium’ (from POc *waga ‘canoe’?)
  Fij: Wayan           waga-waga       ‘spirit medium, person through whom a spirit speaks’
  Fij: Bauan           waga-waga       ‘the body assumed by a kalou-vū [ancestral spirit] for purposes of self-manifestations’
PPn *waka ‘medium or bodily abode of a god’
  Pn:  Tongan          vaka            ‘bodily abode of a supernatural being’
  Pn:  E Uvean         vaka            ‘spirit medium’
  Pn:  Maori           waka            ‘medium of an atua’
PNPn *|waka atua| ‘spirit medium’ (POc *qatuan ‘deity, supernatural being’)
  Pn:  Anutan          |vaka atua |    ‘spirit medium’
  Pn:  Rennellese      |baka ʔatua|    ‘representative of the gods’
  Pn:  Tikopia         |vaka atua |    ‘spirit medium’
>

   One role commonly employed by shamans is that of identifying the person or spirit
responsible for perceived harm. Some do it by divination, testing hypotheses by way of yes/
no questions, but there is little commonality in the methods recorded. Fortune (1963:154)
describes ways of divining in Dobu by water-gazing or crystal gazing, Chowning
(1987:165) describes a pole-in-house technique whereby answers are sought as to persons
responsible for deaths. In Manam, where serious illness is believed due to theft of the spirit
by sorcery, Wedgwood (1934-35:293) describes various ways to divine whether the patient
will live or die. Stephen (1987:56) mentions divination as another means for a Mekeo
sorcerer to communicate directly with the spirits. Hogbin describes a kind of diviner in
Longgu, the toʔiai, who possesses spells that enable him to conjure the dead man’s soul into
an areca nut. By means of various yes/no questions and the resulting movement of the areca
nut the guilty party is located (1964:58). In Kwaio, dried cordyline leaves called felo are
commonly used in divination (Keesing 1982:113). In Sa’a, various implements including
bows, spears and bonito rods may be utilised (Ivens 1927:345). Tonkinson (1981:82)
describes individuals in SE Ambrym known as lele who claim the ability to discern by
divination whether or not particular illnesses are sorcery-related. Williams (1858:228)
describes various methods of divination used in Fiji to decide between two options.

                                                                Magic and the supernatural 263


   Although the belief that certain people have the ability to intercede with the gods while
in a trance or other inexplicable state appears to be widespread, as is the practice of
divination, no reconstructions other than the above have been possible. Wordlists rarely
include terms such as ‘shaman’ or ‘spirit medium’ or ‘trance’ or ‘divination’.

8.3.2 Preparation for magic

There is widespread belief that magic will be strengthened or made effective if the
protagonist undergoes certain privations before he can carry out his activities. Similar
privations must be undertaken by anyone about to sacrifice to the gods. As summarised by
Eves (1998:58) in Madak, “all of the powerful forms of magic, and some minor forms,
require the magician to undergo a regime of fasting and sexual abstinence.” To illustrate,
we offer examples from three Western Oceanic subgroups, NNG (Wogeo); PT (Mekeo,
Roro); and MM (Tabar, Petats).

   In Wogeo, most men think it advisable to refrain from sexual intercourse and from
eating nuts for a full twenty-four hours if they are expecting to perform gardening or fishing
magic (Hogbin 1970b:181).

   An extreme form of preparation is practised by a sorcerer in Mekeo, who must be in a
constant state of ritual preparedness. Stephen (1987:62) points out that the inflicting of
serious illness, injury and death differs from other magic only in that the sorcerer deals with
more dangerous entities … and he must prepare himself more stringently for the task.

__blockquote__
     Sexual abstinence is the most important restriction and this may be necessary for
     only a few days, several weeks or many months. It is also essential not to immerse
     the body in cold water, wash in it or drink it. Hot water must be used for washing;
     and in the most rigorous forms of gope [the magical act] no washing at all is
     permitted. Only hot liquids may be drunk; and under rigorous gope one drinks as
     little as possible. … What little food is consumed must be taken with plenty of
     ginger or chilli to make it hot. This regime is said to render the adept’s body light and
     hot and dry.

    Seligman (1910:292) describes preparation for a wallaby hunt in Roro where “not only
is co-habitation forbidden to the expert, but he may not eat food cooked by his wife or any
other woman, he may not eat yams, nor the flesh of wallaby, nor pig, though he may eat the
flesh of the kangaroo-rat and drink the milk of unripe coconuts which have been more or
less roasted.”.

    In Tabar, a fishing net magician neither eats nor drinks during three days of rites before
initial use (Groves 1934a:449). In Petats, when bonito magic rites are performed, the
principal performer must neither eat nor sleep until the rites are over, and along with all
who take part in the bonito fishing, must abstain from sexual intercourse. (Blackwood
1935:480).

264 Meredith Osmond


   No examples have been located from Eastern Oceanic subgroups.


8.4 Sorcery

Sorcery here refers to magic used for harmful purposes. In its most extreme form,
sometimes referred to as black magic, it was used to cause a person’s death. Such
knowledge was almost never admitted to. It was the most secret of possessions. As
dangerous knowledge, it was essential that it be kept within the hands of a chosen few. It
was strongly discouraged by missionaries as incompatible with Christian beliefs. In British
New Guinea from the 1880’s on, there was also a very real fear of the results of government
interference, for sorcery became an indictable offence (Seligman 1910:278). It would seem
that in general it is desirable that those who profess knowledge of sorcery do not draw
attention to their powers, lest it leave them open to retaliation. Sorcery works best in a
climate of rumour and innuendo. Occasionally, however, as described by Seligman in Roro
(1910:279), “a sorcerer may … be regarded generally as real protection, for, besides being
able to thwart the acts of sorcerers of other villages, the latter will, it is supposed, refrain
from hostile magic in order not to provoke reprisals”, while Hogbin (1964:57) noted that
the Longgu of Guadalcanal attributed a knowledge of sorcery to most village headmen and
many elders, “to the extent that man’s identification as a sorcerer was a measure of his
social distinction.”

    Sorcerers may be the most powerful people in a community, their activities serving
purposes for both good and ill. Their legitimate role may lie in regulating social life, a form
of coersive social control. Hogbin (1935b:18) writes that in Wogeo, yabou (black magic)
helps to ensure that individual rights are respected and obligations carried out, and that the
chief men are obeyed. Disadvantages lie in that it occasionally leads to murders and tends
to increase local hostilities. Firth (1967:211) defines the reasons for sorcery from the
perspective of Tikopia as “mainly those of economics or of personal status: desire for land;
wish to punish for theft of food; jealousy of competitive achievement; resentment at a
personal affront.”

    Although there is widespread belief across communities (e.g. Roro [Seligman
1910:279], Mekeo [Stephen 1987b:252], Kove [Chowning 1987:157], Longgu [Hogbin
1964:58]) that except in the case of infants and very old folk and those killed in warfare,
death is the result of sorcery, much of sorcery consists of attack and counter-attack, without
resulting in death. Kin of sick individuals may approach those believed to have the power
to cause harm and offer them payment to remove their spell (Stephen 1987:43). A sufferer
may have a good idea of someone he or his close kin have offended, or know of those who
hold a grudge against him, and he may have a good idea of those with the ability to practise
sorcery and identify the likely sorcerer. Chowning notes (1989:224) that in Kove, if an
illness was drawn out, it was assumed that the sorcerer wanted to be bought off rather than
to kill the victim. There it was common practice to approach a number of known sorcerers
with offerings of shell money and to ask them to undo the spell.

    Much sorcery was carried out for personal or private reasons. In Dobu, it was used “for
collecting bad debts and enforcing social obligation, in vendetta to avenge one’s own
sickness or one kinsman’s death, to wipe out any serious insult” (Fortune 1963:175).
Chowning writes that in Kove sorcery threats were used to enforce many prohibitions, such
as those that prevented a woman from showing disrespect for the rituals of the men’s
houses, and they also made the younger men obey their elders. Chowning considers that it
was threats of sorcery rather than powerful spirits or gods that upheld general moral
standards in Kove (1989:225).

                                                            Magic and the supernatural 265


   Sometimes, as in the Trobriands (Malinowski 1922:75), Mekeo (Stephen 1987b:270)
and Kaoka/Longgu (Hogbin 1964), a sorcerer will reserve the right to heal by counteracting
sorcery imposed by another, although more often this is done by specialist healers. He may
also be prevailed upon to remove his own spell by means of payment by kin of the affected
person.

   While lesser illness may have been attributed to attack by spirits or to the breaking of a
taboo, severe illness was more likely to be considered due to sorcery involving theft of the
victim’s soul. As Stephen describes it, the soul journeys of the Mekeo sorcerer are the
means of not only ensnaring the souls of others but also of restoring them (p.270).

   As might be expected, no POc terms are reconstructable. A term for ‘sorcery’ and related
‘sorcerer’ is reconstructable for PPT.

<
PPT *baravu ‘sorcery’
PPT *(tau)baravu ‘sorcerer’
  PT: Dobu       barau                (N) ‘sorcery’; (VI, VT) ‘kill or afflict by sorcery’
  PT: Dobu       (to)barau            ‘sorcerer’ (on to- see vol.5, §2.2.1.2)
  PT: Molima     balawu               ‘sorcery’
  PT: Molima     (to)balawu           ‘sorcerer’
  PT: Wedau      baravu               (N) ‘sorcery’; (V) ‘to practise sorcery’ (Seligman 1910)
  PT: Gumawana   balau                ‘sorcery’
  PT: Motu       |ba-balau (tau-na)|  ‘sorcerer’ (for exp. †balahu)
  PT: Motu       |ba-balau (kara-na)| ‘sorcery’ (kara ‘conduct, customs’)
>

However, a search through available sources throws up the terms listed below. They all bear
some resemblance to PPT *baravu above. Assuming regular sound
correspondences, the PPT reconstruction suggests a POc †*ba(r,R)apu, but
none of the forms below exactly reflects this. Lou pʷalop comes close, but Lou -l- reflects
POc *-l-, not POc *-r- or *-R- (Blust 1998a). Intriguingly, the PT language Kilivila has
apparently replaced this same consonant with -g-. Similar issues affect the cognacy of the
other items below, yet the likelihood of chance resemblances of several trisyllables with
similar senses is close to zero. A plausible inference is that the word itself was considered to
have evil power and was distorted for that reason.

__formgroup__
  Adm: Lou             pʷalop         ‘sorcerer’s magic’
  NNG: Mapos Buang     paɾaʁək        ‘sorcery, black magic’
  PT:  Kilivila        bʷagau         ‘sorcery’
  PT:  Kilivila        (to)bu-bʷagau  ‘sorcerer’
  NCV: Lewo            pʷuruwap       ‘sorcerer’

cf. also:

__formgroup__
   NCV: Raga           barahuva        ‘salvation’

Raga barahuva appears under ‘cf. also’ because it is glossed ‘salvation’: is this a Christian
missionary re-use of an old word?

266 Meredith Osmond


   The following reconstruction is given a tentative gloss. It may be connected with the
PPT *baravu above.

<
PWOc *bara ‘poison, magic employed to affect another person’
 NNG: Arop-Lukep     bar           (N) ‘poison, magic; ancestral relic’
 NNG: Takia          bar           ‘incantation, blessing, religious ceremony, song’
 MM: Nehan           (uel)bara(ŋa) (N) ‘power; poison, magical power, love magic, seducing charm, war magic; hot as a pepper, strong’ (uel- RECIPROCAL, - ŋa NOMINALISER)
>

   Without further reflexes it is impossible to know if the following form, reconstructable
to PNGOc, relates only to black magic or to spells in general.

<
Proto New Guinea Oceanic *nabʷa ‘a spell’
  NNG: Manam   nabʷa          ‘spell usually resulting in rapid death’ (Wedgwood 1934-35)
  PT:  Dobu    nabʷa(sua) (N) ‘magic spell’; (V) ‘to utter magic spell’ (-sua ‘?’)
cf. also:
  Adm: Titan   nam            ‘sorcery, magic, spirits’
>

8.4.1 Sorcery using leavings

Examples from NNG, PT, MM and SES show consistency of belief regarding the methods
used by those wishing to inflict harm on another through use of leavings.

   In Manam, “when a man wishes to work dzere against an enemy, he takes something
which has been in close contact with the latter – it may be a piece of chewed areca nut,
some lime, a piece of clothing or some hair clippings” (Wedgwood 1934-35:71). In Dobu,
“personal leavings may be remains of food, excreta, footprints in sand, body dirt, or a bush
creeper with a malevolent charm first breathed into it which the sorcerer watched his victim
brush against and which he subsequently took to his house to treat further” (Fortune
1963:150). Eves writes (1998:63) that in Madak “personal leavings sorcery involves the
sorcerer manipulating the victim’s personal exuviae (excreta, hair, fingernails etc.) or items
which the victim has used or touched (such as a discarded areca nut shell or the soil from a
footprint).”

   In Sa’a,

__blockquote__
     the things used for magical charms to work harm with were skins of areca nuts
     which a person had eaten, cutting of hair or nails, excrement, spittle, earth on which
     the intended victim had trodden, the strip of coconut leaf with which he had rubbed
     himself down after bathing, fragments of his food, the afterbirth of children. In most
     cases the object was breathed upon in order to impart virtue to it. Certain things were
     considered as possessing in themselves the power to do harm, and an incantation
     was said over such charms. Lime, ginger and dracaena leaves were the most
     commonly used of these. (Ivens 1927:324)

                                                            Magic and the supernatural 267


8.5 Conclusion

Our efforts to identify the kind of magic practices performed in POc times are based on
descriptions from ethnographies. These show considerable resemblances, but the
terminology of magic is more diverse, making reliable reconstruction difficult. Where
communities carry out comparable rituals they do so either because they are continuing the
practice of their forebears, or because the practices are borrowed or because they have been
independently innovated. Borrowings in matters magical could be presumed minimal in
view of the secrecy surrounding them in practice, at least prior to western contact. But
when such beliefs as that in which a curer could travel in dreams to recover the soul of an ill
person are identified across subgroups, and are unrelated to any comparable Christian
belief, then evidence favours the conclusion that this was the practice of their forebears.

    Furthermore, over time and place, the very belief system can undergo reinterpretation,
with communities modifying beliefs in such things as the role of the ancestors and the
purpose of traditional rituals. As an example of the former, Hogbin (1935a:330) writes that
in Wogeo the people believed that the ancestors were barely involved there in daily life.
“The spirits of the dead are able to cause the death of small infants, but otherwise they are
completely powerless. It follows from this that as reciprocity is the keynote of native life,
sacrifices are held to be entirely superfluous and are never in fact carried out.” As an
example of the latter we can look to the tendency in places for offerings to be seen no
longer as primarily to the ancestors, but rather to the aggrandisement of the occasion, as in
Mekeo (Hau’ofa 1981:71) or to the giver, as in To’aba’ita (Hogbin 1970a:105). But when
offerings are made to the magician or priest, apparently as thanks for their intervention, we
still find that as in the Trobriands (§8.2.4), in Micronesia and in Moala Fiji (§8.2.4.1), some
part is set aside as a form of homage to the ancestors.

    Nonetheless, the practice of magic has many similarities across the Oceanic world. The
following apply consistently across subgroups and are thought likely to accord with the
practice of POc society.

__block__
    •   Magic was effected by invoking the ancestors/gods or spirits through spells
        consisting of learned words and actions.
    •   Spells were believed to originate with ancestors and were passed down with care.
    •   Certain materials including ginger, lime, and leaves of various plants were
        accorded special powers in the performance of magic ritual.
    •   The efficacy of the magic was dependent on accurate performance of the ritual.
    •   Offerings typically in the form of garden produce or fish were made to the
        ancestors/gods both as a form of obeisance at propitious times including before
        important events, and as atonement for perceived offences.
    •   Offerings of first fruits were made to the ancestors at harvest time before people
        could partake.
    •   There were no people who specialised in serving the gods in POc times. People with
        recognised expertise in particular fields could be called on as required.
    •   Misfortune and death were, with some exceptions, believed to be the result of human
        activity resulting in ancestral displeasure.
    •   Severe illness was thought due to theft of the sufferer’s soul by sorcery.
   •   Sorcerers were able to make decisions of life or death over perceived offenders.
   •   Personal leavings such as hair, fingernail clippings, or items used or touched by
       intended victim were dangerous weapons in the hands of people wishing to do
       someone harm.

268 Meredith Osmond




9               Mana

9.1 Introduction[1]

Attempts to trace the etymology of the Oceanic concept of mana have been undertaken by
various linguists and anthropologists since Capell (1938–39) including Blust (2007) and
Blevins (2008). A Proto Eastern Oceanic reconstruction *mana (VSt) ‘to have supernatural
power from ancestral spirits as manifest in successful outcomes; be efficacious’; (N) ‘efficacy,
success’, is well supported, but to raise it to POc we need either cognates from Oceanic
languages outside the Eastern Oceanic subgroup[2] or from Austronesian languages external to
Oceanic. A few questionable cognates in the MM and PT linkages of Western Oceanic have
either markedly different meanings or are in languages where the possibility of borrowing is
high. Both Blust and Blevins propose POc reconstructions, in each case attributing a
divergent meaning to the POc etymon, but both sets of evidence are problematic. I will begin
by reviewing the evidence for a PEOc reconstruction, before discussing possible WOc
cognates. Blust’s argument for a POc origin that includes power from natural events
including wind and thunder will be considered, followed by that of Blevins who, like Capell,
looks for an origin outside Oceanic.


9.2 The *mana concept in Proto Eastern Oceanic


[1] Particular thanks are due to Jennifer Blythe for advice on the concept of manaka in the French Islands,
    where Bali and Vitu are spoken.

[2] The subgroup status of Eastern Oceanic is unclear. It is defined only by lexical innovations, leaving the
    possibility that POc is the direct ancestor of the EOc languages, rather than a putative PEOc.
    Nonetheless, for reasons given in §1.4.4.2, the authors of The Lexicon of Proto Oceanic have chosen to
    treat EOc as a primary subgroup of Oceanic for the purposes of reconstruction. Because of its uncertain
    status, it is not shown in the Oceanic tree diagram in Figure1.1. It includes SE Solomonic, Southern
    Oceanic, Micronesia and Central Pacific. Non-EOc data in this chapter are all from Western Oceanic.

270 Meredith Osmond

Perhaps the first person to bring the concept of mana to anthropological discourse was Robert
Codrington, a missionary-anthropologist whose 1891 book, _The Melanesians_, was based on
his fieldwork in the southeast Solomons and the Banks Islands of northern Vanuatu[3]. He
described the concept as

__blockquote__
      a supernatural power or influence, called almost universally _mana_. This is what works
      to effect everything which is beyond the ordinary power of men, outside the common
      processes of nature; it is present in the atmosphere of life, attaches itself to persons and
      things, and is manifested by results which can only be ascribed to its operation.
      (Codrington 1891:118)

    The concept was recognised early as of particular importance in Fiji and Polynesia, where
hereditary chiefs were believed to derive much of their power and status from possession of
mana (Firth 1940:488, Sahlins 1962:319). Robert Williamson, a social anthropologist with a
particular interest in the religious beliefs and social organisation of Polynesians, argued
(1937:110) that from a broad Polynesian perspective its primary meaning seems to have been
‘effective’, with the general implication that the efficacy so imputed went beyond that
encountered in everyday life. His view was accepted by Capell (1938–39) who was, however,
more concerned by the word’s etymology than its exact meaning.

    Firth, writing of the belief as understood in Tikopia, agreed with Williamson:

__blockquote__
      A possible translation of manu[4] or mana in Tikopia would … appear to be ‘success’ or
      ‘successful’, which can embody reference both to the ability of man and to tangible
      results. …. Another possible translation of manu is ‘efficacy’ or ‘to be efficacious’.
      Here the emphasis again is on the fact that the activity works, that it performs the
      function for which it was intended. But since the efficacy is believed to be only partly
      due to human endeavour, any translation must also by implication embody a reference
      to the extra-human causes of the result. (1940:506)

He also noted (p.497–8) that “to the Tikopia, manu, I am sure has not the connotation of an
isolatable principle, a power, or any other metaphysical abstraction – though it may be
conceived of as a specific quality.”

    Ian Hogbin, who did fieldwork in several different societies of Melanesia, recognised the
concept represented in metathesised form in To’aba’ita in the southeast Solomons. He wrote
(1936:245) “to have nanama means to be successful through the favour of the spirits”, and
added later (p.257), “Magic is not supposed to achieve its end directly. It coerces the spirits to
do the work by means of their nanama.”

    In 1984, Roger Keesing, an anthropologist whose fieldwork was with the Kwaio of the
southeast Solomons, published a substantial critique of the previous literature on mana.
Believing that the concept was probably traceable back to POc, but concerned with its
interpretation rather than its etymology, he described mana as “a condition, not a ‘thing’, a
state inferred retrospectively from the outcome of events” (1984:137). He considered that the
concept he was familiar with was primarily verbal rather than the nominal form more
common in Polynesia.

[3] Blust (2007:406) notes that Friedrich Max Müller, an Oxford Indologist, had earlier raised in print some
    discussion with Codrington on the concept of mana.

[4] Although Firth came to the conclusion that mana and manu were interchangeable in Tikopian usage,
    manu is a separate lexeme, strictly manū, deriving from PEOc *manuRu ‘lucky, abundant’(Geraghty
    1990).

                                                                                       Mana 271

__blockquote__
     Mana is … in Oceanic languages canonically a stative verb, not a noun: things and
     human enterprises and efforts are mana. Mana is used as a transitive verb as well:
     ancestors and gods mana-ize people and their efforts. Where mana is used as a noun, it
     is (usually) not as a substantive but as an abstract verbal-noun denoting the state or
     quality of mana-ness (of a thing or act) or being-mana (of a person). Things that are
     mana are efficacious, potent, successful, true, fulfilled, realized; they “work”. Mana-
     ness is a state of efficacy, success, truth, potency, blessing, luck, realization—an
     abstract state or quality, not an invisible spiritual substance or medium. (1984:138)

There is broad agreement that mana as identified in the southeast Solomons, northern
Vanuatu, Micronesia, Fiji and Polynesia has a common core of meaning to do with
effectiveness in results and power beyond the ordinary power of men and is well supported
both as a stative verb and noun for Proto Eastern Oceanic.


9.2.1 The reconstruction

Cognate sources are given when they are other than the regular dictionary sources as listed in
Appendix A, or when these are contrasted with a second source.

<
PEOc *mana (vst) ‘to have supernatural power from ancestral spirits as manifest in successful outcomes; be efficacious’; (N) ‘efficacy, success’
  SES: Bugotu      mana           (N) ‘spiritual or magical power’
  SES: Bugotu      mana-ŋi        (VT) ‘to empower’
  SES: Gela        mana           (V) ‘be efficacious from spiritual power obtained from charms, prayers, intercourse with ancestors or spirits’; (N) ‘efficacy, success, power, authority’
  SES: Gela        mana-ŋi        (VT) ‘to make successful, efficient; empower, authorise; rule over’
  SES: Ghari       mana           ‘truth, true, correct’
  SES: Ghari       mana-lia       (V) ‘powerful, efficacious’
  SES: Lengo       mana           (N) ‘power’
  SES: Longgu      nanama         (V) ‘be successful through the favour of the spirits’ (Hogbin 1936:245) (metathesis)
  SES: Longgu      ma-manā        (N) ‘supernatural power possessed by spirits’ (a successful man either has ma manā or to be ma manā) (Hogbin 1936:259)
  SES: Lau         ma-mana        (V) ‘be efficacious (of medicine), grow well (of trees), spiritually or magically powerful; prosperous, lucky, in good health; be true, fulfilled; impart spiritual or magical power; of ghost, empower a person’
  SES: Lau         ma-mana-a      (N) ‘spiritual or magical power’
  SES: To’aba’ita  ma-mana        (V) ‘be real, true; be efficacious, effective’ (Lichtenberk); (N) ‘blessing, prosperity; ancestrally conferred power’; (V) ‘impart spiritual or magical power’ (Hogbin 1936:259)
  SES: To’aba’ita  ma-mana-a      (N) ‘ancestrally conferred power’
  SES: Kwaio       na-nama        (V) ‘be effective, fulfilled, confirmed, realised; “work”; of ancestor, support, protect, empower’ (Keesing 1984) (metathesis)
  SES: Kwaio       nanama-ŋā      (N) ‘protection, efficacy, good luck, blessing, realisation’
  SES: Sa’a        na-nama        (V) ‘be powerful, exercise force’ (in material rather than metaphysical sense; contrast saka ‘spiritual power’; metathesis) (Ivens 1927:186)
  SES: Sa’a        na-nama-ŋa     (N) ‘power’
  SES: Ulawa       mana           ‘ending in invocations, meaning unknown’ (Ivens 1927)
  SES: Ulawa       na-nama        (V) ‘spiritually powerful’ (metathesis)
  SES: ’Are’are    na-nāma        (V) ‘be strong, powerful in metaphysical sense’; (N) ‘s.t. extraordinary, effected by a spiritual power’ (metathesis)
  SES: Arosi       mena~mana      (N) ‘spiritual power in adaro [ghost or spirit] etc.’
Proto Torres-Banks *mana ‘supernatural power held by a person or thing; magic force’ (François 2013:237)
  NCV: Mota        mana           (V) ‘to have invisible spiritual force or influence’; (N) ‘an invisible spiritual force or influence’ (Codrington & Palmer 1896)
  NCV: Mota        manə           (N) ‘supernatural power held by a person or thing; magic force’ (François 2013)
  NCV: Nokuku      me-mana        ‘miracle, miraculous’
  NCV: Lombaha     mana-gi        ‘miracle’
  NCV: Vao         man            ‘magic’
PMic *mana, *mana-mana (V) ‘be efficacious, have supernatural power’; (N) ‘efficacy, supernatural power’ (Bender et. al. 2003a)
  Mic: Marshallese man-man        (V) ‘haunted, having supernatural powers, taboo’
  Mic: Chuukese    mana           (vi) ‘have divine, magical or supernatural power’
  Mic: Puluwatese  mana-man       (N) ‘divine, supernatural or miraculous power’; (V) ‘to have such’
  Mic: Satawalese  mala-man       (V) ‘be efficacious, have supernatural power’; (N) ‘efficacy, supernatural power’
  Mic: Mokilese    man-man        (vi) ‘spiritually powerful, able to do magic without artifice’; (N) ‘magic, spiritual power’
  Mic: Ponapean    mana-man       (V) ‘magical, mysterious, spiritual’; (N) ‘spiritual power’
  Mic: Woleaian    ke-maẓ         (N) ‘miracle, power’; (V) ‘be powerful as a ghost’
  Mic: Carolinian  leme-lem       (V) ‘to be in authority, have power or control’
  Fij: Rotuman     mana           (V) ‘supernatural, miraculous, possessed of or manifesting supernatural power or extraordinary efficacy’
  Fij: Bauan       mana           (N) ‘supernatural power, a sign, a token, omen’; (ADJ) ‘possessing suspernatural qualities’ (Capell 1941)
  Fij: Bauan       mana           (VSt) ‘be effectual; efficient, as a remedy; wonder working’; (V) ‘a word used when addressing a heathen deity: so be it, let it be so’; (N) ‘a sign or omen; a wonder or miracle’ (Hazlewood 1850)
  Fij: Wayan       mana           (V) ‘(of a person) be able to make things happen, be effective, have creative power, (of events which are predicted, wished or worked for) come true, happen, be realised’; (N) ‘power to make things happen, creative power; the act of coming true’
  Fij: Wayan       mana-mana      (V) ‘be wishful, desire or want s.t. to happen that one has worked for’ (Pawley & Sayaba 2022)
PPn *mana (N) ‘supernatural power, effectiveness, prestige’; (V) ‘be efficacious’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Niuean      mana           (V) ‘powerful’; (N) ‘power, authority; miracle, magic (of supernatural phenomena)’
  Pn:  Tongan      mana           (vi) ‘supernatural, superhuman, miraculous; attended or accompanied by supernatural happenings’
  Pn:  Tongan      mana           (N) ‘miracle; supernatural power or influence’
  Pn:  Pukapukan   mana           (N) ‘power, right, influence, authority of an individual’
  Pn:  Pukapukan   mana-mana      ‘magic, magical’
  Pn:  Samoan      mana           (N) ‘supernatural power’ (Milner 1966)
  Pn:  Samoan      mana           (N) ‘supernatural power’; (V) ‘to exert supernatural power’ (Pratt 1911)
  Pn:  Samoan      ma-mana        ‘be powerful, compelling’ (Milner); ‘to do wonders, supernatural power’ (Pratt)
  Pn:  Nukuoro     mana           (N) ‘supernatural power’
  Pn:  Tikopia     mana           (V) ‘efficacious’; (N) ‘power of extraordinary non-physical quality, trad. believed derived from gods and ancestors (essentially pragmatic in being demonstrated only by concrete results); while trad. associated with chiefs, can be attributed to other persons, esp. when of rank as indicated by special powers e.g. in healing or predication’
  Pn:  Rarotongan  mana           (V) ‘having authority and the rights and prestige it confers, effectual, binding’
  Pn:  Tahitian    mana           (N) ‘power, might, influence’
  Pn:  Maori       mana           (N) ‘authority, control; power, supernatural force’; (V) ‘be effectual, take effect’ (Williams 1975); ‘potent, effective, fulfilled’ (Gudgeon 1885)
  Pn:  Hawaiian mana              (N) ‘supernatural or divine power’
>

272 Meredith Osmond

                                                                                   Mana 273


9.3 Looking for corresponding terms in northwest Melanesia

The number of cognates from Polynesia, Fiji, Micronesia and parts of the Solomons with
consistency of meaning point to a significant and widespread cultural concept. It was
consequently difficult for ethnographers to believe that it was not part of some earlier belief
system. But, oddly, the concept itself did not seem to be a part of the underlying belief in
magic or supernatural power held in societies speaking languages from northwest Melanesia.
Success in magic in these communities is believed to come from the correct performance of a
spell and associated ritual (see §8.2.1), and does not depend on the intervention of some other
quality. Early ethnographers searched in vain for the Eastern Oceanic concept in Western
Oceanic. As early as 1910, Seligman observed of the southern Massim region of southeast
New Guinea that:

274 Meredith Osmond

__blockquote__
      Neither at Wagawaga, Tubetube nor elsewhere in the district does there seem to be any
      development of that system of personal influence (mana) taboo whereby the thing
      made taboo receives, as it were, a dynamic charge from contact with an
      individual,which is dangerous to everyone not rendered immune by the possession of
      an equal or greater power. (1910:576)

Hogbin (1936:268), after dealing at some length with the concept in Longgu and To’aba’ita,
pointed out that no such notion could be identified at Wogeo (NNG) or the Polynesian outlier
of Ontong Java [Luangiua]. Rather, in both of these societies, magic appeared alone to do
many of the functions that mana served elsewhere. He expressed the same idea in Hogbin
(1970:171), when he contrasted beliefs held in Wogeo, where people use magic directly to
achieve effect, with those in the Solomons and places further east where people achieve
results second hand through application of a special power, mana.

    Malinowski, who worked in S.E. Papua, chiefly the Trobriands, i.e. places where the
concept did not exist, agreed with Hogbin, noting that Codrington’s assumption that what the
latter described was applicable to the whole of Melanesia could no longer be supported. He
described Codrington’s description of mana as

__blockquote__
      almost the exact opposite of the magical virtue as found embodied in the mythology of
      savages. … If the virtue of magic is exclusively localised in man, can be wielded by
      him only under very special conditions and in a traditionally prescribed manner, it
      certainly is not a force as described by Dr Codrington … The real virtue of magic5 as I
      know it from Melanesia is fixed only in the spell and its rite, and cannot be ‘conveyed
      in’ anything but can be conveyed only by its strictly defined procedure. (Malinowski
      1948:57)

9.3.1 Tubetube namwa-namwa

After searching widely for cognates in northwest Melanesia, Keesing wrote (1984:147) “I
have found only one probable mana cognate among Oceanic languages west of the
Solomons”, namely Tubetube namwa-namwa in the Papuan Tip. Notwithstanding Seligman’s
evidence that there is no evidence of mana [in its EOc sense] at Tubetube, Keesing reported
the following personal communication from Martha Macintyre: “A Tubetube folk healer [told
Macintyre]: “namwanamwa ne nima-gu (my hands are mana).” Keesing was aware, almost
at the same time, of a parallel example from an ethnographer in the Lau islands of Fiji, where
a folk healer is quoted as saying “sa mana liga-qu” (my hands are mana).

    To Keesing, this was incontrovertable evidence that the two concepts were identical,
providing the necessary evidence for a POc reconstruction parallel to that for PEOc. The
highly detailed Tubetube gloss produced on the basis of these examples – ‘be efficacious,
work, be good, be true, have positive qualities, fulfil potential (that is, of an animate or
inanimate entity, to manifest qualities appropriate to one’s nature)’ – presumably comes from
Keesing himself, acutely aware of the detailed meanings of mana terms in the SE Solomons.

[5] Although a number of reflexes of PEOc *mana include ‘magic’ in their glosses, I believe wordlist
    compilers are using the term in its western sense to apply to anything that cannot be otherwise
    explained. The Melanesian sense of ‘magic’ is far more specific.

                                                                                   Mana 275


    However, the regular translation of namʷa-namʷa in Tubetube is ‘good’ (Lithgow 1987).
Why Martha Macintyre chose to translate namʷa-namʷa as ‘mana’ is unknown. Furthermore,
although metathesised and partly-reduplicated examples of mana are accepted as cognate in a
number of SE Solomonic languages (nanama in Longgu, Kwaio and Sa’a, mamana in Lau
and To’aba’ita), the Tubetube term has mʷ rather than expected m, so the correspondence with
EOc mana is doubly irregular. On these grounds namʷa-namʷa cannot be accepted as cognate
with the reflexes of PEOc *mana. The Tubetube term is cognate with other Central Papuan
terms reflecting Proto Central Papuan *namwa ‘good’.

9.3.2 Possible cognates from the Northwest Solomons

A small cluster of languages in north Bougainville, Halia, Teop and nearby Nehan, have
apparent reflexes of PEOc *mana meaning ‘true’ or ‘truth’, a concept that is included among
the wider meanings of mana terms in the SE Solomons and Wayan Fijian. It is a logical
loosening of meaning from ‘become true, be realised’, as in Wayan and other languages. In
effect, mana in these three languages denotes an inherent quality, rather than a quality
validated only by results. This could mean either a) that north Bougainville languages
originally had the result-dependent term but loosened its meaning, b) that they borrowed just
one element of its meaning from SES languages, or c) that the terms are unrelated.

__formgroup__
  MM: Nehan        mana       ‘true’
  MM: Halia        mana       ‘true’
  MM: Teop         mana       ‘truth’
  SES: Ghari       mana       ‘truth, true, correct’
  SES: To’aba’ita  ma-mana    ‘be real, true; be efficacious, effective’
  SES: Lau         ma-mana    ‘be efficacious (of medicine), grow well (of trees), spiritually or magically powerful; prosperous, lucky, in good health; be true, fulfilled; impart spiritual or magical power; of ghost, empower a person’
  Fij: Wayan       mana       ‘(of a person) be able to make things happen, be effective, have creative power; (of events which are predicted, wished or worked for) come true, happen be realised’; (N) ‘power to make things happen, creative power, the act of coming true’

   In the sense of ‘becoming true’ mana may be linked to its use in invocations to the gods as
noted in the closely related languages of Simbo and Roviana, in parts of the SE Solomons,
and in Fiji. Waterhouse (1949:150) writes that in Roviana mana tu is used in invocation, as
when placing offerings for tomate [those to whom sacrifice is made]. In Ulawa mana i eu dili
appears in a variety of invocations (translation not given) (Ivens 1927:330, 331, 338, 339).
Hogbin (1936:261–3) writes that in To’aba’ita, sacrifices ensure the continuance of
mamanaa. He quotes a spell that ends with Oke mama-mamana which he translates as
“Make this magic effective through the operation of your mamanaa.” He adds that it “is a
sort of tag used regularly as a conclusion.” Hocart (1914:98), who worked in Fiji early in the
century after doing research in Simbo, was struck by similar invocatory usage (‘let it be so!’)
in Simbo/Roviana and Fiji,

   He wrote:
                                             275
276 Meredith Osmond

__blockquote__
      Fijians [like Simboese] … do not distinguish ‘true’ and ‘right’. Says one informant: “if
      it is true (ndina) it is mana: if it is not true, it is not mana. … A Fijian medicine does
      mana if it works; it does not mana if it does not work”. In fact, the words are almost
      interchangeable, and natives will speak of a sacred stone as mana or ndina (‘true’). …
      In winding up a prayer the words mana and ndina are always coupled: “mana ee i
      ndina” (“let it be mana, let it be true”) is the Fijian ‘Amen’.

Blust suggests (2007:409) that the reference that mana refers to something true or coming to
pass in both Fiji and the Solomons “may be a post-Christian usage that derives from the
characteristics of scriptural translation, where the fulfillment of prophesies was described as
an expression of divine mana”. However, its inclusion in the performance of sacrifices in
Roviana and To’aba’ita, in untranslated exhortations from Ulawa and in Hazlewood’s 1850
Fijian dictionary where mana as a verb is described as “a word used when addressing a
heathen deity: so be it, let it be so”, point to an early pre-Christian usage.

    A cluster of terms from languages including Simbo/Roviana spoken in Choiseul/New
Georgia in the north-west Solomons show further promise as reflexes. For comparison we
add geographically close SES terms:

__formgroup__
    MM: Varisi         mana            ‘power, good fortune, success’
    MM: Nduke          mana            ‘be propitious, potent, effectual’
    MM: Roviana        mana            ‘potent, effectual; used in invocation’
    MM: Simbo          mana            ‘powerful, potent, effective, gracious, true, power’
    MM: Simbo          mana-tu         ‘invocation: make it mana!’
    SES: Gela          mana            ‘be efficacious from spiritual power obtained from charms, prayers, intercourse with ancestors or spirits’
    SES: Bugotu        mana            ‘spiritual or magical power’

    However, Blust (2007:412) warns:

__blockquote__
      Given the evidence of rather extensive lexical borrowing across major genetic
      boundaries, the distribution of mana reflexes within the central and western Solomons
      must be treated with caution. … Where such evidence is found in the western
      Solomons, it is unclear whether the form-meaning association is native or whether it
      was acquired by diffusion from Guadalcanal-Nggelic languages in the central
      Solomons.

   Although it is possible that these northwest Solomonic terms are valid reflexes rather than
borrowings, stronger support than these is needed to permit a POc reconstruction.


9.4 Evidence from Blust (2007)

In his quest for a POc reconstruction for mana, Blust dismisses the evidence from various
Indonesian languages offered by Capell (1938–9) in support of a putative PMP origin for the
term.[6] Instead, he draws on the existence of a network of examples world-wide “in which
cultural traditions that initially may appear to be arbitrary creations of the human mind turn
out on closer inspection to be inspired by the natural world” (2007:416). He attempts to draw
together the separate concepts of mana ‘wind’ in Papuan Tip languages and mana ‘thunder’
in languages of North/Central Vanuatu and Polynesia by proposing an etymon, POc *mana
‘power in natural phenomena’ that later came to mean ‘wind’ in the west and ‘thunder’ in the
east.

[6] Blust (2007:407) writes that “Not only are these words etymologically heterogeneous, some of them do
    not even exist.”

                                                                                          Mana 277



9.4.1 mana ‘thunder’

Blust relies on wordlists from Tryon (1976:330) as evidence that POc *mana is reflected in
various Torres-Banks terms meaning ‘thunder’. More recently, François (2013:237) has
offered a different set of terms as evidence for Proto Torres-Banks *mana ‘supernatural
power held by a person or thing; magic force’. The terms listed by Tryon, we suggest, support
PT-B *mwonu rather than *mana with the meaning ‘thunder’. Below are listed the ‘mana’
reflexes from François contrasted with terms for thunder from the same languages given by
Tryon. François regards them as distinct and unrelated terms.

__table__
                  thunder              mana
                  (Tryon 1976)         (François 2013)
    PT-B          *mwonu               *mana
    Hiw           mon                  manə
    Lo Toga       mon-lal              menə
    Lehali        mon-beibai           n-man
    Mosina        mwon                 man
    Mota          manu                 mana

In dismissing evidence that thunder is identified with mana ‘supernatural power’ in NCV
languages, we are left with Polynesian terms as the only evidence of a possible connection
between the two concepts.

   Mana has the meaning ‘thunder’ in a number of Polynesian languages, while another
partly overlapping group includes mana with meaning ‘supernatural power’ or similar. Three
languages, Tongan, Nanumean and Tikopia, belong to both groups. Their distribution in the
two primary subgroups of Polynesian permits attribution of both meanings to PPn *mana.

<
PPn *mana (N, V) ‘thunder’; (N) ‘supernatural power, effectiveness, prestige’; (V) ‘be efficacious’
  Pn: Tongan      mana       (1) ‘to thunder’; (2) ‘supernatural power or influence’
  Pn: E Futunan   mana       ‘thunder’
  Pn: Nanumea     mana       (1) ‘thunder’; (2) ‘magical power’ (of person, potion etc.)
  Pn: Rennellese  mana       ‘to thunder (poetic)’
  Pn: Anuta       mana       ‘thunder’
  Pn: Tikopia     mana [7]   (1) ‘thunder’; (2) ‘efficacious’ (Firth 1940); (2.1) ‘power of extraordinary non-physical quality’; (2.2) ‘thunder trad. believed to be produced by gods as sign of power’ (Firth 1985)
  Pn: Pukapukan   mana       ‘thunder’
  Pn: Tuvalu      mana       ‘thunder’
  Pn: Takuu       mana       (1) ‘continental thunder’; (2) ‘thunder and lightening occurring simultaneously’
  Pn: Sikaiana    mana        ‘thunder’
>

[7] Although Tikopia has mana for ‘thunder’ and both mana and manu used interchangeably when referring
    to invisible force (Firth 1940:444), manu is a separate lexeme (see footnote 4).

278 Meredith Osmond


As both meanings are attributable to the same PPn form, either the two concepts are related
or they are homophones. Blust believes the former, i.e. that it is part of the human condition
that people readily conceive of powerful forces of nature as carrying within them some
unseen supernatural agency and that thunder here is basically a representation of supernatural
power.

   He looked further afield in search of mana cognates that are associated with powerful
forces of nature, and found possible candidates in terms for wind in languages of the Papuan
Tip.

9.4.2 mana ‘wind’

    In a number of Papuan Tip languages including Dobu, Tubetube, Saliba and Misima,
mana means ‘wind’. In attempting to strengthen the suggestion that wind might also be seen
as an example of power in natural phenomena, Blust sought evidence that a number of mana
terms in Papuan Tip languages referred particularly to powerful winds (pp415–6). He
includes a reference from Jenness and Ballantyne (1928) that Bwaidoga mala ‘wind, weather,
time of day’ often carries with it the notion of a supernatural force that manifests itself in the
weather. However, Bwaidoga mala does not reflect PPT *mana. Along with Kukuya mana
‘time, weather’ and Tawala mala ‘time’, it reflects PPT *ma(r,R)a ‘time, weather’.8

    Blust also suggested a similar connection between mana and powerful wind in Micronesia
by proposing Satawalese mana-man ‘typhoon’ as cognate with mana. But the Satawalese
term is a reflex of POc *mal(i,e)u ‘wind’9 (vol.2:124). The Satawalese reflex of PMic *mana-
mana ‘be efficacious, have spiritual power’ is mala-man (Bender et al. 2003a). Moreover, we
already have in POc *paRiu ‘cyclone’ and possibly also POc *jaŋi ‘strong wind’ (vol.2:123, 124) wind
terms more suggestive of power. Without these examples there is no evidence that mana is associated
with winds of greater consequence and thus an appropriate representation of supernatural power.


9.5 Evidence from Blevins (2008)

Blevins (2008) follows Capell (1938–39) and Blust (2007) in seeking to uncover the
etymology of mana terms meaning ‘potent, effectual, of supernatural power’ in Eastern
Oceanic. She accepts the general arguments presented in Blust (2007) and adds previously
unrecognised reflexes from New Caledonia and more questionable ones from Southern
Vanuatu while not lessening support for PEOc *mana in its canonic sense.

[8] In email correspondence (11 April 2019), Blust accepted that Bwaidoga mala is not cognate, and that as
    a result there is no clear evidence for a WOc cognate to which he could attribute meaning of a powerful
    force in nature.

[9] Other Micronesian reflexes of POc *mal(i,e)u ‘wind’ include Mokilese mɛl-mɛl ‘storm, typhoon’,
    Ponapean mɛli-mɛl ‘windstorm, typhoon', Woleaian marɨ-mer ‘storm, typhoon’.

                                                                                                Mana 279

__formgroup__
     SV:   Lenakel     e-mna(it)      ‘divine cause of an illness through a dream’ (-it ‘directional suffix indicating movement upwards)
     SV:   Lenakel     ie-mna(it)     ‘diviner, sorcerer who divines cause of illness through dreams’
     SV:   Kwamera     aməna          ‘work, produce, enlarge, improve’
     NCal: Iaai        mæn            ‘powerful, power, strength’
     NCal: Iaai        |mæniñ aŋ|     ‘power of the wind’ (aŋ ‘wind’)
     NCal: Xârâcùù     mā             ‘recognised, famed, acclaimed for ability or force of character’ (Grace 1976)

   A number of comparisons Blevins makes with terms from Western Oceanic are, however,
problematic. Madak manman ‘wind’ can be rejected as cognate; it is a reflex of POc
*mal(i,e)u ‘wind’ (vol.2:124). Ramoaaina mamane ‘lightning’ is questionable in both form
and meaning. A small cluster of north Bougainville terms, Halia namname ‘human spirit,
soul, shadow’, Haku name-name ‘spirit, soul’ and Petats nam-name ‘soul’ appear
semantically too distant to be linked. For our unease about Tubetube namwa-namwa see
§9.3.1.

   Blevins considers that the strongest arguments for the existence of a POc ancestor to the
Eastern Oceanic mana terms lie in locating possible cognates in Austronesian languages
external to Oceania. She identifies a link between a possible cognate in a Celebic language of
the Kaili-Pamona group, Bare’e mana, and those in three Southeast Solomonic languages,
Gela, To’aba’ita and Kwaio, where glosses share a reference to ancestrally conferred power.
As a result she revises and expands the ACD’s entry of Proto Western Malayo-Polynesian
*mana ‘inherit, inheritance’ to PWMP *mana(q)10 ‘inherit(ance) from ancestors’ (p262).
However, of the fourteen possible WMP reflexes Blevins lists, only Bare’e mana
‘inheritance, heritage; inherited position or rank, quality of spirit or body that one has from
one’s forebears’, includes spiritual qualities as inheritable. The other WMP terms, if the
sources go beyond a minimal gloss of ‘inheritance’ to spell out what is included, refer to
property, wealth, heirlooms.

   For comparison, the glosses quoted by Blevins for the three Southeast Solomonic
languages are given here. They are from Fox (1955) for Gela and as quoted by Keesing
(1984:141) for the other two. It is noteworthy that neither corresponding entries in
Lichtenberk’s To’aba’ita dictionary (2008a) and Keesing’s Kwaio dictionary (1975) mention
ancestrally conferred power.

__formgroup__
     SES: Gela        mana        (V) ‘be efficacious from spiritual power obtained from charms, prayers, intercourse with ancestors or spirits’
     SES: To’aba’ita  ma-mana     ‘be true, real, fulfilled; be successful (of a man); impart spiritual or magical power’
     SES: To’aba’ita  mamana-a    (N) ‘blessing, prosperity; ancestrally-conferred power’
     SES: Kwaio       na-nama     ‘be effective, fulfilled, confirmed, realised; “work”; of ancestor, support, protect, empower’

   Capell in fact had included the Bare’e term as a possible cognate, presumably because he
saw mana linked with hereditary rank as in Polynesian societies. However, as Blust notes
(2007:409), no connection between mana and hereditary rank that could justify its inclusion
at POc level has been demonstrated. In this he is supported by Ann Chowning, an
anthropologist whose fieldwork spanned all three Western Oceanic subgroups. She wrote
(1991:64) while considering evidence for hereditary leadership “that we have no linguistic
evidence [from Western Oceanic] that POc society had a concept called mana that pertained
either to gods and spirits, or to primogeniture.”

[10] For discussion of a possible final *-q, see §9.6. Note that WMP is no longer considered a valid subgroup
     (§1.8). Blevins’ cognate set points to PMP *mana(q) ‘heir, inheritance’.

280 Meredith Osmond


    Blevins turns next to the non-Austronesian languages of New Guinea in search of possible
borrowings that could throw light on the origins of mana (pp264–68). In addition to her own
set of mana look-alikes (Table 10, p267) she includes a putative Trans New Guinea
reconstruction, *mana ‘instructions, customary practices, talk’ from Andrew Pawley (2008b).
But although she may feel confident about the form of word sought, she is far from certain
about the concept embodied. Is she looking for links with inheritance, ancestors, traditions,
wind, thunder, truth, instructions, ritual, magic, power? The possibilities are enormous.

    Identifying borrowings is possible if the source language can be located, either close to the
borrower or linked with it by trading or other exchanges. Unfortunately, this is not an option
when no reliable reflexes are identifiable in western Melanesia.

    Blevins (p.270) proposes PMP *mana(q) ‘supernatural power, associated with spirits of
the ancestors and the forces of nature; inherit(ance) from ancestors, including qualities of
spirit or body, customs and laws’ and PEMP/POc *mana ‘supernatural power, associated
with spirits of the ancestors and the forces of nature’. She has done a careful and thorough
exploration of possible antecedents of mana in its canonic form. But without further as yet
undefined limits, she, like the rest of us, is operating in a very vague field. At present there are
simply too many unknowns for us to accept her proposals as more than highly speculative.


9.6 Evidence for a final *-q

There are two hints of a possible final consonant in POc †*mana(q). One, described in detail
by Blevins (2008:256), comes from the South Vanuatu language Kwamera. Kwamera has a
term, -aməna ‘work, produce, enlarge or improve (as one’s resources)’. Although Blevins is
right in noting that Kwamera’s final vowel retention points to loss of a final *-q or *-R (see
Lynch 2001:103–5), the term’s status as a reflex of PEOc *mana is highly questionable in
view of its semantic distance.

   The second instance is from an article by Blythe & Fairhead (2017) which describes
information given by one Dako, a native inhabitant of Uneapa (Bali-Vitu). Dako was
abducted from Unea by an American merchant explorer, Benjamin Morrell, in 1830, and
taken to America where he became an informant to American Ethnological Society founder-
member, Theodore Dwight Jr. Dwight subsequently published two accounts of Uneapa life
and language (1834, 1835).

   Dako informed Dwight (1834:186) that his people ‘acknowledge one Supreme Being
(Manaka), the creator, rewarder of the good and punisher of the bad’ and how ‘their art of
curing diseases and producing rain is also derived from him’. Blythe & Fairhead (2017:25)
continue:

__blockquote__
     While it is impossible to recover precisely what manaka meant to Dako, comparative
     linguistics and contemporary field data suggest that it entailed a wider semantic range
     than ‘supreme being’. … Uneapa today consider manaka (POc mana or perhaps manaq
        (Blust 2007)) a self-manifesting force. … Moreover, manaka also refers to a genre of
        myth that describes processes of primordial and ongoing creativity, including the
        origins of places, animal and plant species, and precedents for social practices. The
        agents depicted in this genre of myth are not humans but vuvumu, the origin beings
        whom Manaka first created and from whom human Uneapa descend.

                                                                                         Mana 281


Although Bali manaka points to a putative POc *manaq, semantically there is little
commonality with the term as used in Eastern Oceanic languages. Blythe (pers comm.) does
not think mana/manaka is a personal attribute of humans in the Bali-Vitu Islands. The Bali
term is best considered a chance similarity rather than cognate with reflexes of PEOc *mana.


9.7 Conclusion

Several POc reconstructions for *mana made earlier have here been reconsidered. They are:

    •     POc *mana (N) ‘power in natural phenomena’ (Blust 2007)
    •     POc *mana (N) ‘supernatural power, associated with spirits of the ancestors and the
          forces of nature’ (Blevins 2008)
    •     POc *mana (VSt) ‘be efficacious, be potent, be true, be realised, be successful,
          “work”’ (Keesing 1984)

   We can be confident of a reconstruction to PEOc, but the arguments given by these three
authors for a POc reconstruction remain unconvincing. An association between supernatural
power as evidenced in human action and powerful forces in nature is suggested only in
Polynesia, where thunder is the powerful natural force. Blust’s evidence for a connection
between thunder and supernatural power in the Torres-Banks languages and his arguments
that ‘wind’ in Papuan Tip languages can be taken as referring to storm winds are rejected.
Blevins’ argument for an association with ancestral inheritance is based on very slender
evidence while her search for a non-Austronesian source of borrowing covers an impossibly
vast field. While we accept Keesing’s arguments in favour of a primarily stative verbal
meaning for *mana, as it applies to PEOc, his claim to have a single Western Oceanic
cognate in Tubetube is also rejected.

   The possibility remains that mana terms located in the north-west Solomons are genuine
cognates, and are traces of a POc term similar in meaning to that reconstructed for PEOc, but
that is dependent on further evidence from western Oceanic sources. On present evidence,
our earliest well-supported reconstruction stands as PEOc *mana (VSt) ‘to have supernatural
power from ancestral spirits as manifest in concrete results; be efficacious’; (N) ‘efficacy,
success’.




10 Taboo

10.1 Introduction

This paper discusses the origin and history of POc *tabu. The term ‘taboo’ [PPn *tapu] was
brought to western awareness late in the 18th century by European travellers in Polynesia
including Captain James Cook, who recognised in its use a widespread system of
promulgating and enforcing a code both religious and political (Cook & King 1785). It was
understood as a stative verb ‘prohibited’, and as a noun applicable both to the ban and to the
object or activity banned. Hence it could be applied to places as being off limits, or a person
might become subject to taboo and hence treated in a certain way. People believed that tapu
restrictions were laid down by the gods or their heirs and had to be scrupulously followed.
Deviation meant misfortune, possibly death. Where hereditary leadership was entrenched, as
in Fiji and Tonga, a certain veneration was due to the chief, who was deemed tabu/tapu. As a
result, certain forms of speech had to be used, not only in speaking to him but in conversation
about him, while certain topics could not be mentioned in the chief’s presence. Thus the
prohibition included a sense of ‘untouchable because sacred’.

   Examples of taboo [tapu] noted by Cook involved prohibition of certain activities or
actions that centred on the king or important chiefs. From the record of his historic journeys
we find the following (1785, vol.3:163–4):

__blockquote__
     They apply the word taboo indifferently both to persons and things. This word is also
     used to express anything sacred, or eminent, or devoted. Thus the king of Owhyhee
     [Hawai’i] was called Eree-taboo; a human victim, tangata-taboo; and in the same
     manner, among the Friendly Islanders, Tonga, the island where the king resides, is
     named Tonga-taboo.

However:

__blockquote__
     Women are also tabooed, or forbidden to eat certain kinds of meats. We also frequently
     saw several at their meals, who had the meat put into their mouths by others; and on
     our asking the reason of this singularity were told, that they were tabooed, or
     forbidden, to feed themselves. This prohibition … was always laid on them, after they
     had assisted at any funeral, or touched a dead body, and also on other occasions.


284 Meredith Osmond


Later, in Hawaii, it was noted (1785, vol.2:249) that, when local people were confronted by
an unfamiliar situation, as when visiting a British ship:

__blockquote__
      The people here always asked, with great eagerness and signs of fear to offend,
      whether any particular thing, which they desired to see, or we were unwilling to show,
      was taboo.

   William Mariner,1 who lived in Tonga from 1806 to 1810, provided a detailed description
by a westerner of its practice (Martin 1827:220–224).

__blockquote__
      This word [taboo] has various shades of signification: it means sacred or consecrated
      to a god, … it means prohibited or forbidden, and is applied not only to the thing
      prohibited, but to the prohibition itself, and frequently (when it is in sacred matters), to
      the person who breaks the prohibition. Thus if a piece of ground or a house be
      consecrated to a god, by express declaration, or the burial of a great chief, it is said to
      be taboo. … If a person touches the body of a dead chief, or any thing personally
      belonging to him, he becomes taboo, and time alone can relieve him. Certain kinds of
      food, as turtle, and a certain species of fish, from something in their nature, are said to
      be taboo, and must not be eaten until a small portion be first given to the gods. Any
      other kind of food may be rendered taboo by a prohibition being laid on it.

   Mariner made clear (p.222) that not all taboos in Tonga were equally sacred, describing an
occasion when a temporary taboo was applied by the chief to safeguard food supply:

__blockquote__
      To prevent certain kinds of food from growing scarce, a prohibition or taboo is set on
      them for a time, as after the inachi, or other great and repeated ceremonies; and which
      taboo is afterwards removed by the ceremony called fuccalahi. [fakalahi ‘increase’]

   The term was readily adopted by missionaries who followed closely on the heels of the
European explorers, and saw the concept as a useful term befitting elements of their teaching
of a Christian God. As a consequence, the Polynesian term is believed to have spread into
other parts of the Oceanic world with the adoption of Christianity, either as an extended
meaning of an existing term, or as a new term, possibly replacing a different term with related
meaning. We have in fact reconstructed two terms to POc, *tabu and *pali, with similar
meanings. Reflexes of the latter were evidently once widespread but are now greatly reduced
(see §10.7 below), presumably replaced by reflexes of *tabu.

   A second result of western contact was that the Polynesian tapu term was rapidly adopted
into familiar English usage as taboo. The Macquarie dictionary defines taboo as ‘forbidden to
general use; placed under a prohibition’. Its emphasis is on the socially prohibited rather than
the sacred. Although Cook and others recorded the term in their journals as ‘taboo’, that
spelling carries its current English meaning in this article unless it is from a direct quotation.
As can be seen from the cognate set below, the English term is in some dictionaries used to
define the local term.

[1] William Mariner was a teenage ship’s clerk on the British privateer Port-au-Prince, who survived when
    the ship was attacked and sunk by Tongan warriors off the island of Lifuka in Tonga in 1806. He was
    taken under the protection of the king who treated him as a son. Intelligent and resourceful, and blessed
    with a keen ear, he became fluent in the language, and partook of daily life as a member of the royal
    household for the next four years. On his return to England he dictated a book of his experiences to John
    Martin, which included a grammar and vocabulary. (http://www.oldsaltblog.com/2012/08/william-
    mariner-the-privateer-port-au-prince-the-tongan-shipwreck).

                                                                                           Tabu 285


10.2 POc *tabu and its reflexes

Although reflexes are widespread throughout Oceania, apparently related terms have been
found beyond its borders only in two widely separated regions of CEMP. One is Tanimbar, an
island roughly midway between the Bird’s Head of New Guinea and Arnhemland in
Australia, where two languages, Yamdena and Fordata, are spoken. Patrick McConvell (pers.
comm.) has questioned these terms as possible loans from Australian languages.[2] The other is
Numfor-Biak, islands off Cenderawasih Bay in Indonesian Papua, where the term kābus,
although irregular, is considered a possible cognate by Blust in the ACD.

    In the ACD, Blust reconstructs both POc *tabu ‘forbidden, prohibited’ and POc *tabuna
‘dehortative: don’t’, but recognises that *tabuna includes the root *tabu. The separate
reconstruction of *tabun is unnecessary, as final -na can be accounted for independently. The
root *tabu is reflected as both a stative verb ‘be forbidden, prohibited’ and as a noun
‘prohibition; that which is prohibited’. Reflexes of both word classes occur, with a suffix
reflecting POc *-ña P:3S, while noun reflexes sometimes carry other possessor affixes. Thus
in Molima tabu-gu, Kove tavu-ɣu ‘my taboo, that which is taboo for me’ and Kove (ai)tavu
‘her/his taboo, that which is taboo for her/him’, tabu- is a directly (inalienably) possessed
noun. Adjectives in some Papuan Tip languages take possessor suffixes as markers of
agreement with the noun they modify, e.g. Iduna tabu-tabu-na ‘forbidden’ (modifying a
singular noun). Languages of the Admiralties and North Huon Gulf (Yabem, Bukawa) groups
reflect *-ña as a fossil on roots that are or were used as attributes, and this accounts for the
Admiralties reflexes below, where Proto Admiralty *tabu-n meant ‘forbidden’, readily
interpreted as dehortative ‘don’t’.[3]

<
PCEMP *tambu ‘forbidden, taboo’ (ACD)
 CMP: Yamdena       tambu                ‘restrain, prevent’
 CMP: Fordata       tabu                 ‘forbid, prevent’
 SHWNG: Numfor        kābus                ‘tree branch or anything else placed on fruit tree or other object by its owner in order to make others afraid to approach the marked object lest ill fortune befall them’ (long vowel and final -s unexplained) (ACD: footnote under *tapu-tapu)
POc *tabu (VSt) ‘forbidden, prohibited’ (Blust 2009:48); (N) ‘prohibition’
POc *tabuna ‘dehortative: “don’t!”’ (ACD)
 Adm:  Nauna         tapu(n)              ‘don’t’
 Adm:  Penchal       rapu(n)              ‘don’t’
 Adm:  Wuvulu        apu(na)              ‘don’t’
 Adm:  Aua           apu(na)              ‘don’t’
 Adm:  Lou           topu(n)              ‘forbid, don’t do it’
 Adm:  Kaniet        tabu(n)              ‘forbidden’
 Adm:  Nyindrou      ⁿrabu(n)             ‘taboo, holy, sacred’
 NNG:  Yabem         dabu(ŋ)              (N) ‘abstinence, continence, chastity, fast, taboo’
 NNG:  Yabem         |-jàm dabuŋ laweŋi|  ‘avoid contact with in-laws, not touch them or call them by name’ (-jàm ‘do’; laweŋi ‘in-laws’)
 NNG:  Bukawa        dabu(ŋ)              ‘holy, taboo’
 NNG:  Kove          (ai)tavu             ‘a taboo as on eating s.t. or saying an affine’s name’ (ai- ‘her/his’)
 NNG:  Sio           tabu                 ‘s.t. that is prohibited’
 PT:   Dobu          tabu                 (N) ‘a disease magic inhibition placed on garden, coconut grove etc. by owner to prevent stealing’; (V) ‘to place such magic inhibition’ (Fortune 1963:138)
 PT:   Dobu          tabu-                ‘[certain kin of deceased] who do not eat at a mortuary feast’ (Fortune 1963:196)
 PT:   Gumawana      tabu                 ‘taboo’
 PT:   Gumawana      (va)tabu(ye)         ‘make s.t. taboo’
 PT:   Iduna         tabu                 (N) ‘law; forbidden thing; taboo’
 PT:   Iduna         tabu-tabu(na)        (ADJ) ‘forbidden’
 PT:   Iduna         (ala)tabu-tabu(yena) ‘place a prohibition, put a spell on, work magic against, cause sickness or crops to fail’
 PT:   Iduna         -atabu(yena)         ‘eat s.t. taboo’
 PT:   Molima        tabu(gu)             ‘food forbidden to me’ (limited to food; -gu ‘my’)
 PT:   Tawala        tabu                 ‘forbidden’ (said to be a Suau loan)
 PT:   Tubetube      tabu                 ‘don’t’
 MM:   Nakanai       tabu                 ‘to tabu, be tabu’
 MM:   Tigak         tap                  ‘holy’
 MM:   Sursurunga    tam                  ‘strong taboo, e.g. of a spirit dwelling. It is used in places where spirits dwell and where punishment is inevitable if violated’
 MM:   Tolai         tābu                 ‘prohibition; a forbidden thing’
 MM:   Ramoaaina     tabu                 ‘prohibited, forbidden’
 MM:   Tangga        tabun                ‘a funeral feast where only clan members of the dead person may take part’ (Bell 1935b)
 MM:   Babatana      tabu                 ‘forbidden, sacred’
 MM:   Maringe       tabu                 ‘be tabu, prohibited, sacred’ (from Bugotu?)
 MM:   Roviana       tabu                 ‘put taboo under certain circumstances, on food’ (perhaps an introduced term? Waterhouse 1949)
 SES:  Gela          tabu                 ‘to be set apart, forbidden; sacred, holy’
 SES:  Bugotu        tabu                 ‘sacred, forbidden, holy; prohibition placed on use or handling of anything’
 SES:  Longgu        abu                  ‘be taboo, forbidden’
 SES:  Kwaio         abu                  ‘sacred, taboo’
 SES:  Lau           abu                  ‘don’t’ (to child or animal)
 SES:  Lau           ābu                  ‘holy, taboo’
 SES:  To’amba’ita   abu                  ‘be tabooed, not allowed, forbidden’ (used as dehortative) (Lichtenberk 2008a); ‘sacred, relating to the spirits; set apart, forbidden’ (Hogbin 1934)
 SES:  ’Are’are      apu                  ‘sacred, forbidden’ (used also as prohibitive, dehortative to children)
 SES:  ’Are’are      apu(na)              (N) ‘taboo. There are four varieties of taboo, each variety causing a different sickness’
 SES:  ’Are’are      apu-apu              ‘whole region of burial place’
 SES:  ’Are’are      apu(ni-a)            (V) ‘put a taboo under curse; forbid’ (-ni VT; -a O:3S)
 SES:  Sa’a          apu                  ‘be taboo, forbidden’
 SES:  Arosi         abu                  ‘dehortatory don’t, sacred’
 SES:  Owa           apu                  ‘forbidden’
PNCV *tabu ‘sacred, forbidden, taboo’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV:  Mota          tapu                 ‘unapproachable, not to be touched under a prohibition with the sanction of some mana’
 NCV:  Mota          tapu(a)              (N) ‘thing or place made tapu’ (-a nominaliser)
 NCV:  Raga          tabu                 ‘set apart, prohibit’ (Bislama borrowing? Marie Duhamel, pers. comm.)
 NCV:  Tamambo       tabu                 ‘sacred, forbidden’
 NCV:  Nguna         tapu                 ‘holy, sacred’
 SV:   Anejom        (i)tapw              ‘forbidden’
 Mic:  Marshallese   capʷi                ‘taboo’ (archaic)
 Mic:  Woleaian      tāfʷu                (N) ‘taboo, ban, ritual restriction protected by supernatural sanction’; (VI) ‘be prohibited by taboo’ (Pn loan?)
 Mic:  Kiribati      tapʷu                (N) ‘prohibition, interdiction’; (V) ‘sacred; forbidden, prohibited’
 Fij:  Rotuman       fapu-i               (VT) ‘to mark, (esp. a coconut palm) as forbidden to others’; (N) ‘a nut or leaf used to mark a tree as forbidden’
 Fij:  Bauan         tabu                 ‘forbidden, prohibited, implying a religious sanction; sacred, holy’
 Fij:  Wayan         tabu                 ‘forbidden by strong communal sanction, sacred, holy’
PPn *tapu ‘prohibited, under ritual restriction; sacred’
 Pn:   Tongan        tapu                 ‘forbidden, prohibited; sacred, holy’
 Pn:   Niuean        tapu                 ‘be sacred, prohibited to common people, forbidden’
 Pn:   Rennellese    tapu                 ‘be forbidden, sacred, hallowed; forbidden or sacred place’
 Pn:   Samoan        tapu                 ‘be forbidden’
 Pn:   Tikopia       tapu                 ‘forbidden, both as improper, and as formal interdiction on activity’; ‘sacred’; ‘holy’ (modern)
 Pn:   Tahitian      tapu                 ‘a restriction’
 Pn:   Maori         tapu                 ‘under religious or superstitious restriction, a condition affecting persons, places and things’
 Pn:   Hawaiian      kapu                 (N) ‘taboo, prohibition’; (V) ‘sacred, holy’
cf. also:
 MM:   Petats        tsūbu(n)             ‘restriction on actions such as the eating of certain food by specified persons or at specified times, or the avoidance to be observed between individuals who stand to each other in certain relationships. Not applied to places or persons’ (Blackwood 1935:480) (-ū- for †*-a- is unexplained)
 SV:   Sye           tompo(r)             ‘sacred, taboo’ (final -r is unexplained)
>

[2] An email dated 28 October 1997 from Waruno Mahdi to the Austronesian Languages and Linguistics
    email list asks “Have you considered the possibility of a loan into Australian languages of English
    taboo?”

[3] Particular thanks are due to Malcolm Ross for advice on irregular form variation.

286 Meredith Osmond


                                                                                     Tabu 287


288 Meredith Osmond


10.3 Relevant situations

From ethnographic descriptions we learn that *tabu reflexes are pervasive in Polynesia,
used widely but in variable situations across North and Central Vanuatu (François 2022),
occur a little less in the southeast Solomons where they apply mainly to spiritual concerns,
and are found in very limited ways in western Melanesia, being apparently not used at all in
some places.[4]

   The following, however, appear to be contexts where tabu prohibitions are shared across
major subgroups

10.3.1 Food restrictions (+ kin)

Strong prohibitions exist throughout the Oceanic world on foodstuffs being prepared or
particular foodstuffs eaten by certain people at particular times, such as pregnant or
menstruating women or boys undergoing initiation. Cook’s journals give numerous examples
of tapu situations where people, including chiefs, and people who have handled dead bodies,
could not handle food but had to be fed by others (1785, vol.1:305, 350, vol.2:203). The
following instance records the reaction of several Tongans invited to share a meal aboard the
British ship (vol.1:286):

__blockquote__
      When dinner came upon table, not one of them would sit down, or eat a bit of any
      thing that was served up. On expressing my surprise at this, they were all taboo, as
      they said; which word has a very comprehensive meaning; but in general signifies that
      a thing is forbidden.

    In western Oceanic communities, where tabu situations are far fewer than in Polynesia,
the most frequently tabued situations involve consumption of food. Often a prohibition is
restricted to certain kin relationships. In Dobu (PT), tabu- (with pronominal suffix) refers to
‘those [certain kin of deceased] who do not eat at a mortuary feast’ (Fortune 1963:196).
Chowning (1991:61) defines tabu-gu in Molima (PT) as ‘food forbidden to me (limited to
food)’. In Kove (NNG), she defines tavu-ɣu as ‘a taboo as on eating s.t. or saying an affine’s
name’. In Yabem (NNG), dabu(ŋ) is defined as both a noun, ‘[s.t.] forbidden to eat’ and a
verb ‘abstain from eating certain foods’. Bell (1935b:175–198, 306–322) lists a number of
avoidance situations in Tanga (MM) [=Tangga], but most are labelled by terms other than
*tabu reflexes. An exception is tabun, a funeral feast in which no other persons but the clan
of the dead man may take part. Also listed is kuen tabun, a term for a coconut palm when its
fruit is reserved for formal presentation to certain womenfolk as a form of gratitude. Bell
writes that “although the word may appear to resemble tapu, it is not used much in Tanga”.
He adds: “the word seems to be used only to express the exclusive nature of certain clan
actions.” (p319).

[4] Seligman, for example, describes in some detail the kinds of prohibitions recognised in Wagawaga and
    Tubetube (1910:574–582), many of them identical with taboos recognised elsewhere, but nowhere is the
    tabu term used.

                                                                                             Tabu 289


    In Petats (MM), Blackwood (1935:480) writes that the prohibitions which govern the
daily lives of the people, given the term tsūbun5, apply neither to places nor persons, but to
actions such as the eating of certain food by specified persons or groups or at specified times,
or the avoidance to be observed between individuals who stand to each other in certain
relationships. Waterhouse (1949) notes that, in Roviana, tabu means ‘to put taboo under
certain circumstances, on food’, but he adds the proviso “perhaps an introduced term”.

    Food restrictions dictated by tabu are not singled out for special mention in descriptions of
avoidance behaviour we have from Southeast Solomonic languages (Hogbin 1934, Ivens
1927, Keesing 1982), and they have a minor role in northern Vanuatu, being mentioned only
in relation to candidates undergoing initiation rituals (François 2022:230).

10.3.2 Safeguarding supply

Supply of foodstuffs may be subject to a temporary taboo, as described by Martin (1827) in
Tonga (§10.1) where it is applied by chiefs to harvesting items such as coconuts prior to a
major feast or in the likelihood of future shortages. Malinowski (1922:425) refers to
kaytubutabu, in the Trobriands, ‘a ban on the consumption of coconuts and betelnuts
associated with a specific magic to make them grow’. François (2022:225) notes a
comparable usage in Mwotlap na-tqō where fishing activity is banned for a period so as to
allow fish to reproduce. A ban there is signalled by a conspicuous leaf (e.g. a coconut frond, a
cordyline leaf) tied to a stick at the entrance to the area. Ivens (1927:254–5) describes a
similar temporary prohibition on foodstuffs prior to a feast made by a chief in Sa’a. Here the
visible sign is identified as a pole with a bunch of leaves of the putty nut (Parinarium
laurinum). In Sa’a, such non-religious prohibitions are labelled adi, not abu.

10.3.3 Property protection

A similar practice is the placing of a taboo sign on a tree or garden by the owner to prevent
theft. It is commonly placed on coconut and betel palms growing away from the village.
Those who steal or trespass are believed to suffer illness or other misfortune, the result having
been preordained by the owner. The tabu term may refer both to the ban and to the sign
representing it. In Dobu, individuals may own the right to both impose and lift tabus which
have the power to inflict disease, and are commonly used to protect private property in this
way (Fortune 1963:138). We also find mention of the practice in Rotuman where fapu-i
serves as a verb ‘to mark (esp. a coconut palm) as forbidden to others’, and as a noun ‘a nut
or leaf used to mark a tree as forbidden.’

    In Herman Melville’s Typee, set in the Marquesas and published in 1876 is the passage:

__blockquote__
      Frequently, in walking through the groves I observed breadfruit and coconut trees with
      a wreath of leaves twined in a peculiar fashion about their trunks. This was the mark of
      the taboo. The trees themselves, their fruit, and even the shadows they cast upon the
      ground were consecrated by their presence. (1876:252, quoted by Handy 1923)

[5] Presumably an introduced term, as irregular sound correspondences cannot otherwise be explained.

290 Meredith Osmond


Melville was evidently aware that the ban there was more than just a prohibition – it carried
with it an endowment of sanctity.

   In Numfor-Biak, a non-Oceanic Austronesian language, is a term kābus defined as ‘tree
branch or anything else placed on fruit tree or other object by its owner in order to make
others afraid to approach the marked object lest ill-fortune befall them’. The term is included
in a footnote in ACD under *tapu-tapu, noting that while the initial k- corresponds to POc *t-,
the long vowel and final -s are unexplained.

10.3.4 Place taboos

A taboo may also be placed on a location because it is perceived as either sacred or dangerous
or some combination of both. This may be as in Tonga where a piece of ground or a house or
a grave that has been visited by a chief and hence regarded as consecrated by a god, becomes
tapu. It may apply in Vanuatu where graveyards and other places haunted by supernatural
forces are to be avoided through fear. François (2022:235) lists Sakao e-tev ‘burial ground,
grave’, and Tamambo tambu ‘grave’ as examples. The only mention of a place-related use of
tabu in western Oceanic languages is in Sursurunga (MM) where tam is defined as ‘a strong
taboo, e.g. of a spirit dwelling. It is used in places where spirits dwell and where punishment
is inevitable if violated’.

    The above-mentioned prohibitions apply to everyone. Other place taboos may be
applicable only to a specified group. As Keesing (1982:65) explains it:

__blockquote__
     A Kwaio men’s house or shrine is abu from the point of view of those – women,
     infants, Christians – who are excluded from it; but it is not abu in and of itself. A
     woman giving birth is abu, and so is the women’s latrine, the menstrual hut, the
     childbirth shelter – but only in relation to those who cannot enter them. … What is abu
     for one person is mola ‘permitted’ for another.

No doubt practical, non-sacred prohibitions of this kind exist throughout the Oceanic world.
But nowhere else have we located them so-labelled. Either these restrictions are thought to be
so commonplace that mentioning is unnecessary, or they are labelled in terms other than abu.

10.3.5 Dehortative

Perhaps not surprisingly, apparent reflexes of *tabu sometimes occur as a dehortative,
probably so that children might learn early where it applied. It is mentioned as sharing this
function in wordlists from the Admiralties, in Tubetube and several Southeast Solomonic
languages, while François lists it as a Bislama interjection probably borrowed from
Polynesia (2022:219). It is not clear whether this meaning should be attributed to POc *tabu
or if it developed independently in various daughter languages.


10.4 Identifying the sacred

There is a difficulty in identifying the degree to which a sense of sanctity is part of the
meaning of tabu as practised in different communities. Even in Polynesia, Fornander
(1878:113) recognised a certain ambivalence in its practice.

                                                                                        Tabu 291

__blockquote__
     The religious tabus relating to rites, observances, public worship, and the maintenance
     of the gods and their priests, were well known, comparatively fixed in their character,
     and the people brought up from childhood in the knowledge and observance of them.
     But the civil tabus were as uncertain and capricious as the mind of the chief, priest or
     individual who imposed them on others, or on himself and his family.

As an example of the latter, in Dobu, where taboos are widely used to protect private
property, they are also used in the ordinary course of private feuds. A man will put a tabu on a
woman who has refused his advances (Fortune 1963:143).

   In his detailed examination of taboo terms in Vanuatu, François (2022) finds that
although languages vary in what is identified by the terms as “off-limits, forbidden”, there
is widespread evidence for their meanings to include “sacred, due to a sentiment of awe
and fear before spiritual forces”.

   Ivens (1927:253–5) describes the situation in Sa’a and neighbouring Ulawa, where there
are two terms, apu and adi, both denoting prohibitions.

__blockquote__
     There is a word apu in both languages which … denotes something that is forbidden to
     a person by reason of communal regulations, e.g. the marriage of cross-cousins, or the
     following of any course of action which would result in bodily harm or in bringing on
     the ill will of the ghosts, e.g. the rash intrusion into those spheres of religion which
     belong to the office of the priest, or the doing of any thing which would cause a person
     to be ceremonially defiled, or that condition of things which follows the imposition of
     a tabu by the proper authority. The causative form ha’aapu denotes a state of
     prohibition which has as its background the commands either of constituted authority,
     or of the local ghosts. (1927:253)

   The second term, adi, covers prohibitions imposed by the hereditary chiefs. Prohibitions
are largely administered on an ad hoc basis for limited ends, and contain no ghostly sanctions.
The things which are thus prohibited are “fruit trees, paths, gardens, pigs, fishing, streams,
landing places, personal possessions” (p.253). adi depends on the position and prestige of the
chiefs for its inviolacy: the action is merely human. apu is carried out with the
accompaniment of religious rites, there is a ghostly sanction empowering it, and it is
immaterial whether the person who invoked it was a person of importance or not. Any case of
infraction of apu will be followed by sickness.

   Hogbin (1934:261) writes that in Malu’u [= To’aba’ita], ‘sacred’ rather than ‘forbidden’ is
the primary meaning of the term.

__blockquote__
     ambu is the local form of the Polynesian tapu and means, primarily, relating to the
     spirits, and hence, sacred. There are in addition, several derived meanings, first, set
     apart; second, forbidden under penalty of punishment by the spirits; and third,
     forbidden under penalty of punishment by man.

    He adds (p.262) that since the introduction of Christianity, ambu, instead of being applied
to spirits is now applied to God.

    The sense of ‘sacred’, sometimes linked with ‘holy’ is included in definitions of reflexes
of *tabu from a majority of subgroups. The implications of this terminology are open to
conjecture. The entry for tapu in Firth’s Tikopia dictionary, for example, includes both
‘sacred’ and ‘holy’ in its gloss but annotates ‘holy’ as ‘modern’, suggesting the latter as a
Christian addition to the meaning.

292 Meredith Osmond


10.5 Relationship with mana

A major difference in tabu practices between Eastern and Western Oceanic societies would
appear to lie in the way in which the authority believed responsible for upholding the
prohibitions is viewed. In Eastern Oceanic the chiefs are believed to derive much of their
power and status from possession of mana. The term exists in reconstructed form as PEOc
*mana, a stative verb ‘to have supernatural power from ancestral spirits as manifest in
successful outcomes; be efficacious’ and as a noun ‘efficacy, success’ (§9.2.1). Particularly in
Polynesia, chiefs, endowed with mana, were regarded as descended from gods, with powers
of life or death and largely held apart from the rest of the community. This carried an
implication of sanctity on both the chiefs and on whatever they came in contact with,
rendering tapu their person and much associated with them. The association between mana
and tabu is continued in the Southeast Solomons but the chiefs there are ‘merely human’ in
Ivens’ words, with the religious duties mainly overseen by priests.

   Evidence of mana is lacking in western Melanesian communities. Seligman (1910:576)
writes that

__blockquote__
     Neither at Wagawaga, Tubetube nor elsewhere in the district does there seem to be any
     development of that system of personal influence (mana) taboo whereby the thing
     made taboo receives, as it were, a dynamic charge from contact with an individual,
     which is dangerous to everyone not rendered immune by the possession of an equal or
     greater power.

    In western Oceania, some communities are led by hereditary chiefs, others by big men.
But in both kinds of leadership, power is often shared. In Mekeo, the chief shared his
leadership role with the sorcerer (Stephen 1987), while in Kilivila the garden magician
appeared equally powerful (Malinowski 1935). Neither hereditary chiefs nor big men in
western Oceania hold the god-like stature of sacredness and apartness attributable to those in
Fiji and Polynesia, and which accord the latter a special relationship with mana. In western
Oceania it is magic rather than mana that affects all aspects of life, and magic appears to
depend more heavily on a negative fear of sorcery than a positive awe in the face of the
supernatural for its effectiveness.


10.6 Freedom from tabu

Where a taboo is represented by a physical sign such as a cluster of leaves on a pole, removal
of the taboo is indicated by removal of the sign. But where no sign exists, as with food or
name taboos, an oral expression is required for its removal. Terms indicating freedom from
taboo may show either that a temporary taboo has been lifted, or simply that a questioned
item is not subject to taboo (and may never have been), and without context it is not always
possible to know which situation applies. Both PPn *ŋafua ‘be allowed’ and PNPn *taŋa
‘free from ritual prohibition’ have cognates applicable to both situations, the shared Samoan
and Tikopia terms indicating that either can apply to remove a restriction.

                                                                                   Tabu 293

<
PPn *ŋafua ‘be allowed’
 Pn: Tongan         ŋofua    ‘allowed, permitted, not prohibited’ (Martin 1827:233 calls it in contradistinction to taboo)
 Pn: Niuean         ŋofua    ‘be allowed, be free to do s.t.’
 Pn: Samoan         ŋafua    ‘be made common, have a prohibition removed’ (Pratt gives faʔa-ŋafua ‘lift a taboo’)
 Pn: Tikopia        ŋafua    ‘licit; appropriate, usually of food; opposite to tapu, hence edible’
PNPn *taŋa ‘free from ritual prohibition’
 Pn: Rennellese     taŋa     ‘to end, of a taboo, free of taboo’
 Pn: Pukapukan      taŋa     ‘common, not tabu’
 Pn: Samoan         taŋa     ‘to have a restriction removed from things that had been prohibited’
 Pn: Tikopia        taŋa     ‘free from taboo (of land, traditional stories etc.)’
 Pn: Tokelauan      taŋa     ‘allowed, free to do’
>

Some Eastern Polynesian languages use reflexes of still another PPn term *noa ‘be common,
worthless’ to indicate that no taboo applies to a situation.

<
PPn *noa ‘be common, worthless’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Niuean         noa         ‘signifies non-existence or infinitesimal state’
  Pn:   Tongan         noa         ‘worthless, unimportant, meaningless’
  Pn:   Samoan         noa         ‘of no importance, worthless, without purpose’
  Pn:   Rarotongan     noa         ‘ordinary, not sacred, free from tabu’
  Pn:   Tahitian       noa         ‘profane, without tabu; only’ (placed after a noun)
  Pn:   Maori          noa         ‘free from tapu or any other restriction’
>

   The Proto Malaita-Makira reconstruction *mola ‘usual, merely’ has reflexes in Lau and
Kwaio that are similar in some respects to PPn *noa. Its meaning is extended in Lau to
describe terms as contrary to taboo. Keesing describes the same function in Kwaio when he
writes (1982:65) “What is abu for one person is mola ‘permitted’ for another.”

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *mola ‘usual, merely; permitted’
  SES: Lau              mola                ‘merely, common; unconsecrated, not abu’
  SES: Kwaio            mola                ‘merely, only; secular, render secular; permitted’
  SES: Sa’a             mola(ʔa)            ‘free, without price’
  SES: ’Are’are         mora                ‘merely, only’
  SES: ’Are’are         mora(ʔa)            ‘allowed, permitted’
  SES: Arosi            mora                ‘original, real, usual, customary’
>

294 Meredith Osmond


10.7 A second taboo term

A second term carrying the meaning of taboo, POc *pali ‘ritually restricted or prohibited’,
has been reconstructed. It has an older history than POc *tabu, being reconstructed back to
PAn *paliSi ‘taboo, ritual restriction; purifying rite’ (ACD). Its scattered Oceanic reflexes from
the Admiralties, southeast Solomons and NC Vanuatu, together with a larger number from
Micronesia, are evidence that it was once widespread, presumably replaced in some
languages by reflexes of *tabu. The Micronesian terms do not suggest a clear PMic
antecedent. Perhaps ‘engage in ceremonial rite’ is preferable to the gloss offered by Bender et
al., 2003. Only Woleaian has reflexes of both *pali and *tabu, its *tabu reflex possibly
borrowed from Polynesia. We currently lack enough information to allow us to distinguish
the two terms with any certainty, although *pali differs from *tabu in lacking any sense of
sanctity. We note that Blust glosses POc *pali as ‘taboo’ and that Paiwan palisi is glossed
‘tabu’ (ACD).

<
PAn *paliSi ‘taboo, ritual restriction; purifying rite’ (ACD)
  Fma: Paiwan           palisi             ‘rite, ceremony; tabu; “superstition”’
  WMP: Malay            p-em-ali           ‘taboo’
POc *pali ‘ritually restricted or prohibited’ (ACD: ‘taboo’)
  Adm: Seimat           (ha)hali(ni)       ‘forbid, prohibit’ (causative ha- may be added to verbs to express compulsion: Smythe p.416)
  SES: Ghari            vali               ‘prohibited, forbidden’
  NCV: Raga             bali               ‘to refrain from certain kinds of food as "the one who carries a child does not eat chicken, shellfish etc."’ (Hardacre 1924)
PMic *fali ‘engage in ceremonial rite’ (‘taboo, sacred’; Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic: Woleaian         fari               (vi) ‘be restricted, stay away from impure things, keep away from certain foods’
  Mic: Puluwatese       fel                ‘to worship’ (faalifir ‘to be clean, uncontaminated’)
  Mic: Chuukese         fen                ‘taboo, restricted, engage in worship’
  Mic: Chuukese         fǣn                ‘church worship’
  Mic: Ponapean         pel                ‘be in a taboo relationship with s.o. or s.t.’
  Mic: Mortlockese      fel                ‘be taboo, worship traditional gods’
  Mic: Satawalese       fal                ‘to worship traditional gods’
>

10.8 Conclusions

There can be little doubt that the primary meaning of POc *tabu was as a stative verb
‘prohibited, forbidden’ and as a noun, applicable both to the ban and to the thing banned.
Hence POc *tabu (VSt) ‘prohibited, forbidden’; (N) ‘a ban on some action or thing; the thing
so banned’.

   From the collected ethnographic examples, POc *tabu appears to have had the
following applications:

                                                                                     Tabu 295

__block__
•   In the preparation and consumption of foodstuffs in particular circumstances including at
    times the kin relationship between the supplier and the consumer (§10.3.1).
•   Through the safeguarding of food sources by a visible sign either to guarantee supply
    (§10.3.2) or to guard against theft (§10.3.3).
•   Through the identification of places where people should not go, either for reasons of
    safety or sanctity (§10.3.4).
•   Through use of the term as a dehortative, so that children might learn early where it is to
    be applied (§10.3.5).

    One area in which there is doubt as to its application in POc times is in the degree to
which the tabooed object carries the sense of untouchable sanctity. The sense of awe and
obeisance displayed before the chiefs in Polynesia and to a lesser extent accompanying the
religious practices in the SE Solomons, and implicit there in tapu/apu is largely lacking in
Western Oceanic, and it is suggested that this dispersal correlates to some extent with belief
in mana. Tabu in western Oceanic languages appears not to hold the sense of sanctity unless
imposed by Christian influence.

    Blust calls the concept “one of the key cultural items in the POc lexicon, designating a
type of social control that was enforced by supernatural sanctions” (ACD). As described in
this chapter it may be rather more limited in its context.



11 Seasonal cycles and lunations

11.1 Introduction

This chapter complements the ways of talking about time discussed in chapter 9 of volume 2.
That chapter addressed concepts like ‘day’ and ‘yesterday’ and ‘tomorrow’. This one is
concerned with longer periods of time.

    Time is an abstract concept, expressed in western terms by countable named entities, days
of the week, months of the year, numbered years. In fact it is difficult for westerners to
conceive of time in other than named measurable periods with clear boundaries. But tradition-
ally Oceanic speakers seem not to have thought of time in this way. Here we look at how early
Oceanic speakers conceived of years, seasons and the lunar cycle, and consider whether they
treated the latter as a system.

    The chapter is organised as follows: First, in §11.2, we explore the concepts of years and
seasons. In §11.3 the interrelationship between lunar months and the solar year is discussed as
their interaction is relevant to any form of calendar. Next, in §11.4, we discuss the checkpoints
that recur in Oceanic speakers’ talk about the calendar. In §11.5 we review lunar month names
in a range of Oceanic languages, illustrating the use of checkpoints and the kinds of conceptu-
al world they denote. Lunar months imply moon phases, and these are examined in §11.6.

    We observed in volume 2 (p320) that lunar month names “have complex associations with
their users’ culture, both material and non-material” and wrote that they would receive a
chapter to themselves in a later volume. We endeavour to keep that promise in §11.5 but lunar
‘months’ turn out to be something other than we might have envisioned when volume 2 was
compiled.


11.2 Years and seasons

    Early Oceanic communities were inevitably aware of the annual cycle evident in move-
ment of the sun and stars, in regular seasonal changes to weather patterns and in the growth
and flowering of plants, both cultivated and wild. They knew that certain foodstuffs, particularly
the yams on which many communities were dependent, had a regular growing season,
with optimal times for planting and harvesting, and they associated yam planting and
harvesting with, among other things, the positions of certain stars in the night sky.

298 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    But we cannot be sure that early Oceanic speakers had a concept of, or at least a term for,
one complete annual cycle as illustrated by the sun and stars. When we look up ‘year’ in
dictionaries we find expressions that translate as ‘rainy season’ (Kove) or ‘yam season’ (Sa’a)
or ‘yam harvest’ (Kwaio) or ‘time of ripe canarium almonds’ (Bugotu) or even just
‘garden’ (Gedaged). In other words, examples of well-recognised seasonal cyclic events are
used to represent the annual cycle.

    Another reason for wondering if speakers had a concept of year was that a person’s age in
years was apparently irrelevant to their thinking. To have a meaningful count in years, it is
necessary to have a shared base line from which to start counting, something for which there is
no evidence across Oceanic communities prior to western influence. Numerous ethnographies
refer, both directly and indirectly, to the fact that Oceanic speakers seemed to have no interest
in counting years of age (§14.1.2.3). Alkire, for example, notes (1970:37) that “an individual
does not think of his age in terms of years (a unit of measurement of little traditional impor-
tance in Woleai) … but only comparatively, as being younger or older than some other person
of reference.”

    Below is the cognate set given in vol. 2:308–309 in support of POc *taqun, along with two
glosses, the first given in vol. 2, the other a revised definition for which we argue below.

<
PMP *taqun ‘period of a year’ (Dempwolff 1938) (ACD)
POc *taqun ‘recurrent seasonal cycle, especially yam season cycle’ (revised definition); ‘period of a year, yam season cycle (?), any cyclic period’ (definition given in vol. 2:308)
 NNG: Bariai           taun                  ‘the time when …’
 NNG: Buang            ta                    ‘year; a complete cycle of yam growing’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain       taun                  ‘year’
 MM:  Bola             tahu(na)              ‘the time when …’
 MM:  Sursurunga       taul                  ‘season’
 MM:  Patpatar         t<in>ahon, t<in>ohon  ‘year’ (<in> marks a nominalisation)
 MM:  Ramoaaina        t<in>əwon             ‘year’
 MM:  Tolai            taun                  ‘season, period, time’
 NCV: Mota             tau                   ‘season’
 NCV: Nguna            (na)tau               ‘year’
 Mic: Kiribati         tai                   ‘time, season, harvest’
 Mic: Chuukese         sowu-                 ‘time, season’ (in compounds)
 Pn:  Tongan           taʔu                  ‘yam season cycle, year’
 Pn:  E Futunan        taʔu                  ‘yam season’
 Pn:  Samoan           tau                   ‘season, year’
 Pn:  Rennellese       taʔu                  ‘season’
 Pn:  Tuvalu           tau                   ‘season’
 Pn:  Rapanui          taʔu                  ‘year’
 Pn:  Anutan           tau                   ‘year’
 Pn:  Mangareva        tau                   ‘season, year’
 Pn:  Maori            tau                   ‘season, year, the recurring cycle being the predominant idea rather than the definite time measurement’ (Williams)
>

                                                                   Seasonal cycles and lunations 299


   Here we have a reconstruction with sufficient evidence to support three concurrent mean-
ings: ‘year’, ‘season’ and ‘yam season cycle’. But some ethnographic comments give us pause.
Codrington writes that in Mota, in the Banks Islands of northern Vanuatu:

__blockquote__
        There is no native notion of a year as a period of fixed time; the word tau or niulu,
        which corresponds most nearly to the word ‘year’, signifies a season, and so now the
        space of time between recurring seasons: thus the yam has its tau, its seasons of five
        moons from the planting, when the erythrina is in flower, till the harvest, after the palolo
        has come and gone;1 the breadfruit has its tau during the winter months; the banana and
        the cocoanut have no tau, being at all times in fruit.’ (Codrington 1891:349)

Fornander (1878:124) records the following for various parts of Polynesia:

__blockquote__
        In all the Polynesian dialects the primary and original meaning of tau is ‘a season; a
        period of time’. In the Tonga group it has the further sense of ‘the produce of a season’
        and derivatively, ‘a year’. In the Samoan group, beside the primary sense of ‘season’ it
        has the definite meaning of ‘a period of six months’, and conventionally that of ‘a year’.
        In the Society group it simply means ‘a season’. In the Hawaiian group, when not
        applied to the summer season, it retains the original sense of an indefinite ‘period of
        time’, ‘a lifetime’, ‘an age’, and is never applied to a year; its duration may be more or
        less than a year, according to circumstances and the context.’

   Their evidence suggests that POc *taqun did not refer to a fixed period of time, but
to a period that varied with context. In other words it was a name for any regularly
recurring seasonal period. When we find languages using a reflex of *taqun to refer to
‘year’ it seems that, as in the Maori definition, it is being used as just one particular
recurrent cycle: its length is irrelevant. A quote from Jenness & Ballantyne (1920:160),
writing about the Bwaidoga (PT) speakers of Goodenough Island in the D’Entre-
casteaux Archipelago, reflects a similar concept, albeit with a different term. They write
that

__blockquote__
        a native who wished to date some event that happened some time in the past might say
        that it occurred three malamala ago, in the avalata (north-west monsoon) season, i. e.
        between October and March;2 or in the yam time, from June to August; or he could be
        still more precise, and name the actual stage in the growth of the yams, and thereby
        narrow the period down to a single month.

They tell us that malamala is the name given both to a season ushered in by the sun
at its northern zenith and also to the whole period covered by the sun’s annual
movement, i.e. a year. Chowning’s (n.d.) dictionary of neighbouring Molima
confirms the first definition: ‘period from December to April, time of big sun after
planting, yamless period’. The ‘year’ definition is confirmed by Huckett, Lucht and
Awadoudo’s (1992) dictionary of Iduna, a dialect of Bwaidoga, where malamala is
glossed as ‘year’. However, malamala has a deeper history, as its Kilivila and
Muyuw cognate is milamala ‘palolo worm’, the risings of which were and are an
important checkpoint in the Oceanic year (§11.4.3). At some point in the past, a
Bwaidoga speaker who said that something occurred three malamala ago was
saying that it occurred three palolo risings ago.

[1] ` For the palolo worm and its rising, see §11.2 and §11.2.1.

[2]  Bwaidoga avalata reflects POc *apaRat ‘north-west monsoon season’ (vol.2:128–130, 307). See
     §11.2.1.

300 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Our conclusion is that POc speakers had a concept of a recurrent seasonal cycle, *taqun,
which could be applied to cycles of different durations including possibly the annual cycle.
The corollary to this is that there was no POc term for the concept of a fixed, measurable
block of time that westerners refer to as ‘year’.

    It is difficult to determine which terms for a year in Oceanic dictionaries reflect the
longstanding usage of a term and which reflect an adjustment to the western fixed-term
concept. Where terms for a year other than reflexes of *taqun have been adopted they
typically come from horticulture or arboriculture, such that a salient annual event doubles as
the term for an annual cycle. Examples in addition to those given on p297 include the
following: In Dobu (PT) yakʷara, ‘last year’s garden’, has become the term for a year. In
Kiriwina (PT) the term for the staple crop, taytu ‘small yam’, also carries the meaning ‘year’.
Tolo (SES) uvi means both ‘yam’ and ‘year’. In the southeast Solomons languages spoken in
Malaita and Makira there is a cognate set3 that refers to the yam harvest but includes ‘year’
among its senses: Lau falisi ‘garden, yam harvest, year’, Kwaio falisi ‘yam harvest, year’,
’Are’are harisi ‘grass, small clover, yam harvest, year’, Arosi harisi ‘year, season, crop’, Sa’a
halisi ‘harvest, crop, time of ripening, yam season, year’. The ’Are’are, Arosi and Sa’a
dictionaries make the proviso that the denotation ‘year’ is a recent one. Other food crops with
regular planting and harvesting seasons also assumed the added sense ‘year’. Thus Marovo
(MM, New Georgia) buruburu ‘Canarium spp.’ also means ‘year’, the interval between two
ripenings of canarium almonds (Hviding 2005:107). Similarly Maringe finoɣa ‘canarium
harvest’, and To’aba’ita ŋali ‘canarium nut tree and fruit’ all also have the sense ‘year’.4 In
Mangaia in Eastern Polynesia, “in the premissionary times, the age [of a child] was counted
by counting the number of breadfruit (kuru) harvests” (Shibata 1999:110).

    There are, however, indications that a common application of *taqun was to the complete
cycle of yam growing. From the cognate set we learn that the year was equated with the yam
season cycle in Buang, Tongan and Maori. Kirch & Green (2001:267) comment that “in
Western Polynesian languages, reflexes of PPN *taqu (e.g., [E Futunan] taʔu) refer not just to
‘season’, but more specifically to ‘yam season’.” Although yams, particularly Discorea alata,
and taro, Colocasia esculenta, were both important staples for POc speakers (vol.3:256), it
was Discorea alata whose time of planting was critical. Taro is not seasonal, growing
throughout the year. When people wanted to refer to a time equivalent to ‘last year’ or ‘next
year’, they tended to do it by referring to their previous yam garden or their future yam
garden.

    In the light of this discussion the revised definition of POc *taqun given above reads
‘recurrent seasonal cycle, especially yam season cycle’.

11.2.1 Named seasons

[3] This set reflects POc *pali(s,j)i ‘generic term for grasses and other grass-like plants’ (vol.3:75), but this
    meaning is retained only in ’Are’are and Ulawa. The shift in semantic focus to ‘yam harvest’ must
    already have occurred in Proto Malaita–Makira.

[4] For Bugotu the sense ‘year’ is given only in the English–Bugotu finderlist of Ivens (1940a).

                                                                      Seasonal cycles and lunations 301

   While POc *taqun was the generic term for any seasonal cycle, specific seasons were
separately named. The POc homeland in the Bismarck Archipelago, and indeed much of
western Oceania, experience two seasons, strongly marked by wind and weather: the dry,
when the southeast trades blow with reasonable consistency, and the wet or monsoon, when
the less reliable northwesterlies blow. The names of the winds, POc *raki ‘southeast trades’
and POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind’[5], almost certainly also denoted the dry and wet seasons
respectively. The wet and dry seasons do not have sharp boundaries, however: the focus is on
the events that define them.

    Almost all Oceanic communities for which we have relevant information divide the year
into these two main seasons, sometimes accompanied by a short season between them, but the
names do not always reflect the POc terms. Thus Wogeo had the kama ‘trade wind season’
and the yavara,‘monsoon season’ (< POc *apaRat) (§11.5.1.1). Maenge had vinte ‘the
wet’ (May–September) and kaepâ ‘the dry’ (November–March) (§11.5.1.2). Barok has awat
(< POc *apaRat) “identified with the traditional cycle of six lunations, [while] two awat are
encompassed by the sun’s annual circuit of the ecliptic” (Wagner 1986:40). The two awat are
awat ni nien ‘season of plenty’ and awat nere loŋ ‘season of hunger’. Barok awat has thus
taken over the semantics of POc *taqun. Tangga, spoken on small islands east of New Ireland,
contributes no month names but offers bāt ae us, ‘the rainy season’ (November–March; us
‘rain’) and pisae ‘the sun’ or ‘dry season’ (May–September) (Bell 1946:143).

    Some of these names may have originally been allusions to crop-based seasons. Lichten-
berk (2008a:177) writes that the To’aba’ita year was traditionally divided into two halves: six
months of canarium almonds (April–September) and six months of strong winds (October–
March). Ivens (1927:397) writes that in Sa’a “practically there are two divisions of the year:
marāu or āu, the time associated with the canarium almonds [ŋali], and oku, the time
associated with the palolo” (cf §11.5.4). Mota had maɣoto ‘Miscanthus grass’ (‘wet season’),
rara ‘Erythrina’ (‘dry season’), and ud ‘palolo season’. Kirch & Green’s (2001:260ff) detailed
examination of time reckoning and the ritual cycle in Polynesia is summarised in 11.5.7.

    Grimble (1931) describes a Kiribati year of two seasons, marked by observation of te auti
‘Pleiades’ from early December to early June,6 and rimʷimāta ‘Antares’ from early June to
early December. The year is considered to begin with the appearance of the Pleiades about 15
degrees above the eastern horizon just after sunset, in about the first week of December. It
seems likely that Kiribati time reckoning has been influenced by Polynesian: two seasons are
maintained, but are now star-based.

    A number of names like those above also serve as labels for what ethnographers sometimes
describe as ‘months’, but we argue in §11.5 that these ‘months’ do not add up to anything like
a calendar in the modern Western sense.


11.3 Lunar months and solar years

    There is a tension between the solar year with its solstices and the lunar cycle. The dry and
wet seasons and the times for planting and harvesting crops are all governed by the solar year
and the stars, while shorter periods of the year are linked to named lunar ‘months’. How was
this difference reconciled in traditional Oceanic societies?

[5] Supporting cognate sets are given in volume 2:131–135.

[6] Kiribati lies north of the Equator, so the dates given in Table 11.1 do not apply.

302 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    A lunar cycle consists of 29.53 days. Twelve lunar months total a year of 354 days, eleven
days short of a solar year. In most Oceanic societies for which we have descriptions of lunar
months, the year was divided into twelve lunations, although in some cases thirteen are
recorded, totalling 384 days. Either way, if a strict program of activities were carried out
according to the lunar calendar it would have gradually become out-of-sync with the annual
seasonal cycle. It follows that a system of reckoning time by referring to a systematic list of
lunar months has little practical value unless it includes some mechanism for intercalation, i.e.
for inserting days to align the lunar year with the solar year.

   The need for intercalation carries with it an assumption that people are aware of the
existence of a solar year containing a specific number of lunar months. But this assumption is
not borne out by the few detailed accounts we have of attitudes to time, at least in WOc. While
most ethnographers evidently assume a concept of a year as a fixed period of time, for
speakers time is more flexible, with allowance for adjustment so that lunar months and known
seasonal events do not get out of step. Malinowski reported (1927:209) that “in the Trobriands
the moons are used rarely and only under special circumstances for counting time; the whole
system of naming and arranging moons has no special place in their time-reckoning.” Rather
they would become aware that at times the moons and the start of a seasonal cycle were out of
step, or as the Trobrianders put it, “the moons become silly” (1927:213).

   Damon (1990:35) distinguishes between lunar month names (kʷel) and moons in Muyuw
(PT).

__blockquote__
     Muyuw can count moons. They do not count kwel (although a new kwel begins with a
     new moon)… People might be able to tell me at what kwel something should happen
     but not how many kwel between now and then. They are keen observers of the moon
     and its phases, but they do not systematise their observations.

Damon (1990:4) considered the question of intercalation, noting that while the east had a
twelve month calendar, Central Muyuw had a thirteenth month. He writes “This disparity
might once have meant something quite significant – perhaps a way of adjusting solar/lunar
discrepancies … Repeated attempts to explore this contrast, however, revealed nothing during
either of my research periods.”

    Chowning & Goodenough (2016) writing of the Nakanai of New Britain who identify
eight months and Seeman (1862:297) who had considered the problem inherent in his eleven-
month Fijian calendar, both describe similar solutions. In both locations a period of from two
to four months is treated flexibly so that the rest of the year is marked out by more precise
markers of time such as the palolo rising (§11.4.3). In Nakanai this period is about four
months, roughly from June to September. In Fiji the period is aligned with the time of clearing
and preparing gardens around June and July.

    Wagner (1986) writes that the Barok of New Ireland use correlation between the moon, the
sun and the Pleiades in regulating their gardening activities, with the movements of the
relatively constant sun and Pleiades acting to correct the seemingly variable nature of the lunar
cycle. He names six lunations, suggesting that one, tege gowo, ‘the one that is left’, may serve
to fill the variable space until the appropriate new moon appears (§11.5.3.2).

    In Polynesia, where the calendar became more systematised than in early Oceanic, there
were procedures for intercalation. According to Collocott (1922:168) in Tonga

__blockquote__
     With [the month of] Tanumanga the year normally ends. If, however, observation of the
     yam and other plants and of fishes at the next new moon fails to discover the appear-
     ances proper to the month with which the year begins, Lihamua, another month is
     intercalated.

                                                               Seasonal cycles and lunations 303


    Buck (1932:230) records a different system in Rakahanga in the Cook Islands whereby the
usual year of twelve lunar months would be replaced at intervals by a thirteen-month year.
“The intercalation of a thirteenth month was decided by the simple rule that a new year could
not start until the first new moon after the morning rising of the Pleiades”. The strict applica-
tion of the rule would automatically lead to the intercalation of a 13th month in some cycles.

    In Hawaii according to Makemson (1941:97) a calendar consisted of twelve months of 30
days plus five days interspersed at various times set aside for religious rites. We wonder if this
is in fact a post-contact adjustment. We have found no evidence elsewhere in Oceania that the
year is seen as a unit of fixed length of 365 days, but rather a collection of recurring cycles.

    The assortment of ways in which communities, or perhaps ethnographers, have tried to fit
lunar months into a solar year leads one to think that not only was this difficulty unanswered
in POc times, but rather that the problem simply did not exist for its speakers. If the annual
cycle was seen as not a fixed period of time (§11.2), and if lunar months could not be
combined to form an assembly (§11.5), the question of reconciling the two systems becomes
meaningless. Rather, the topic may have become a matter for debate following introduction of
the western conceptual system of time.


11.4 Checkpoints

The term “checkpoint” is used here of natural, arboricultural and horticultural phenomena that
occur cyclically and allow Oceanic speakers to locate themselves in the cycle of the seasons
and prompt them to perform particular activities. Some checkpoints are fairly precise; for
example, the rising and setting of the Plaeiades (§11.4.2.1), the annual rising of the palolo sea
worm (§11.4.3). Other checkpoints are fuzzy: for example, the readiness of the canarium
almonds for harvesting (§11.4.5), or the beginning and ending of the wet season (§11.4.7).

   As becomes obvious below, a checkpoint can also sometimes become entrenched as the
name for a period of time in which the named phenomenon occurs. When we use the term
‘month’ in an Oceanic context, it is these periods of time that we are referring to: not a period
of time defined by its boundaries but a period of time that centres on a cyclically occurring
event (see further §11.5). Exceptions to this generalisation are found in Micronesia (§11.5.7)
and Polynesia (§11.5.8).

   Most of our data on seasonal time are in the form of lists of so-called lunar month names
collected from more than 30 languages from Western Oceanic, the SE Solomons, Vanuatu,
Micronesia, Fiji and Polynesia. They consist of, usually, 12 or 13 names for or references to
the kinds of phenomenon mentioned above that serve to mark roughly sequential points or
approximate periods of time through an annual cycle. The lists show that the same kinds of
markers are recognised in widely scattered parts of Oceania, notwithstanding its geographic
range. They include the apparent annual movement of the sun (§11.4.1) and stars (§11.4.2),
the palolo rising (§11.4.3), plant cycles (§11.4.4–6), weather patterns (§11.4.7), and land crab
migrations (§11.4.8). In spite of this, the lists are a very varied lot. It is apparent that except in
Micronesia and Polynesia they offer very little in the way of shared terms that could be taken
as a basis for reconstructing a calendar of POc lunar months. In this chapter we explore the
ways in which communities used these checkpoints in order to see if any system can be
recognised.

304 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


11.4.1 Solstices

Solstices occur twice each year, in June and December. In the Bismarck Archipelago and
elsewhere in the southern tropics, the June solstice is the time when the sun reaches its lowest
zenith, the December solstice its highest. Their occurrence as checkpoints in Oceanic
communities is mentioned infrequently in the literature, but all early Oceanic speaking
communities must have been aware of them.

   Panoff (1969:155) writes of speakers of Maenge (NNG; a dialect of Mengen, SE New
Britain):

__blockquote__
      Both extreme points from which the sun rises at solstices are perfectly known and are
      identified with conspicuous landmarks on the horizon (mountain, reef, islet etc.), which
      differ from village to village according to the surrounding topography. They are called
      kae taraŋana ‘resting places of the sun’, since they correspond to a ten days’ full stop in
      the shift.

Jenness & Ballantyne (1920:160) write that the Bwaidoga (PT)

__blockquote__
      have noticed [the sun’s] annual movement and related it to their gardening operations.
      Igoboda, the time when the sun is farthest south, is the period when gardening com-
      mences; when it reaches half-way back to the north again it is harvest-time; and at its
      northern zenith it ushers in the malamala season.

Wagner (1986:39) writes that the Barok (MM, New Ireland)

__blockquote__
      seem always to have noted the seasonal variation in the points-of-rising of the sun and
      moon … The northern solstice occurs when the sun rises over Lihir and the full moon
      rises over Namarodu … and the southern solstice when the sun rises over Namarodu and
      the full moon rises over Lihir.

   Although similar terms for the solstices have been noted in various parts of Polynesia (see
vol.2:153), no reconstructions are possible.

11.4.2 The stars

Stars appear to move across the sky in a circle whose centre is the north or south celestial pole.
Stars closer to the pole describe a smaller circle and never disappear from the night sky. Others
describe a larger circle that takes them below the nighttime horizon: they traverse the sky
invisibly during sunlight. The first pre-dawn rising of a star after a period of invisibility and
the last post-dusk setting before invisibility had calendrical significance for many premodern
peoples.[7] But the event recognised in pre-modern communities is the first brief apparent pre-
dawn rising of the star, which occurs when the star is high enough above the horizon to be
seen, perhaps two weeks later than its astronomical counterpart. Apparent risings are later than
their astronomical counterparts and apparent settings earlier. On the basis of dates given in
ethnographies, we assume that the apparent first or last rising/setting occurs when the star is 15 degrees
above the horizon, but the actual date depends on the topography of the communi-
ty’s environment and on weather.

[7] These astronomical risings and settings are respectively the heliacal (or cosmical) rising, the acronychal
    (or acronitic) rising, the cosmical setting and the heliacal setting (or acronychal/acronitic) setting).
    Heliacal means ‘coincident with the sun’ (rising when the sun rises, setting when the sun sets), while
    acronychal means ‘occurring at sunset’.

                                                                    Seasonal cycles and lunations 305


    These events affect all stars that rise and set. They appear to have been of especial impor-
tance in Nuclear Polynesian (§11.5.8), where certain month names are associated with the
rising or setting of a given star. PNPn *tolu and Proto Eastern Polynesian *takulua evidently referred respectively
to the pre-dawn rising of the middle star in Orion’s Belt and of Sirius, PNPn *tākelo to the
post-dusk rising of Betelgeuse. The most important sidereal checkpoints for traditional
Oceanic speakers were the risings and settings of the Pleiades (§11.2.1), but it can scarcely be
the case that the Pleiades were the only night sky events of which they took notice.

    With the single exception of the Pleiades, knowledge of stars and their movements seems
today scarcely to exist in western Oceanic communities.8 The only record there of stars being
used as calendar reference points comes from two closely related communities, Kilivila
speakers of the Trobriand Islands and Muyuw speakers from nearby Woodlark Island
(§11.5.2.1.1). A far more detailed awareness of stars has been retained in Micronesia and
Polynesia, no doubt due to their importance in navigation (Lewis 1972) (vol.2, ch.6). Here one
finds month names that are simultaneously star names. These terms, however, are never
cognate with those in Kilivila and Muyuw.

11.4.2.1 The Pleiades

The Pleiades are a small bright patch of stars with an annual orbit such that at times they
disappear from the night sky. Their significance as a checkpoint may have formed part of the
corporate memory that the ancestors of POc speakers brought with them from a former
homeland. Their presence with similar functions in languages across the Indo-Malaysian
archipelago (Forth 1983; Ammarell 1988) suggests that this was true at least as far back as
PCEMP.[9] The Pleiades have been recognised as significant calendrical markers throughout the
Oceanic world, although the timing of their appearance, and thus the particular event(s) they
mark, have changed by about five weeks in the approximately 3000 years since POc was
spoken[10].

   The dates of the Pleiades’ apparent risings and settings in the year of writing (2016) and in 1200 BC
(approximately when POc was spoken) at Kimbe, New Britain, are given in Table 11.1. Kimbe
is chosen as it is within the assumed region occupied by POc speakers. In Apia,
Samoa, the dates are just a day later.[11]


[8]  For example, when Ross attempted to elicit Takia (NNG) star names in the 1980s, the only feature
     whose name was well known was the Pleiades.

[9]  Nilsson (1920:114–122) notes that Mohammed swears by the setting Pleiades in the 53rd chapter of the
     Koran. Homer refers to them in the Iliad, and they are known to the Eskimos of Greenland and the
     Luiseño of southern California. According to Strehlow, in central Australia the Pleiades are seven
     maidens who had danced at the circumcision ceremony and then ascended into the heavens.

[10] This apparent lag in star movements is influenced by what is known as the precession of the equinoxes,
     caused by a slight wobble in the earth’s axis.

[11] The dates here and below were estimated using the software application Stellarium (http://www.stellari-
     um.org/), which allows one to see the sky from a given location at any point in time. The web page
     Sirius and its phenomena in the course of the year (http://www.gautschy.ch/~rita/archast/sirius/
     siriuseng.htm#jahreslauf, accessed on 30 April 2016, based on Gautschy (2011), provided a model for
     working out the Pleiades’ dates.

306 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Areas in which the Pleiades are known to provide checkpoints include the north New
Guinea coast (Wogeo, Table 11.10 in §11.5.1.1), around the Huon Peninsula of New Guinea
(see below), in Mangap-Mbula (Table 11.12 in §11.5.1.3), in Barok (Table 11.18 in §11.5.3.2),
in Micronesia (Table 11.22 in §11.5.7) and Polynesia (Table 11.23 in §11.5.8.1).

: Table 11.1     Apparent risings and settings of the Pleiades

__table__
                                   2016 AD                     1200 BC
      first pre-dawn rising        around 7 June               around 3 May
      last pre-dawn setting        around 5 November           around 1 October
       first post-dusk rising      around 6 December           around 1 November.
       last post-dusk setting      around 1 May 2017 AD        around 27 March 1199 BC

   In Western Oceanic communities the position of the Pleiades in the night sky provides a
series of indicators to stages in the yam cycle. In a number of languages of the north coast of
New Guinea, the Pleiades (Gedaged bal̥ as, Bing barahas, Takia baras, Wogeo baras, Manam
barasi) are associated with young women and fertility rituals marking the start of the
agricultural cycle. It is worth quoting Mager’s (1952:17–18) Gedaged dictionary entry for
bazas (= bal̥ as) in full. It refers to the Pleiades’ first pre-dawn rising.

__blockquote__
     The Pleiades constellation thought of as young unmarried women. When they reap-
     peared on June 13th or 14th the fertility rites were observed. When first seen the tauz
     triton shell was blown and a big rumpus made by beating and shouting. All the young
     people were awakened and driven into the sea to bathe; this was to cause them to be
     healthy, tall and beautiful. … When the Pleiades reappeared the people knew that it was
     time to prepare the fields for planting yams.

   Hogbin (1938b) describes the situation in Wogeo (§11.5.1.1), an island off the north New
Guinea coast, where certain rites known as baras losalosa ‘washing the Pleiades’ (or ‘washing
the pubescent girls’), are performed.

__blockquote__
     These are associated with the changing position of the Pleiades, a constellation known
     as Baras, the term for a girl passing through her first menstruation. … The purpose of
     the rite is to secure protection from sickness during the coming year and to ensure a
     good nut harvest (1938:138).

   Wedgwood (1934:397) describes an apparently identical rite in nearby Manam, barasi di-
ruʔu ‘they wash the Pleiades’, marking the beginning of the agricultural year. It takes place in
the months of April, May or June according to the village which is performing it. Wedgwood
comments

__blockquote__
     I was not able to find out how the people of Manam adjust the lunar year to the solar
     year, but I was given the names of thirteen ‘moons’, and was told that the people knew
     which ‘moon’ was which by the position of the Pleiades just after sundown in relation to
     the mountain top (1934:397).

Wedgwood’s ‘mountain top’ refers to Manam Island itself, a near-perfect volcanic cone.

   There is a tantalising entry in Chowning’s (n.d.) dictionary of Molima (PT): veʔovaiya-
liwoliwo ‘to greet the reappearance of the Pleiades’ (presumably its first pre-dawn rising), but
apart from ovaiya meyavinena ‘Pleiades’ there is no elaboration. The word ovaiya has no
known meaning outside this context, but meyavine-na means ‘female’. Is this an echo of the
association between the Pleiades and pubescent girls attested in Gedaged, Wogeo and
Manam? Intriguing is the fact that ovaiya meyavinena ‘Pleiades’ contrasts with ovaiya
meʔolotona ‘Orion’s Belt’, where meʔolotona means ‘male’.

                                                              Seasonal cycles and lunations 307


   In Yabem (NNG) Streicher (1982:80) writes about the period when the Pleiades are
prominent in the night sky:

__blockquote__
     the Pleiades [dam, damɔ] are the main constellation seen by the Jabêm [Yabem] during
     the dry season (October to March) and governing their activities in their gardens; i. e.
     the felling of trees to clear the ground for new gardens; the burning and planting of
     fields is done according to the position of the Pleiades.

Along with other terms for the Pleiades from around the Huon Peninsula, Yabem dam, damɔ
appears to reflect PAn *damaR. However, PAn *damaR is also more obviously the ancestor of
POc *ramaR ‘coconut leaf used as a torch when fishing’ (vol.3:382). The Huon Peninsula
terms would reflect a putative POc *dramaR, of which the initial nasal-grade consonant would
probably reflect an unknown morphological modification. Its POc reconstruction remains
uncertain.

<
PAn *damaR ‘tree resin used in torches (?)’ (ACD)
POc *dramaR (sense uncertain)
  NNG: Sio               dɔma             ‘January’ (also ‘Pleiades’?)
  NNG: Mangap (Marile)   ⁿdāma            ‘Pleiades; December’
  NNG: Tami              ⁿdam             ‘Pleiades’
  NNG: Yabem             dam, damɔ        ‘Pleiades’
  NNG: Yabem             dam(saŋiŋ)       ‘approx. June: period of transition between dry and wet seasons’
  NNG: Numbami           damana           ‘Pleiades, said to herald the rainy season; rainy season, season, year’ (for †damala)
>

   Yabem dam-saŋiŋ is a compound which Streicher (1982) explains as follows:

__blockquote__
     People ask each other, “Have the Pleiades disappeared from the western sky or not?”
     Disappearance of the Pleiades marks the end of the dry and the beginning of the wet
     season. Hence dam ‘Pleiades’ and saŋiŋ ‘enquiry’.

The Yabem term thus refers to the last post-dusk setting of the Pleiades in late April or early
May, and the Numbami term evidently marked the same seasonal transition. The Sio and
Mangap terms, however, seem to refer to their first post-dusk rising in early December, and an
ethnographic note in Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen (2007a) says that this marked the canarium
trees beginning to form buds (Table 11.12).

    Although the Pleiades carry less weight for the Maenge of New Britain (NNG), their
appearance and disappearance are noted. Panoff (1969:156) writes that

__blockquote__
     The movement of the Pleiades, which are called kumana puni me, literally ‘a dense
     cluster of young taros’ has failed to suggest to the Maenge the notion of a yearly cycle,
     although their disappearance [their last post-dusk setting–MO & MR] is interpreted as a
     signal to plant the last taros before the heaviest rains of the wet season.

   In Bwaidoga (PT) in the northern D’Entrecasteaux, Jenness & Ballantyne (1920:161) write
that the Pleiades

308 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


__blockquote__
        is the best known of all the constellations…. The natives often date their yam harvest
        from the time when the Pleiades appear in the east in the early evening till the time
        when they have moved over to the west.

     In Dobu (PT), Fortune (1963:127) writes that

__blockquote__
        gathering times are regulated by the position of the Pleiades in the sky …When he rises
        at about 15º angle with the ocean the bush is cleared; at about 30º the land is planted. He
        climbs from the north-eastern to the south-western sky, sets in the south-west, and is
        unseen for over a month. Then, when he rises in the north-east, harvest time is come.

    Damon (1990:39) notes with regard to Muyuw speakers (PT; §11.5.2.1.2) that yams should
be planted when the Pleiades “is thirty or so degrees above the western horizon at dusk, in
February” en route to their last post-dusk setting.

    For the Barok people of New Ireland (MM), “the timing of the gardens is regulated by
three celestial indicators: the moon, the sun and the Pleiades” (Wagner 1986:37). A discussion
of the Barok calendar is provided in §11.5.3.2.

    In his discussion of local knowledge of the heavenly bodies in north Vanuatu, Codrington
(1891:348) writes that

__blockquote__
        The Banks’ Islanders and Northern New Hebrides people content themselves with
        distinguishing the Pleiades, by which the approach of yam harvest is marked.

    The Pleiades play a significant calendrical role throughout Micronesia where it takes its
place in a sequence of twelve stars or constellations that serve as monthly timekeepers
(§11.5.7).

    The calendrical uses of the Pleiades described above refer to single events. In some EOc
languages, however, this has developed into a marking of the two seasons into which the year
is divided (§11.3).12

    Kirch & Green (2001:260ff) have made a detailed examination of the reckoning of time
and the ritual cycle in Polynesia, and we have drawn on their account for much of the
following. They quote from early descriptions – Tahitian King Pomare in 1818 (quoted by
Henry 1928), and Gill (1876) on Mangaia, among others – showing that the risings and
settings of the Pleiades were widely observed in many Polynesian societies, “where they were
used to mark the change in seasons and/or to mark the commencement of the year” (Kirch &
Green 2001:262). In this they concur with Makemson (1941:76) who wrote that

__blockquote__
        undoubtedly the Polynesians carried the Pleiades year with them into the Pacific from
        the ancient homeland of Asia. With but few exceptions they continued to date the
        annual cycle from the rising of these stars until modern times.

Gill (1876:317) writes that in Mangaia

__blockquote__
        The arrival of the new year was indicated by the appearance of Matariki, or Pleiades, on
        the eastern horizon just after sunset, i.e. about the middle of December. Hence the
        idolatrous worship paid to this beautiful cluster of stars in many of the South Sea
        Islands. … In many islands extravagant joy is still manifested at the rising of this
        constellation out of the ocean.


[12] It is possible that this is also true of the WOc language Barok, discussed in §11.5.3.2.

                                                            Seasonal cycles and lunations 309


   Kirch and Green note (Kirch & Green 2001:261–262) that the pre-dawn rising of the
Pleiades is observed as a significant event in East Futuna, Tikopia, Rakahanga, Pukapuka,
Mangareva, Tuamotu and New Zealand, while the post-dusk rising is significant in Tokelau,
Tuvalu, Tahiti and Mangaia. Both are significant in Hawaii. The pre-dawn rising counts as the
beginning of the year in Tokelau and Rakahanga, while in other locations across Polynesia it is
the post-dusk rising that counts. Kirch and Green infer from these distributions that both dates
were important for the early Polynesians, the May and October risings – or the new moons
which followed them – marking the beginnings of the two seasons, PPn *taqu, into which
most Polynesian communities divided their annual cycle. Strictly, it was probably not the rise
of the Pleiades themselves that counted as the beginning of the new season, but the appearance
after their rise of the first sliver of a new moon.

    As Kirch and Green note, the ancestral Polynesian calendar was inseparably linked to the
horticultural year, and especially the seasonal yam crop, whose scheduling depended on
climatic seasonality within the Polynesian homeland (Kirch & Green 2001:265). The pre-
dawn rising in May signalled the onset of the dry season in the Tonga-Samoa region, the
Polynesian homeland, while the post-dusk rising in October announced the onset of the wet.

    A POc term for the Pleiades, repeated here from vol. 2:171, can be tentatively reconstructed
– “tentatively” because the Nakanai, Roviana and Gela reflexes are phonologically irregular.
However, no reflexes have been found in calendrical terms.

<
PMP *buluq ‘a constellation, the Pleiades’ (ACD)
POc *bulu(q) ‘a constellation, the Pleiades’ (ACD: *puluq)
 MM: Nakanai               vulu             ‘Pleiades’ (v for †b)
 MM: Roviana               bi-bolo          ‘Pleiades’ (o for †u)
 SES: Gela                 buru-buru        ‘Pleiades’ (r for †l)
 SES: Kwaio                bulu-bulu        ‘star, firefly’
 SES: Lau                  bu-bulu          ‘star’
 SES: ’Are’are             puru-puru        ‘star, firefly’
 SES: Arosi                buru             ‘Pleiades’ (buru-buru ‘firefly’)
>

Apart from the small groups of New Guinea north coast and Huon Peninsula languages
mentioned above, terms for the Pleiades in Western Oceanic show no evidence of cognacy.
They are reconstructable as month names only in Micronesia (PChk *mʷakariker ‘about July;
the Pleiades’; §11.5.7) and Polynesia (PNPn *mataliki ‘month name, June’, from PPn *mataliki
‘Pleiades’; (§11.5.8).

11.4.3 Palolo risings

The palolo worm, Eunice viridis (also Leodis viridis or Palolo viridis) is a segmented sea
worm that lives in crevices in a coral reef. Its annual spawning occurs in a widely distributed
number of places, but always at a time associated with the lunar cycle. In Eastern Oceanic
communities this is typically six to nine days after the full moon in October and November
(Burrows 1955:141) while in Wogeo Hogbin (1938b:132) identifies it with the week preceding
the full moon. There is a minor rising, followed one lunation later by a major rising.
Occasionally, if the first rising occurs very late in the cycle there may be no second rising. The
lunar cycle moves back about eleven days every year, so that the critical dates actually occur,
as far as there are records, at variable dates between mid-October and mid-December
(Burrows 1955; Caspers 1984).

310 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Each year, before spawning, the palolo generates a tail, often several times larger than its
body, containing eggs and sperm. When the lunar timing is right the tails are released and
undulate to the surface where they form a writhing mass, the segments bursting and releasing
a milky, gelatinous soup of eggs and sperm. A rising lasts about four hours before dissolving
away. Its occurrence is predictable, and in many Oceanic locations the palolo’s breeding
frenzy is interrupted by people who scoop up the tails before they burst and cook them as a
culinary delight.

    The palolo’s appearance, although recorded in various places in Western Oceanic, carries
less calendrical weight there than in Eastern Oceanic. Damon reports that on Muyuw
(Woodlark Island) although the palolo (milamala) appears around the full moon of, usually,
October, it is neither eaten nor used for any calendrical purposes (1982:229). Similarly,
although Maenge on the south coast of New Britain

__blockquote__
       seem to be able to foretell with good accuracy the time of appearance of Palolo viridis,
       they have never thought of making a time marker of this striking phenomenon (Panoff 1969:158–59).

     However, Hogbin (1938b:132) writes for Wogeo on the NNG coast that

__blockquote__
       the seven or eight days preceding the night of the full moon in late October or early
       November are deliberately avoided when fixing dates for festivals. On this one night of
       the year (or occasionally on the night following) that curious marine annelid, the palolo
       worm [manuam], rises to the surface of the sea for spawning. It is regarded –with reason
       – as a great delicacy, but the haul is so uncertain that a taboo is imposed beforehand on
       all save urgent tasks in an attempt to ensure the co-operation of supernatural forces in
       securing favourable conditions.

   Mondragón (2004:294) writes that in Loh in the Torres Islands of northern Vanuatu the
palolo rising is not simply a source of food but has elicited long-standing ritual.

__blockquote__
       Once a year at dawn (on November 15th by the Gregorian calendar), if the sky is clear,
       the people of Loh gather in Peliauluwo to observe the rising sun as it emerges just to the
       south of the outline of Ureparapara. This, they claim, is a signal that the Palolo shall
       emerge from the ocean later that day. Although there has never been a tradition of
       horizon-based astronomical observation in the Torres, Loh islanders have long em-
       ployed the peculiar solar alignment as a key indicator of the emergence of the Palolo
       and the approach of the summer solstice.

Although there are obvious errors in linking the rising of the palolo with a fixed solar event
rather than a more mobile lunar one, as Mondragón notes, the association is presumably a
remnant of some earlier calendrical ritual which has now been mistakenly fixed into the
western calendar.

   Because the palolo worm is tied directly to the lunar cycle, it plays a substantial role in the
naming of lunar months. Many languages with month names that include a palolo term have a
pair of such names associated with the small and big risings and denoting successive months
around October and November. A number (Sa’a, ’Are’are, Loh, Mota, Mwotlap) use the term
for palolo to refer to a season that may extend for several more months, while in Kwaio its
regular appearance marks the span of a year. The palolo occurs in month names in a few
Western Oceanic languages (Kairiru munuan,[13] Wogeo manuan, Yabem igeyaŋ, Bing
yagyahag, Kilivila/Muyuw milamala), but the only reconstructed terms are PEOc *(o,u)du
‘palolo worm’ and PCP *balolo ‘palolo worm, season name’ (vol.4:212). Below is a list of
SES and NCV palolo month names. From these it is clear that PEOc would have had a term
meaning literally ‘big palolo’ referring to the month of the major rising, with a range of
possible terms for ‘big’.[14]

[13] Kairiru munuan is inferred to have meant ‘palolo’ because of its evident cognacy with Wogeo manuan.
     It is not glossed by Wivell (1981b).

                                                                   Seasonal cycles and lunations 311


__formgroup__
     SES: Gela           odu             ‘November, when the odu [palolo] comes’
     SES: Gela           |odu lade|      ‘October’ (lade ‘flower of nut tree’)
     SES: Gela           |odu tina|      ‘November’ (tina ‘big’)
     SES: Arosi          ogu             ‘palolo’; ‘late October/November’
     SES: Arosi          |ogu raha|      ‘December’ (raha ‘big’)
     SES: ’Are’are       |oku rate|      ‘September’ (rate ‘small bamboo used to stake yams’)
     SES: ’Are’are       |oku māʔa|      ‘October’ (māʔa ‘very’)
     SES: ’Are’are       |oku tanu|      ‘November’ (tanu ‘ladle’)
     SES: ’Are’are       |oku paina|     ‘December’ (paina ‘big’)
     SES: Sa’a           |oku lade |     ‘September’ (lade ‘flower of nut tree’)
     SES: Sa’a           |oku mʷā |      ‘October’ (mwā ‘full’)
     SES: Sa’a           |oku denu|      ‘November’ (denu ‘ladle’)
     SES: Sa’a           |oku paine|     ‘December’ (paine ‘grow big’)
     SES: Kwaio          odu             ‘palolo worm; year; span of a year’
     SES: Kwaio          |buli-ʔi odu|   ‘December-January’ (buli-ʔi ‘after’, ‘last of’)
     NCV: Loh            n-ut            ‘palolo’; (≈ November)
     NCV: Loh            |n-ut lavə|     ‘≈ December’ (lavə ’big’)
     NCV: Loh            |n-ut wir |     ‘≈ January’ (wir probably ‘rump’)
     NCV: Loh            |n-ut mələɣɛhə| ‘≈ February’ (mələɣɛhə ‘green’)
     NCV: Loh            |n-ut meməʈarə| ‘≈ March’ (meməʈarə ‘red’)
     NCV: Mota           |un ɣoɣona|     ‘≈ September’ (ɣoɣona ‘bitter’)
     NCV: Mota           |un lava  |     ‘≈ November’ (lava ‘big’)
     NCV: Mota           |un werei|      ‘≈ December’ (werei ‘rump’)
     NCV: Mwotlap        n-in-ɣon        ‘≈ September’ (ɣon ‘bitter’)
     NCV: Mwotlap        n-in-yiɣ        ‘≈ October’ (yiɣ ‘small’)
     NCV: Mwotlap        n-in-lap        ‘≈ November’ (lap ‘big’)
     NCV: Mwotlap        n-in-wey        ‘≈ December’ (wey ‘rump’)

   Semantically the Fijian languages agree with the languages above in reflecting PEOc ‘big
palolo’. They also agree with Loh, Mota and Mwotlap in having month names meaning ‘small
palolo’, suggesting that the latter occurred in Proto Remote Oceanic.

__formgroup__
     Fij: Bauan     |balolo lailai|       ‘October’ (lailai ‘small’)
     Fij: Bauan     |balolo levu  |       ‘November’ (levu ‘big’)
     Fij: Wayan     |balolo sewa  |       ‘October’ (sewa ‘small’)
     Fij: Wayan     |balolo levu  |       ‘November’ (levu ‘big’)


[14] Proto Banks–Torres month terms are listed and reconstructed in §11.5.5, Table 11.20.

312 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Like Fijian, Polynesian languages reflect PCP *balolo ‘palolo worm’, but differ in replacing
‘small’ and ‘big’ with reflexes of PPn *muqa ‘first’ and *muli ‘last’. Palolo risings have not
been reported in Polynesia outside Tonga and Samoa, and month names have become divorced
from their original reference and are now simply recurring names in a list. Even in Samoan the
terms refer inexplicably to two non-palolo months.[15]

__formgroup__
     Pn: E Futunan           |palolo muʔa|       ‘August’ (muʔa ‘first’)
     Pn: E Futunan           |palolo muli|       ‘September’ (muli ‘last’)
     Pn: Samoan              palolo-mua          ‘July’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Samoan              palolo-muli         ‘August’ (muli ‘last’)
     Pn: Tuvalu              |palolo mua|        ‘August’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Tuvalu              |toe palolo|        ‘September’ (toe ‘again’)
     Pn: Manihiki            paroro-mua          ‘September’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Manihiki            paroro-muri         ‘October’ (muri ‘last’)
     Pn: Tokelauan           palolo-mua          ‘June’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Tokelauan           |toe palolo|        ‘July’ (toe ‘again’)
     Pn: Tahitian            paroro-mua          ‘July’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Tahitian            paroro-muri         ‘August’ (muri ‘last’)
     Pn: Penrhyn             paroro-mua          ‘July’ (mua ‘first’)
     Pn: Penrhyn             paroro-muri         ‘August’ (muri ‘last’)

    What the listings above do not show is that the palolo month names were integrated into a
system that included other aspects of the annual cycle, aspects which are sometimes mentioned
in the notes attached to lists of names. Thus in Wogeo manuan also marks the beginning of
yavara ‘north-west monsoon season’ (< POc *apaRat, vol.2:129–130) while in Sa’a oku peine
marks the awalosi (vol.2:130), again the northwest monsoon that brings the rainy season
(Hogbin 1938b:137; Ivens 1927:397). Kilivila milamala marks the beginning of the new year,
preceded by the yam harvest and followed by the burning, clearing, and planting of next year’s
gardens (Damon 1982:231). Similarly in Loh, yams and other crops are planted around nʉt
‘palolo’ and poles are erected for the climbing vines around nʉt lavü ‘big palolo’. The series of
nʉt month names continues with nʉt melüɣehe ‘green palolo’ and nʉt memüdarü ‘red palolo’.
According to Durrad (1939) and Alexandre François (fieldnotes) ‘green palolo’ is when the
yam vines are in full green leaf and ‘red palolo’ is when they begin to turn red. Codrington
(1891) records ‘small palolo’ as the season of maturity and ‘big palolo’ as the time for digging
up the tubers. Thus his yam calendar runs a month behind those for Kilivila and Loh.

    Although no POc term for palolo can be reconstructed (vol.4:212), there is enough
evidence to suggest that POc speakers may have had at least a calendrical checkpoint named
for the palolo.

11.4.4 Yam or taro cultivation

The one marker of the time of year that would have been consistently recognised by all
members of a community was the stage of development of the staple crop, particularly the
yam, Dioscorea spp., on which many communities depended for their survival (vol.3:258–261).
Yams are seasonal, with planning essential for prior garden preparation and sowing.
Once established, the developing vines are usually given a stake or frame for support. Leaves
change colour and die off, indicating the appropriate time for harvesting. The yam crop
effectively serves as a kind of time line along which various points may be identified to mark
a particular occasion or event. Thus, almost the whole life of a community, the times for
greatest gardening activity, for rituals, for feasting, for trading, would be dependent on the
timing of the staple crop. So it is not surprising that month names based on the various stages
of yam cultivation, are common in Oceanic languages such as Kwaio (Table 11.3), Mota
(Table 11.4), Fijian (Table 11.5) and Tongan (Table 11.2), although they do not extend beyond
Tonga, which lies at the eastern extreme of cultures practising yam cultivation. Tongan itself,
however, has one of the most articulated (or perhaps best described, by Collocott 1922) sets of
agriculturally based month names.

[15] A set of Proto Nuclear Polynesian month names is reconstructed in §11.5.8.2.

                                                               Seasonal cycles and lunations 313


   At the opposite extreme, there are almost no Western Oceanic month names that directly
denote stages of yam cultivation. However, certain Sinaugoro names refer indirectly to yam
growing (Table 11.16 in §11.5.2.2). The term ɣʷa-koli ‘April approx.’ means ‘month of no
food’ (ɣue ‘moon, month’, koli ‘finished’), referring to the time of hunger, while ɣʷa-ɣaniɣani

: Table 11.2     Tongan month names that allude to yam cultivation

__table__
      Month name       Word glosses     Accompanying notes
 12-01 liha-mua         ‘early nit’      The first planted yams are forming roots. Little protuberances
                                        or roughnesses, like nits, appear on the heads of the roots.
 01-02 liha-mui         ‘late nit’       All the yams, late as well as early, show the little nit-like protu-
                                        berances.
 04-05 fakaafu-moui ‘putting forth       Vigorous growth with healthy suckers and shoots appearing on
                      living shoots’    many plants.
 05-06 fakaafu-mate ‘putting forth       Suckers arc now not so vigorous, and dead tops of the yams
                      dead shoots’      appear.
 06-07 hiliŋa-kelekele ‘laying earth’    The precise meaning is not clear.
 07-08 hiliŋa-meā      ‘laying meā’   Time to dig and store the remaining yams. The meaning of
                                     meā is unclear in this context.
 09-10 fuufuunekinaŋ ‘full leafiness’ The yams planted around June and July are now in full leaf.
 11-12 tanu-maŋa     ‘throwing soil A growing yam is likely to project slightly above the ground.
                    on branch,       Frequently a small yam grows down from the same stem thus
                                     making a branch or fork on the head of the root. In this
                    fork’
                                     month if the head of a yam appears forked (maŋa), the gar-
                                     dener banks it over with soil (tanu).

‘May approx.’ means ‘month of eating’ (ɣaniɣani ‘eating, food’) heralding harvest after ɣʷa-
koli.

   Other month name sets that refer to agriculture are from the SE Solomons and Vanuatu,
and refer to stages of yam cultivation. Table 11.3 lists Kwaio (SES) month names that refer to
such stages.

   Loh (NCV) month names are set out in Table 11.20 in §11.5.5. Here the colour terms in
n’ʉt mələɣɛhə ‘green palolo (January)’ and n’ʉt meməʈarə ‘red palolo (February)’ refer to the
leaves of the yam, not to the palolo.

   Codrington (1891) lists a set of alternative month names in Mota (Table 11.4) which
clearly refer to gardening activities, and these are echoed in the limited data available from
central and southern Vanuatu. Thus Atchin (Malakula) hil-hilɛn ‘name of a feast’, literally
‘digging up’ and ruwan ‘clearing (forest)’. Two other Atchin month names echo the Sinaugoro
pair above: boŋ hoal wele ‘days of little food’ and boŋ hoal lɛp ‘days of much food’. Crowley
(1998:154) notes that in Sye (SV) some month names refer to the yam cycle. They consist of
mov and a verb. Thus mov-ɣorovoh (August) where ɣorovoh means ‘s/he cleared a garden site’
is ‘month of clearing a garden site’. Similarly mov-ɣerevei (September) ‘month of trimming’,
mov-ɣowi (November) ‘month of planting’.

314 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

: Table 11.3          Kwaio month names that allude to yam cultivation (Keesing 1975)

__table__
     Kwaio        Word glosses                                       Accompanying notes
     month name
 01   labaniŋa     ‘staking plants’                                   roughly January and February
 03   kai-galogalo kai ‘yam’, galo ‘twist’                            yams are climbing on trellises
 05   luʔufi-luma luʔufi- ‘search for’, luma ‘house’                  segment of year when yams are ripening
 07   māʔe-falisi māʔe ‘section, group, part, portion’,               the beginning of the yam harvest
                  falisi ‘yam harvest’
 08   ʔeli-ladāʔi  ʔeli ‘dig’, lada ‘dig with a stick’                August, September and October
 11   kai-laŋaʔa kai ‘yam’, laŋaʔa ‘garden’                           yams are ready to produce first shoots,
                                                                     roughly November and December


: Table 11.4      Mota yam cycle ‘months’

__table__
       Mota month name and gloss              Codrington’s definition        POc ancestor
 04     tara ‘chop’                            ‘chopping down trees’          *taRaq ‘adze’, vol.1:90
 05     rakasag ‘turn upward’                  ‘turning over and piling up cleared vegetation’
 06-07 siŋ ‘burn (VT)’                         ‘burning cleared vegetation’ *sinaR ‘shine’, vol.2:157
 08     nur ‘dig a hole’                       ‘digging yam holes’
 09     riv ‘plant (V)’                        ‘planting’
 10     tau matua ‘season’ + ‘ripe’            ‘season of maturity’           *taqun, §11.2 + *[ma]tuqa ‘old’,
                                                                             vol.2:211
 11     ɣoro (ɣoroɣoro ‘cutting of yam         ‘dig (tubers up with digging stick)’
       vines’)
 12     umʷa ‘clear away growth from a          ‘clearing garden’             *quma ‘garden’, vol.1:117
       garden, the first stage in preparation’


: Table 11.5         Terms in Wayan Fijian that denote stages of yam cultivation

__table__
      Month name           Word glosses                                 Accompanying notes
 04-05 vula i keli-keli     keli ‘dig’                                   season for harvesting root crops
 04-05 vula i visa-visa     visa ‘have the leaves wither                 harvesting season for yams
                           and die after maturity’
 07-11 vula i lau-lau       lau-lau ‘plant’ (V)                          season for planting
 10-03 vula i kʷadre-kʷadrē kʷadre ‘sprout, shoot up’                    growing season
 11-03 vula ðola            ðola ‘grow’                                  season of (crop) growth

                                                                   Seasonal cycles and lunations 315


    There are terms in Wayan Fijian (Table 11.5) that look suspiciously like month names as
they begin with vula ‘moon, month’, but it is clear from the period lengths they denote (in the
leftmost column) that they here mean ‘season, time of year’, as Pawley & Sayaba (2022) note.
The same is probably true of the similar expressions in Bauan Fijian in Capell (1941).

11.4.5 Canarium arboriculture

Canarium arboriculture was practised in New Guinea probably for millennia before the arrival
of Oceanic speakers. There are numerous tree species of the genus Canarium. Those grown by
Oceanic speakers are discussed and terms for them reconstructed in vol.3. POc *[ka]ŋaRi
referred to C. Indicum and probably was also used as the generic term (vol.3:312–317). The
edible fruit is often called the canarium nut or canarium almond.16

    Canarium almonds continue to be highly valued in Near Oceania and Vanuatu because they
are good eaten raw or smoked, and pounded almonds are an essential ingredient in much
appreciated oily puddings. As a result, their annual harvest in July and August has given rise to
various ceremonies and rituals (vol.3:314), and these have come to mark certain months of the
year in various communities in Near Oceania.[17]

    The most extreme instance of canarium-based month names in the data is in Mangap
(NNG) from Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen 2007a, listed in Table 11.12 in §11.5.1.3. The
ethnographic definitions shown in the “Accompanying notes” column of Table 11.12 all refer
to canarium (Tok Pisin galip) trees.

    The Roviana month names in 11.4.5 are from Waterhouse’s (1949) dictionary. Only
muzara ‘approx. October’ is assigned to a western month. The month haele can be assigned to
July–August as its gloss (‘climb’) and the accomanying note indicate that it is the time of the
canarium harvest. The month lomu kubata must also be somewhere around harvest time.

     Waterhouse’s definition of okete ‘Canarium’ reads

__blockquote__
       okete, a tree [Canarium sp.]. The ripening, gathering and storing of the nuts were
       important features in Roviana life, and several of the months take their names from
       various phases of the okete cult.

Not much appears to be known about the Roviana canarium cult, but the month names in 11.4.5
indicate that canarium was sacrificed at hope, ‘the general name for sacred places,
especially where skulls are placed’ (Waterhouse 1949). There is plentiful archaeological
evidence of canarium in Roviana shrine excavations (Aswani & Sheppard 2003). A perhaps
similar cult is recorded on neighbouring Choiseul by McClatchey et al. (2006). About
canarium, they write:

[16] ‘Canarium almond’ is technically more appropriate, as the canarium ‘nut’ is botanically not a nut but a
   drupe, like the almond. A drupe is a seed contained in a hard covering that makes up the ‘stone’ of a
   stone fruit like the peach (vol.3:312).

[17] We have found no instances in Vanuatu, but our collection of Vanuatu calendars is not well distributed
     and in some instances not well understood (see §11.5.5).

316 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

__blockquote__
     Its usage so permeated peoples’ ceremonial and dietary lives that some ancient and
     special relationship is connotated particularly through usage as a sacrificial offering and
     as a principal symbol of land tenure and authority … The uses and interactions with
     Canarium by the Babatana and Ririo are extensive and permeate most aspects of
     traditional life. It is difficult to imagine these cultures in the absence of Canarium.

    Various month names referring to canarium almonds in other Oceanic languages are listed
in Table 11.7. These mostly denote the time when the canarium almonds are first ready for
harvesting, and the geographic distribution of these names further attests to the cultural
importance of canarium.

    No reconstructions of month names involving the canarium almond can be made, even at
quite local levels, but the data and discussion in this subsection indicate that in cultures of
Near Oceania the canarium almond is more important than any other food stuffs except the
yam (§11.4.4), and that it has (or had, traditionally) a significance that goes beyond nutrition.
In the western Solomons there was a canarium cult. Whether or not the naming of months for
events in the canarium cycle reflects an earlier canarium cult, is unknown. However, the
cultural significance of the canarium is widely enough spread in Near Oceania to suggest that
if there was a term in POc-speaking communities labelling a lunar month around June, July
and August it was likely to be one that referred to the ripening or harvesting of canarium
almonds.

: Table 11.6      Roviana month names

__table__
Month name Word glosses                          Accompanying notes
haele      ‘climb’                               the climbing month (i.e. for canarium almonds)
h<in>aele  <in> NOMINALISER + ‘climb’            the season when women may eat canarium al-
                                                 monds
lomu kubata lomu ‘fall’                          the name of a month
            kubata ‘black ripe canarium’
muzara      ‘crush’                      approx. October
m<in>uzara <in> NOMINALISER + ‘crush’ month name: men then commence to eat
                                         smoked canarium almonds
susuni      suni ‘prick’                 month name; the season for general offering of
                                         smoked canarium almonds at a hope
tome-laŋono tome ‘hide’                  month name: canarium almonds are then packed
            laŋono placename             in special baskets, and put away to be smoked.
                                         Some are taken to the hope of Langono.

: Table 11.7      Oceanic month names that refer to the canarium almond

__table__
    Month name           Word glosses                 Accompanying notes
Kove (NNG) (Chowning 2009)
07 kokopalai       koko ‘cooked, eaten’,   about July?
                   palai ‘canarium almond’
Maringe (MM) (White et al. 1988)
07 posa-sitʰa      posa ‘arrive’,          time of year around July at which almond nuts first
                   sitʰa ‘Canarium’        mature
08 finoɣa          ‘year’                  time of year around July and August when almond
                                                      trees (sitʰa) are full of ripe nuts; conceived as com-
                                                      pletion of yearly cycle
Kwaio (SES) (Keesing 1975)
09 faʔamada           faʔa- CAUSATIVE;             heavy rains in season when canarium almonds are
                      mada ‘ripe’                  ripening (September)
Sa’a (SES) (Ivens 1927)
08 hure’i lade        hurei ‘emerge’,              emerge and form (of canarium almond); August,
                      lade ‘form’                  winds S.E.
08 ŋali maelo                                      the month of August, the time of ripe nuts

Owa (SES) (Mellow 2014)
  meotogo ni aŋari aŋari ‘Canarium’                3rd lunar month, when the galip nuts ripen

                                                             Seasonal cycles and lunations 317


11.4.6 Wild plants

The Maenge calendar (Table 11.11, §11.5.1.2) represents the most extreme instance of months
being named for wild plants, but such names are fairly common across Oceania. One of the
most widespread is the flowering of the coral tree or erythrina (POc *rarap ‘Erythrina spp.’,
POc *baR[baR] ‘Erythrina variegata’; vol.3:158–161), with distinctive bright orange-red
spiral flowers at the end of each branch. It occurs in month names in Maenge (NNG),
Sinaugoro (PT; Table 11.16) and Mota (NCV; Table 11.20). The tree is often a salient feature
in and around Melanesian coastal villages, and its flowering is often taken as an indicator that
it is time to plant yams. Other references to the erythrina are less specific (or less well
understood). Two NCV languages of Malakula refer to the erythrina. They are Avava, which
has the name ivlemial for November, glossed ‘red, Erythrina variegata’ by Crowley (2005),
and Atchin, for which Capell & Layard (1980) give the month names rere tsar ‘the leaves of
the erythrina are falling’ (tsar ‘erythrina’) and ni-rere ‘[the erythrina is] red’.

    Also featuring in month names are two tall grass species. In Western Oceanic this is usually
Saccharum edule (PWOc *tabuqaR, vol.3:301), known in Papua New Guinea as pitpit, a tall
grass related to sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum). It is cultivated for the unopened inflores-
cence at the tip of the cane, which is harvested as a seasonal vegetable that is either roasted in
its leafy sheath or cooked in coconut cream with other vegetables. The other grass is Miscant-
hus floridulus (POc *pi(y)uŋ, vol.3:253), a reed-like grass which grows on dry hillsides, to
about 2 metres tall.

    Table 11.8 shows that the month names that refer to the two grasses are more or less in
complementary distribution, with Saccharum edule in NNG and Miscanthus floridulus in
SES, Vanuatu and Fiji. The event that is marked across the languages in Table 11.8 is the
flowering of the grass, usually in April or May (Bariai, Yabem, Arosi and Wayan Fijian). It is
at least plausible to suggest that this month was also labelled in this way in POc, and that
terms for S. edule were replaced by terms for M. floridulus as Oceanic speakers moved
eastward.

318 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

: Table 11.8     Month names involving tall grasses in Oceanic languages

__table__
     Month name       Word glosses              Accompanying notes
Bariai (NNG)
 04 tabual aea laoe tabual ‘S. edule, eaten’,    season characterised by good weather near the
                    laoe ‘a fruit’s time of     month of April when S. edule ripens
                    ripeness’
Mangseng (NNG)
 12 tovu=po epei ko tovu=po ‘S. edule            middle of S. edule season
                    season’, epei ‘half’, ko
                    ‘there’
Yabem (NNG) (Streicher 1982)
 05 dabuʔ-benoŋ      dabuʔ ‘S. edule’,           the time between the dry and the rainy seasons; the
                    benoŋ ‘calm’.               time of ripening of S. edule and abatement of the
                                                NW monsoon; the resulting calm is/was ascribed to
                                                S. edule hulls being thrown into the sea
Sinaugoro (PT): see Table 11.16
Sa’a (SES) (Ivens 1927)
 09 ōku rate           ōku ‘dry season’,         3rd lunar month, when the galip nuts ripen
                      rate ‘M. floridulus’
Arosi (SES) (Fox 1978)
 05 raŋisi mʷaō        raŋisi ‘rain on’,         month when this grass flowers
                      mʷaō ‘grass sp.’
Mota and Mwotlap (NCV): see Table 11.20
Anejom (SV) (Lynch 2001b)
 03 niau              niau ‘reed sp.’            flowers in March
 08 niyeŋ-aɣen                                   bitter wild cane
Wayan (Fij) (Pawley & Sayaba 2002)
 04 vula i ŋasau      vula ‘moon, month’,        end of hurricane season, when ŋasau, reeds, are in
                     ŋasau ‘M. floridulus’      flower; season for harvesting yams


11.4.7 Weather patterns

The weather cycle of Pacific communities is dominated by the contrast between the wet and
the dry seasons. In the dry season, typically from May to October, the southeast trades (POc
*raki) blow, in the wet the northwesterlies (POc *apaRat), from December to March, and the
sea is rough (vol.2:131–135). Between the seasons are the doldrums.

   Month names in some languages make fairly simple reference to the seasons. Thus in Kove
(NNG) May is called hai kaŋkaŋa, presumably the start of hai (< POc *raki), August simply
hai, and the period from September to November sua-hai (Chowning 2009). Sinaugoro and
Motu (PT) each have a month lailai, but in Sinaugoro it denotes June, in Motu March.
Sinaugoro also has the term lai-toɣa ‘quiet lai’ for the June–July period.

                                                             Seasonal cycles and lunations 319


    ’Are’are (SES) has several month names that refer to the dry, calm season ōku: ōku rate
‘Miscanthus dry season, September’, ōku māʔa ‘very dry season, October’, ōku paina ‘big dry
season, December’ (Geertz 1970).

    Fewer languages have month names reflecting POc *apaRat. Those that do are on the
south coast of Papua: Lala avala ‘thirteenth month’ (Clunn & Kolia 1977), Sinaugoro avala-
kavata and raba-avala, both labels for December and presumably meaning ‘start of avara’.

    Some languages refer directly to rain, e.g. Tongan (Pn) vai-mua ‘early water, February-
March’ and vai-mui ‘late rain, March-April’. Others refer to the rainy weather a little more
obliquely, for example, Arosi (SES) hura-doa ‘blind month (because windy and rainy),
April’ (hura ‘month’, doa ‘blind’); waru-ahe ‘all streams flooded, May’ (waru ‘stream’; ahe
‘flooded’); waro ŋaŋara ‘violent winds, August’ (waro ‘month’, ŋaŋara ‘rough (of weather)’.

: Table 11.9    Yabem month names that allude to the weather

   Month           Word glosses             Accompanying notes
   name
01 kɔm-sìŋ     kom ‘field’,                 The sheaths of sago leaves (labi-sìŋ) were used by rain-
               sìŋ ‘sword’                  makers for making rain-magic.
02 pɛŋgɔʔ-àwà- pɛŋgɔʔ ‘bird sp.’, àwà       There is no rain and the cry of the pɛŋgɔʔ bird can be
   àndaŋ       ‘voice’, àndaŋ ‘hot’         heard during the dry season.
04 niplema     nip ‘coconut palm’,          The NW monsoon turning to the north blows so strongly
               lema ‘arm, hand’             that it often shakes the fronds from the palms , much to
                                            the despair of the women cooking their meals in front of
                                            their houses under the palms of the village square.
05 dabuʔ-benoŋ dabuʔ ‘wild                  The time between the dry and the rainy seasons: it is
               sugarcane’,                  getting cooler; wild sugarcane is ripening; the NW mon-
               benoŋ ‘calm’                 soon is abating. The resulting calm was ascribed to the
                                            wild sugarcane hulls being thrown into the sea.
08 buani           bu-ŋa-dani ‘water its-   The height of the rainy season.
                   thicket’

   The Sa’a (SES) term for a month around August is ro hutuhuto ‘the two foam’, obviously a
reference to rough seas, but the allusion of ro ‘two’ in this context is not known.

   One of two languages of communities that undertook long-distance voyaging refer to the
odd month with a reference to this. Thus Motu veadi hiri-hiri ‘July’ refers to the hiri, the
annual trading voyage westward to the Elema communities of the Papuan Gulf, powered by
the southeast tradewind. Arosi ʔariha ‘January’ is a nominalisation of ʔari ‘come, go’ and
denotes the month ‘when voyages are made’ at the beginning of the northwesterlies season.

   Months in Yabem (Table 11.9) show poetic allusions to phenomena associated with the
seasons. The numbers in the leftmost column are approximations to the lunar months denoted.
The use of metonymic allusion is not restricted to Yabem. It is found in Mangap (NNG) (Table
12) and the Torres and Banks Islands languages (NCV) (Table 11.20). It was probably
widespread, and perhaps many of the month names we cannot gloss are due to the fact
speakers have forgotten their meanings or that researchers have not collected them.

320 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


11.4.8 Land crab migration

Apart from the palolo, the only animal mentioned in month names across a range of languages
is the land crab. Pawley (vol.4:173) writes:

__blockquote__
     The large land crabs, Cardisoma spp., are an important food source in many Oceanic
     communities and there are often several terms relating to their growth stage and
     spawning behaviour. For example, Foale (1998) reports that in west Gela (central
     Solomons) females of the abundant land crab Cardisoma hirtipes [Discoplax hirtipes]
     migrate to the beach at certain phases in the lunar cycle in the wet season, from October
     to December, releasing zoea larvae from their egg mass (lami). … Three weeks before
     doing this they migrate to the sea to immerse themselves, an event known as the sapa
     toga (thousands go seawards). This is the preferred time to take them because they are
     fatter. In Fiji, Wayans refer to the mass migration of C. hirtipes as vui.

Pawley notes elsewhere (2022) that spawning time of land crabs (tubā) in Waya ‘happens at
high tide on two or three evenings in December, January and February’. Hence Wayan Fijian
labels the season from December to February vula ni vūsē (vūsē ‘have or carry eggs or
spawn’).

   Panoff (1969:157) notes that in Maenge (NNG), the first month of the wet season (end of
April to end of May) is called in some villages goga, the name given to ‘land crabs [which]
leave the bush at night and gather on the beach where they are extensively caught by torch-
light’.

   Roviana (MM) has four month names, roughly October to February, that allude to the
ɣarumu ‘land crab’: ɣarumu kara ‘month of the sea crabs’; ɣarumu leana (lea-na ‘good’)
‘[month] when crabs move to beach [to spawn – MR]’; porana hite (porana ‘poor condition’,
hite ‘small’) ‘[month] when crabs are going off in condition, but some are still good; porana
lavata (lavata ‘big’) ‘[month when] crabs are no good for food’ (Waterhouse 1949)

   Fox (1955) defines Gela (SES) kakau (k.o. land crab) as ‘the name of the month of Decem-
ber when crabs come down to the sea to spawn’ while the following month, tivu popolo, lit.
‘look for [crabs] in covering’ refers to the time ‘when crabs return from the sea and hide in
bushes’.

   We have not been able to ascertain why the Maenge month name is attributed to May whilst
the remainder centre on December.


11.5 Lunar ‘months’

    Lunar months were a useful way of planning for forthcoming festivals or intended trading
voyages, or counting off the period of time during which a taboo applied to individuals
following a birth or death. Ross quotes an elderly Takia (NNG) speaker describing the timing
of a planned event (vol.2:288):

__blockquote__
     All right, and so they waited – in the old times they didn’t know about years. They
     always kept time by the moon. Thus, when they wanted to set a time – when they
     wanted to set a time, they mentioned the month. But they also didn’t know the names of
     the months. The moon waned and waxed, that’s all. They would say the months in this
     way: they would count the months with their hands, they would count them with their
     fingers. And then they would say, the month of the little finger will come and will die,
     the next finger will die, and the next and in the fourth months the man and woman will
     get married. They said this – well – with regard to their saying that they would marry in
     four months …

                                                              Seasonal cycles and lunations 321


   Ross saw in this a striking similarity with Whorf’s description of the Hopi conception of
time. While westerners see time as if it is a physical entity, made up of measurable, countable
units (minutes, hours, days of the week, months of the year), the Hopi do not make this
extension. Ten days cannot be imaginatively experienced by the Hopi as if they were ten men.
“[They] experience only one day, today; the other nine (or even all ten) are something
conjured up from memory or imagination” (1956:139).

   As Whorf describes it (1956:148):

__blockquote__
     The count [of days] is by ordinals. This is not the pattern of counting a number of
     different men or things, even though they appear successively, for, even then, they could
     gather into an assemblage. It is the pattern of counting successive reappearances of the
     same man or thing, incapable of forming an assemblage.

   Like the Hopi, the elderly Takia speaker was counting successive visits of the same moon.
Successive passings of cycles could be counted but they could not be aggregated into a
countable unit forming a solid block of time. So although it is perfectly acceptable for Oceanic
speakers to name different parts of a day (as when the sun is low in the sky) or a month (as
when the moon appears as a slim sliver) or a year (as when the yams are sprouting), they did
not add separate parts together to form a whole, or see a period of time as a whole that could
be neatly subdivided. This conceptualisation applied to all astronomical cycles, whether daily,
lunar or annual.

   In spite of the elderly Takia speaker’s claim that “they didn’t know the names of the
months. The moon waned and waxed, that’s all”, we have gathered lists of apparent lunar
month names from more than thirty languages from Western Oceanic, the SE Solomons,
Vanuatu, Micronesia, Fiji and Polynesia. These lists consist of, usually, 12 or 13 names for or
references to natural features that mark roughly sequential points or periods of time in an
annual cycle and reflect the complex conceptual system of astronomical, meteorological,
ecological and horticultural checkpoints that made up the annual cycle in traditional Oceanic
communities.

   The lists are varied. While some listed names are direct references to or descriptions of
events (see e.g. Sa’a, Table 11.19), others are largely untranslatable (e.g. Kilivila, Table 11.13;
Nakanai, Table 11.17) . Some are strictly local references (e.g. Motu, Table 11.15). Still others
refer to events through metaphors or allusions to shared narratives (e.g. Mangap-Mbula, Table 11.12;
Yabem, Table 11.9). Some languages, like Sinaugoro (Table 11.16 in §11.5.2.2) and
Mota (Table 11.4 in §11.4.4, Table 11.20 in §11.5.5) have many more month names than can fit
in a year, and it seems that some or all months have alternative names depending on the
checkpoints the speaker is focussed on. Indeed, the considerable variation in month names
across Oceanic languages and even among closely related languages (e.g. Sinaugoro/Motu/Lala
in §11.5.2.2; SE Solomonic in §11.5.4; northern Vanuatu in §11.5.5) suggests that alternative
names have long been the norm.

   It is significant that named natural features have a central focus but no precise beginnings
and endings, so it is impossible to say when one period ends and another begins. There may be
periods of overlap or gaps. This means that even if individual names for times of year were
fixed, they could not be aggregated into a solar year. No doubt this explains the response of
local speakers that they could not provide memorised lists when requested (in the Trobriands,
§11.5.2.1.1, in Fiji, §11.5.6, in Tahiti, §11.5.8.1). Where neat sets of names exist, these are
assumed to result from attempts to fit them into a western time frame

322 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    It is easy to read these lists of names as loosely comparable to our calendar months and
assume because of their number that the names total a year. But this represents the intrusion of
a western concept of time. Oceanic ways of talking about time may be compromised both by
speakers’ own efforts to interweave the old system with the western one and by descriptions
from ethnographers who have interpreted what they saw in terms of western concepts. The
number of named lunar months in a list evidently had little or no place in Oceanic speakers’
conceptions of time. The fact that they are often organised into lists of 12 or 13 is a reflection of
a western need to associate activities with western calendar months while also offering local
speakers a link to a full moon or a lunar cycle if required. Theoretically, the number of names
local speakers could use to identify points of time in a solar year is limited only by local
knowledge.

    In this light it is unsurprising that a set of POc month names cannot be reconstructed, even
though it is reasonably clear from §11.4 which checkpoints were of importance to early
Oceanic speakers. There is evidence, however, that in some places, related communities share
similar month names, permitting low-level reconstructions. Examples include Loh, Mota and
Mwotlap in the Banks Islands of northern Vanuatu, the Chuukic languages of Micronesia, and
Polynesia. It needs to be stressed that the results cannot be regarded as a fixed system. Names
cannot be combined to form a solar year. Lists will always include a degree of flexibility to
ensure that descriptive names match natural features, and allow alternative names to be
substituted as desired.

    The following collections of month names are included with some discussion in an attempt
to identify any systematic approaches.

11.5.1 North New Guinea

11.5.1.1 Wogeo

The Wogeo language is spoken on two of the Schouten Islands, Wogeo and Koil, located off
the north coast of PNG. Table 11.10 shows Wogeo month names, pieced together from
Hogbin (1938b:138–140). However, it is clear from Hogbin’s comments that the periods thus
named may overlap.

: Table 11.10 Wogeo month names

__table__
      Month name Comments and glosses                    Month name Comments and glosses
01    rakum          ‘land crab’                  07-08 wasek           harvest of an unidentified nut
                                                                        with purple husk
02    kasawara       moon of Bariat               09     kama lava      ‘big southeast trade wind’
03    —              moon of Dap                  10     kama lig       ‘little southeast trade wind’
04    —              moon of Bagiau               11     manuan         ‘palolo worm’
05    wabu           [canarium] almond harvest    12     rakakajarak —
06    kame           [canarium] almond harvest

                                                                     Seasonal cycles and lunations 323


    The ‘washing the Pleiades’ ceremony, mentioned in §11.4.2.1, was performed separately
by each of four groups of villages. It is performed by the most northerly group in Bariat
village in February “during the month when the Pleiades hang over this part of the island at
sunset”, by a second group a month later “when the stars have moved round and the Pleiades
are at sunset over Dap [village]”. A third group follows in April when the Pleiades are at
Bagiau village, and a fourth group with their own month, at a time not noted by Hogbin. The
months of, roughly, February, March and April are simply named the moons of Bariat, Dap
and Bagiau. The moon of Bariat is also called kasawara (no gloss given). Where he does give
the local names, Hogbin glosses some and comments on others. We have added one gloss, as
rakum evidently reflects POc *rakum(u) ‘land crab’ (vol.4:173–174).

    It is noteworthy that this is not primarily a horticultural calendar, as the staple crops, taro
and bananas, are grown all year round, and so do not provide checkpoints. Instead, the
calendar is based on various events in the natural environment. The months that refer to the
Pleiades (§11.4.2.1), to the harvesting of canarium almonds (§11.4.5) and wasek nuts and to
the southeast trade winds (§11.4.7) are anchored in the solar, not the lunar, year. Lunar-related
events are the spawnings of (probably) the land crab (§11.4.8) and the palolo worm (§11.4.3).

11.5.1.2 Maenge

Maenge (a dialect of Mengen, NNG) is located on the southeast coast of New Britain. Panoff’s
(1969) listing of the months is shown in Table 11.11.18 The leftmost column numbers the
western months, but each Maenge month begins a few days earlier. This is the only calendar in
our data in which almost every month name reflects the flowering of a wild plant (cf §11.4.6).

Panoff writes:

__blockquote__
       despite the continuous character of the process and the obvious impossibility of
       recognising clear demarkations between the stages, flowering always remains the final
       criterion and accounts for some calendar variations from village to village. Moreover,
       there are unavoidable discrepancies between time reckoned in lunar and in botanical
       terms whenever flowering happens to be late. (1969:156)

: Table 11.11 Maenge month names

__table__
   Month name            Gloss                    Notes
01 vega pana             between two              This period corresponds to no flowering time, but bridges
                         flowering periods        the gap between the previous ‘month’ and the following
                                                  one. Its duration is variable—15 to 30 days—depending
                                                  on the length of the previous and next months. Felled
                                                  bush trees are burnt in the new collective gardens. Festi-
                                                  vals happen.
02 tolova e volau        Evodia elleryana         The second driest month of the year. The best varieties of
                         (volau) flowers          taro are planted in the new collective gardens. The last
                                                  festivals of the cycle take place.
03 tolova e sina     the sina flowers       The sina is an unidentified tree which differs from the
                                            volau in the size of its leaves. The driest month of the
                                            year. There may be food shortage as a result of both
                                            drought and the huge consumption of taro through the
                                            previous months. Pig fences are erected around the col-
                                            lective gardens.
04 tava             Alphitonia incana       Tava corresponds to a significant rise in the curve of
                    flowers                 rainfall (the average figure is 250 mm, double that in the
                                            previous months). In most gardens the taros become
                                            available that were planted about the time the Pleiades
                                            disappeared.
05 oalo kuna        vine head (= vine       The name refers to two climbers, a Calamus species and
                    flower)                 Zizyphus papuanus. This is the first month of vinte (the
                                            wet season). Some people start introducing yams into
                                            their diet. Land crabs (goga) leave the bush at night and
                                            gather on the beach, where they are extensively caught by
                                            torchlight. Hence this month is called goga in Pomio and
                                            Sali villages.
06 piri a           flowers appear on one The erythrina is shedding its leaves, and flowers appear
   kamana kena      branch of Erythrina     on a few twigs. The northern solstice approaches. The last
                    indica                  taros are planted before the heaviest rains.
07 piri manaŋana the true flowering time The erythrina has lost its leaves and is entirely covered
                    of Erythrina indica     with flowers. This and the following month are the
                                            wettest months of the year.
08 kereŋe kemera Pterocarpus indicus        Throughout this month the weather is so bad that ‘nobody
   OR               has shed all its leaves knows who may have died in the neighboring village as
   kereŋe kau soali and is bare             communication is too difficult.’
09 kerenge          Pterocarpus indicus is The rains decline, and the sky is less cloudy. Yams cease
   manaŋana         flowering               to prevail in the Maenge diet. Travel from village to
                                            village is resumed.
10 ulasi            a small fish, the       A transitional month between vinte and kaepâ (wet and
                    bluestripe squirrelfish dry). Squirrelfish swarm in shallow waters near the
                    (Sargocentron tiere) beach.
11 paugala ka        Albizzia falcata is     The Albizzia is budding. It is the first month which defi-
   siana             pregnant                nitely belongs to kaepâ (the dry season). Preparations for
                                             the great festivals of the dry season are well under way.
12 paugala enga      the flowers of Albizzia The southern solstice approaches and the rains are getting
   valipola          falcata burst           very scarce. The palolo make their appearance on the
                                             surface of shallow waters for one or two nights and are
                                             skimmed off as delicacies by the inhabitants of Malakuru
                                             and Pomio. Many villages start their festivals. Usually
                                             large sections of bush are cleared for preparing the collec-
                                             tive gardens, the harvest of which is designed for the
                                             following year's festivals.


[18] Panoff's notes are lightly abbreviated. He glosses ulasi as ‘small unidentified fish’, but Madden’s (2002)
     more precise gloss is used in Table 11.11.

324 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross



This unit of time follows the phases of the moon very erratically. A vega matana ‘tree
category’ ~ ‘month’ may last for as few as 15 days or for as long as five weeks. The Maenge
turn their attention to the phases of the moon only to secure a correlation with the tree
behaviour. Nevertheless the system is said to work satisfactorily with a margin of uncertainty
of less than one month. Perhaps it is precisely the flexibility of the system which has allowed
the Maenge not to add a thirteenth month to their calendar, as the observation of the shifting
sunrise on the horizon through the year should have urged them to do if their monthly unit had
been exclusively lunar (Panoff 1969:156).

                                                            Seasonal cycles and lunations 325


    The two seasons, vinte ‘the wet’ and kaepa ‘the dry’ (§11.3), each have six lunar months,
and are separated by ulasi, the one month that has a fish name.

    The Maenge are able to foretell palolo risings (§11.4.3) and also are aware of the appear-
ance and disappearance of the Pleiades (§11.4.2.1), but Panoff does not recognise either of
these events as a calendrical marker (1969:156, 158).

11.5.1.3 Mangap-Mbula

The Bugenhagens’ listing of lunar month names in Mangap-Mbula (Vitiaz Straits:NNG)
(2007a:420; Table 11.12) focusses almost solely on the annual cycle of the canarium almond
crop (§11.4.5), although their accompanying notes are necessary to make that interpretation.
For example, manᵐbule mamāza ‘the bird’s anus is dried up’ makes little sense without the
accompanying note. ‘Galip’ is the Tok Pisin term for the canarium tree and almond. The
‘Word glosses’ represent our best attempt to gloss the component parts of the month names.

    The one interpretable month name that refers less directly to canarium almonds is ⁿdām-
bula ‘December’, where the first element reflects ⁿdāma ‘Pleiades’ (in the Marile dialect of
Mangap this month name is simply ⁿdāma), but the Bugenhagens note that this marks budding
of the canarium (and thus the beginning of the cycle).

11.5.2 Papuan Tip

11.5.2.1 Kilivila and Muyuw

The calendars of closely related Kilivila and Muyuw provide a rare example of an apparently
fixed list of names, to some extent divorced from the seasonal events reflected. Kilivila is the
language of the Trobriand Islands. The Trobriand calendar has been the subject of consider-
able ethnographic debate (Malinowski 1927, 1935; Austen 1939; Leach 1950). There are two
main areas of confusion. One centres on the number of months. The other is the difficulty of
correlating these months with specific times of year in a place where four different calendars
operate, and identifying the recognised standard by which the lunar months are kept in step
with the solar year. The various descriptions of Trobriand lunar months by Malinowski and
Austen throw up several unresolved issues, not only between the two authors, but also
between Malinowski’s earlier and later papers. Leach’s paper is an attempt to resolve some of
the differences.

: Table 11.12 Mangap (Yangla dialect) month names

__table__
     Month          Word glosses                 Accompanying notes
     name
01   ᵐbui           ‘flower (VI)’                The galip trees are flowering.
02   gomsala        gom ‘?’, -sala ‘go up’)      The galip trees are budding, flowering.
03   turgom         -tur ‘nod off’, gom ‘?’      Clusters of galip nuts are breaking off and falling
                                                 down.
04    ayo buzāna      ayo ‘?’, buzāina              When we (INC) dig the new harvest up to eat them,
                      ‘disgusting’                  they are not very good. A lot of mosquitos appear.
05    ro matāna       ? ‘first leaves’              The first galip nuts fall down.
06    muna            ‘food made of galip nuts      A huge amount of galip nuts comes down, galip
                      and tapioca or taro, baked in nuts are spreading out [all over the ground].
                      an earth oven’
07    kara-tete       karakāla ‘be constipated’, A huge amount of galip nuts comes down onto the
                      tetekat ‘wrapped food made ground.
                      of sweet potatoes or taro
                      and crushed canarium nuts’
08    aigere          …                             A time for rain, and [the time when] bats bite off
                                                      the skins of galip nuts. They bite their skins, but
                                                      don’t swallow them. A bad month.
09    manᵐbule        man ‘bird’, ᵐbule ‘anus’,       The pigeon’s anus gets torn [due to having eaten so
      mamāza          mamāza ‘dried up’               many galip nuts and defecating them], and it can-
                                                      not swallow any more galip nuts. The time for
                                                      galip nuts is now finished.
10    manpur          man ‘bird’, pur ‘fart’          Birds fly up and look for galip nuts but are unable
                                                      to find them.
11    ŋese            …                               You (SG) want galip nuts, but can’t find them.
                                                      [Time for] scratching around looking for isolated
                                                      nuts.
12    ⁿdām-bula       ⁿdāma ‘Pleiades’                The galip trees bud again.

326 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


11.5.2.1.1 The Trobriands

The Trobriands have a unique system, whereby four regions, Kiriwina (the major dialect of
Kilivila) (in the north), Kuboma (centre), Kitava (east) and Vakuta (south), each run a distinct
calendar with similar names and similar sequencing, but each starting their year with the
milamala moon at a different time: Kitava roughly in June, Kuboma in July, Kiriwina in
August and Vakuta in September. The moon called milamala is always the first (Malinowski 1935:463).
The name milamala is also the name of the palolo worm (§11.4.3), which appears
on the fringing reef of the Vakuta district during the moon of milamala ‘in September or even
October’ (1935:54), presumably giving the moon its name. But the time of year to which it
refers varies from one district to another. In other words, its sequence in a recognised list has
taken precedence over its original association with a natural event.

   Malinowski argues (1927:210) that the fact that each district starts its year at a different
time is a reflection of different gardening systems. In places where taro is the staple food,
gardens start early and are harvested early. In the main agricultural districts where small yams
form the main crop, harvest occurs at least two months later than in the earliest yam districts.

                                                                Seasonal cycles and lunations 327


    The thirteen names, as given in Malinowski 1935 are: milamala, yakosi, yavatakulu,
toliyavata, yavatam, gelivilavi, bulumaduku, kuluwotu, utokakana, (ilaybisila), (yakoki),
(kaluwalasi), kuluwasasa. However, Malinowski (1927) and Austen (1939) are agreed that
only ten names are significant. The three names whose existence is questioned (bracketed
above) are those where informants are least certain, or are names recognised in one or two
districts but not all. Two – yakoki and kaluwalasi—are listed by Malinowski in 1935 but not 1927.
In 1927 he wrote (1927:215) that although

__blockquote__
     several moons seem to have different names in different districts, … it is significant that
     ten moons are identical everywhere and easily obtained, while the remaining odd
     moons, for which sometimes one to three names are obtained, always fall outside the
     scheme division of two groups of five.

Austen suggests that kuluwasasa is a corruption of kʷeluvāsasa, translated as ‘passageway
between the [two] garden periods’ (1939:240). He writes that “the garden periods following
ilaybisila are vague, and the moons really have no definite names and it is often a time of
confused ideas” (1939:244).

    Malinowski (1927:211) writes that milamala is the moon of festivities after the harvest, and
that the sequence kuluwasasa, when harvesting is done, milamala and yakosi “are universally
known to the natives and they are used by everybody”. Other month names figure less in
people’s minds.

    Leach (1950) offers an ingenious solution to the question of how this accords with a solar
year. He suggests that the milamala period is the key, being a flexible period when taken as a
whole across all four districts.

__blockquote__
     The milamala period of the whole group covers four months, this plus the other nine
     month names is sufficient to cover a full lunar year of 12-13 months. Thus in an
     ordinary 12-month year Kitava celebrates milamala nine months later than Vakuta,
     which is the ‘standard’, Kuboma one month after Kitava, Kiriwina one month after
     Kuboma, Vakuta one month after Kiriwina, which completes the annual cycle. The
     whole territory can thus complete a 12-month cycle without any one area bothering to
     count more than 10 months. So long as each group knows the relative position of its
     own calendar to that of its neighbour, the system is complete. … Vakuta milamala, as
     checked by the appearance of the palolo worm, is the beginning of a 12 or 13 month
     cycle which ends with the three months Kutava milamala, Kuboma milamala, Kiriwina
     milalmala (1950:254–255).

    Austen (1939), however, sidesteps completely the difficulties of reconciling the palolo
rising with the timing of the milamala month. Although his fieldwork in the Trobriands
followed closely on the heels of Malinowski, he takes a position against Malinowski in
arguing that the Trobrianders used a systematic series of solar observations in keeping the
lunar months in step with the solar year. Austen believed that relations between month names,
kʷeluva, and stars were more important than those between the month names and the moon.
He writes that

__blockquote__
     there are quite a number of star groups (native constellations) connected with gardening,
     the most important being … Uluwa /Uruwa ‘Pleiades’ and Kibi ‘three stars of Aquila,
     the central one being Altair’.

In addition Austen lists sinata ‘part of Scorpio’, lakum (‘land crab’) ‘part of Cancer and Hydra
incl. Praesepe’, dubukavivila ‘native constellation incl. Hamel’, kauwoma ‘native constellation
incl. Aldebaran’, kiyadiga ‘Orion’s Belt’ and munukaiwau ‘Sirius’ (1939:240). And he adds
later, “For the correction of the annual lunar cycle, the star group kibi is used” (1939:243). He
notes that the community depended on inhabitants of Wawela, a village in the central
Trobriands who were the accepted experts in knowledge of the stars, and who were consulted
each year as to the timing of forthcoming rituals (1939:239).

328 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Malinowski had written in 1927

__blockquote__
        that at certain seasons certain configurations of stars appear in the sky in the evenings.
        They have names for a number of constellations, for the Pleiades, for a part of Orion,
        the Southern Cross, and many others; and they know in which season these stars are
        visible, but they do not use them as a means of measuring time’ (1927:203).19 (our
        italics)

In 1935 Malinowski correlated moons, winds, and gardening and other activities with western
months, but his chart (1935:50–51) contains no mention of stars. Austen’s evidence is
discussed further together with Damon’s evidence for Muyuw.

11.5.2.1.2 Muyuw and the Trobriands

Damon (1982, 1990) describes the lunar calendar in Muyuw, spoken on Woodlark Island east
of the Trobriands, and contrasts its system with that of the Trobriands, with which Muyuw is
linked through the Kula Ring trading network. The calendars share similar names and month
sequences, but differ in their starting positions and thus their relationship to the western
calendar.

    Table 11.13 contains 13 names of Kiriwina months (Malinowski 1935:51) and 13 names of
Muyuw months (Damon 1990:290) aligned to highlight similarity of names (they are not
aligned with reference to western month names). Nine of the thirteen show cognacy, evidence
of a recent shared past. The names listed third, fourth and fifth contain a reflex of POc
*apaRat ‘north-west wind’, the wind that holds sway from December to April. Apart from
these three and milamala the names are, as far as we can tell, largely untranslatable and
therefore without meaning-based association with particular seasonal events. Those pairs that
are not cognates are marked with #, and occur close together in the sequence.

: Table 11.13 Kilivila and Muyuw month names

__table__
                         Kilivila      |           Muyuw
                         #milamala     |           #yanak
                         yakosi        |           yakous (‘finish’)
                         yavatakulu    |           yevtakun
                         toliyavata    |           tenyavat
                         yavatam       |           yevtom
                        #gelivilavi    |        #gag
                        bulumaduku     |        bulumaduk
                        kuluwotu       |        kunuwut
                        utokakana      |        wutukan (Central Muyuw only)
                        ilaybisila     |        veneybis
                        #yakoki        |        #oneveig
                        kuluwalasi     |        aluwanas
                        #kuluwasasa    |        #ikokio

[19]
     Malinowski in fact reported this in his first major Trobriand publication in 1916, but later either forgot or
     dismissed it. He wrote in 1916 in describing the milamala festival, "[The festival] is held always at the same
     time of the year, in the first half of the moon, which is also called milamala. This moon is determined—as
     their calendar in general—by the position of the stars. And in Kiriwina proper, the full moon of milamala
     falls in the second half of August or first half of September." And later he adds, "The dates of the moons are
     fixed by the position of the stars, in which astronomical art the natives of Wawela, a village lying on the
     beach in the southern half of the island, excel." (1954 [1916]: 179. 262).

                                                                  Seasonal cycles and lunations 329


    Although the two lists imply a shared system, Muyuw lacks a milamala moon. Oddly
enough, the palolo worm appears in some Muyuw lagoons at the full moon of, usually,
October, and it is called milamala. But it is neither eaten nor used for any calendrical purpose
(Damon 1982:229).

    However, there is, or was, another system of regulating time in Muyuw, one shared with
the Trobriands, namely that provided by the stars. Damon (1990:29) provides a list of thirteen
star groups and roughly aligns them with lunar months and other seasonal events or activities,
although he warns: “Although stars are conceived to rise in a sequential order just as kwel
[lunar months] follow one another, Muyuw do not associate particular stars with specific
kwel.” (1990:38).20

    Several star names (Table 11.14) are cognate with Austen’s list for the Trobriands, although
there are minor variations in their identity. Austen’s kibi refers to Aquila while Damon’s kib is
Delphinus, an adjoining constellation. Strangely, although both list the Pleiades, their names
for the star cluster are not cognate. In the Trobriands it is ulawa and in Muyuw gumeaw.

    Damon (1990:38–40) implies that Muyuw rely on the stars rather than lunar months to
arrange their yearly activities. He describes Muyuw knowledge of celestial bodies as impres-
sive. “It is yam harvest time, people note, when the long axis of the Southern Cross stands
vertical in the dark of a young night, mid-July or so”. And although other crops – taro,
bananas, sweet potatoes – may be and are planted throughout the year: yams should be planted
when gumeaw ‘is thirty or so degrees above the western horizon at dusk, in February.”


: Table 11.14 Trobriands/Muyuw cognate star names

__table__
           Trobriands  |    Muyuw
           kibi        |    kib   Aquila or Delphinus (lit. ‘k.o. triggerfish’)
           lakum       |    lakum Praesepie (part of Cancer and Hydra) (lit. ‘crab’)
           kiyadiga    |    kiyad Orion’s Belt (lit. ‘poles connecting outrigger to hull’)
           sinata      |    sinat Stars in Scorpio (lit. ‘comb’)


[20] In order, starting mid-March, the list runs kib (Delphinus), kiyad (Orion's Belt), gumeaw (Pleiades),
     kowun, nowagteit and lakum (Praesipie) all rising pre-dawn, followed from mid-September, by
     tanaboub (Southern Cross), tabwakum (Coalsacks), dagelio/sinat (Scorpius), alisig, kup, kuluwit (Big
     Dipper) and usay.

330 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


: Table 11.15 Motu month names

__table__
         |  Month name        |     Word glosses
     01  |  gui-raura         |     gui ‘embark, tie, prepare a torch’
     02  |  goha              |     cf goheahu ‘shut out (of clouds veiling the sun or moon)’
     03  |  lailai            |     ‘prepare a place by cleaning’
     04  |  daro-daro         |     daro ‘sweep’
     05  |  divaro            |     ?
     06  |  veadi [hadohado]  |     hado-hado ‘planting’
     07  |  veadi hiri-hiri   |     hiri ‘long trading voyage to the west’
     08  |  uria              |
     09  |  laɣa              |     ‘breathe’
     10  |  manu-maura        |     manu ‘bird’; maura ‘a token, sign of pledge’
     11  |  biri-a-kei        |     biri ‘nipa palm leaf used as thatch’, kei ‘small’
     12  |  biri-a-bada       |     biri ‘nipa palm leaf used as thatch’, bada ‘big’


11.5.2.2 Motu, Sinaugoro and Lala

Motu, Sinaugoro and Lala are considered together as they are clustered in the middle of the
segment of New Guinea’s south coast occupied by the Central Papuan group of Oceanic
languages.

   Lister-Turner & Clark’s (1954) Motu dictionary includes twelve month names, given in
Table 11.15 with glosses drawn partly from Andrew Taylor’s (pers. comm.) notes and partly
from Lister-Turner & Clark’s glosses.

   The Motu sailed their laɣatoi (double-hulled canoes) annually westward to the Gulf of
Papua to trade with the Elema. They would wait for the mid-year wind change, then sail back
to their villages (around present-day Port Moresby). These trading voyages were known as
hiri, also used as the month name for a period roughly corrresponding to July. The names for
January and October also seem to be associated with these voyages. The term maura (part of
the month name for October) is glossed by Lister-Turner & Clark as

__blockquote__
     s.t. small given as a pledge, to remind recipient of his promise to return; a token that the
     messenger who brings it has been sent by the owner, an Elema man who sails on a
     laɣatoi and stays till next year.

The ‘promise to return’ probably alludes to a man’s pledge to his Elema trading partner to
return the following year. ‘An Elema man who sails on a laɣatoi and stays till next year’ is
almost self-explanatory: he is a man from the Gulf who is transported on the laɣatoi to its
owner’s Motu village, and remains there as a guest until he can return to the Gulf on next
year’s hiri.

   Sinaugoro, to the east of Motu, shares some month names with Motu, but none that are
associated with the hiri, in which Sinaugoro speakers did not traditionally participate. Instead,
names peculiar to Sinaugoro often reflect the fact that its speakers live in the savanna.
Whether the names shared with Motu are loans or shared inheritances is difficult to know, as
the languages are phonologically similar. Table 11.16 is drawn from two sources, Kolia (1975)
and Tauberschmidt (2006), marked K and T respectively in the leftmost column.
Kolia’s data are from the Balawaia dialect. He does not assign his month names to western
calendar months, but does gloss them. Tauberschmidt on the other hand, whose month names
are from the Saroa dialect, assigns them to western months, but does not gloss them further.
Some glosses, marked (R) (= Ross), are inferred from Kolia’s and Tauberschmidt’s vocabular-
ies.

                                                               Seasonal cycles and lunations 331

: Table 11.16 Sinaugoro month names

__table__
              Month name       Gloss                             Etymology
TK 01         manu-bada        ‘big bird’                        [bird-big] < Motu?
TK 02–03      bili-a-kei       ‘small harvest’                   [sago-a-small] cf Motu November
TK 03         bili-a-bara      ‘big harvest’                     [sago-a-big] cf Motu December
TK 04         ɣʷa-koli         ‘no food’                         ɣue ‘moon, month’, koli ‘finished’
TK 05         ɣʷa-ɣaniɣani     ‘new food’                        ɣue ‘moon, month’, ɣaniɣani ‘food’
T    06       lai-lai          …                                 < POc *raki ‘SE trade winds’
T    06–07    lai-toɣa         …                                 see above + toɣa-toɣa ‘quiet’
T    07       bune             ‘magpie’ (R)
T    07–08    magara           …
T    07–08    uria             …                                 cf Motu August
T    09–10    koko-uriuri-na   …
TK 11–12      aɣa-bada         ‘big wind’                        [breath-big]
K    12 ? (R) raba-avala       ‘dry season’                      avala ‘northwest monsoon’
K    12 ? (R) avala-kavata     ‘NW wind season’                  avala ‘northwest monsoon’
K    …        daga             ‘white feathery grass’
K    …        ɣau-ɣala-bara ‘burning tall grass’                 ɣau ‘tree’, ɣala ‘burn VI’, bara ‘big’
K    …        ɣau-ɣala-kei     ’burning short grass’             ɣau ‘tree’, ɣala ‘burn VI’, kei
                                                                 ‘small’
K    …        viniɣi-mole      ‘flame tree’ , probably erythri- viniɣi ‘flame tree’, mole ‘firelight’
                               na
K             bona-rakava      ‘smell of burning’               bona ‘smell’, rakava ‘bad’
K             ɣorava           ‘chestnuts’                       ɣorava ‘chestnuts’
K             tukakereani      ‘lightning’
K             vitiɣo-walo      ‘red leaves and rope’             walo ‘rope, vine’

    The range of names in Table 11.16 demonstrates that month names even in dialects of the
same language can diverge quite widely. It also reveals how culture-specific month names can
be. Where some Motu names reference seafaring, names from the Balawaia dialect reference a
grass species and burning in the surrounding savanna. Both dialects refer to the end of the
harvest in April and the beginning of a new crop in May.

    Both dialects also include manu-bada, perhaps the ‘big bird’ constellation of Sirius,
Canopus, Procyon, Betelgeuse and Rigel described in volume 2 (pp168–170), which Tauber-
schmidt assigns to January. Immediately after sunset in January this huge constellation
dominates the eastern sky over the Motu and Sinaugoro villages. That ‘big’ has its Motu shape
bada rather than Sinaugoro bara suggests that it may be a loan.

332 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Clunn and Kolia (1977:143) list thirteen month names for closely related Lala, situated to
the west of Motu. The name for the thirteenth Lala month, avala, is literally ‘north-west’,
reflecting POc *apaRat ‘northwest wind; wet season when westerlies blow and sea is
rough’ (vol.2:129). This is cognate with Sinaugoro avala, occurring in two month names.
Otherwise no Lala month name is cognate with either a Motu or a Sinaugoro month name.

11.5.3 Meso-Melanesian

11.5.3.1 Nakanai

Chowning (2016) lists eight lunar month names from Nakanai, on the north coast of New
Britain. The eight are considered a complete set, and their ordering is clear, running from e
tolo bubu ‘1st moon of the calendar year, approx. Sep.–Oct. (starts about autumn equinox)’ to
e sakalu kea (lit. ‘white reef’) ‘8th and last moon—actually several moons of the same name,
approx. June–Sep.’ Apart from the 8th month, the names are, as far as we can tell, untranslat-
able, and there is no discussion apart from brief descriptions included in the dictionary entries.

: Table 11.17 Nakanai lunar months (Chowning & Goodenough 2016)

__table__
     Month name        Annotation
1    e tolo bubu       1st moon of calendar year, approx. Sept.-Oct. (starts about autumn equinox)
2    e tolo pura       about Nov.
3    e vulea           around Jan.-Feb. Assoc. with NW monsoon and height of rainy season
4    e vito            time when makusa fish are running in the Kapeuru River
5    e uaga            about March
6    e rave taro kitoa beginning of dry season, about March to April
7    e vatu            around May-June when sea and reef are free of debris.
8 ++ e sakalu kea      lit. ‘white reef’. 8th and last moon. Actually several moons of same name,
                          roughly June-Sep.


11.5.3.2 Barok

Wagner (1986) describes the timing of the gardening cycle in Barok, New Ireland. He writes
that “a cycle of six named lunations seems to have been recognised, and used in conjunction
with gardening, in pre-European days.” (1986:38). His own observations and his conversa-
tions with Barok speakers about the traditional calendar lead him to conclude that the awat ni
nien ‘season of plenty’ and the awat nere loŋ ‘season of hunger’ each represent a six-month
cycle, but because the large garden is planted only four months after the small (see Table
11.18), the gardening calendar cannot be described within a single six-month cycle. He points
out that the Barok observe lunar, solar and sidereal events (1986:41), which do not correspond
exactly. However, he concludes that each awat effectively begins at the new moon closest to
when the Pleiades are crossing the meridian, i.e. in the evening on 21 February and predawn
on 22 August. The position of the sun around these dates is also not far from its position at the
solstice.

                                                                Seasonal cycles and lunations 333

: Table 11.18 Barok lunations

__table__
     Lunations      Co-ordinate events                     Gardening              Seasons
  01 marana-kai     Pleiades on meridian in evening        large garden planted   awat ni nien
  02 murana-kai     Pleiades ‘turn their bottom’           bananas planted
  03 matana-aler    sun rises ‘in the middle’              …                      equinox 20 March
  04 muruŋ-aler     …                                      …
  05 tege ni kuka   crab-hunting (lit., moon of crabs)     …
  06 tege gowo      — (literally, the moon that is left)   …                      S solstice 21 June
  07 marana-kai     Pleiades on meridian before dawn       …                      awat nere loŋ
  08 murana-kai     Pleiades ‘turn their bottom’           …
  09 matana-aler    sun rises ‘in the middle’              small garden planted equinox 22 Sept
  10 muruŋ-aler     …                                      …
  11 tege ni kuka   crab-hunting (lit., moon of crabs)     …
  12 tege gowo      — (literally, the moon that is left)   large garden prepared N solstice 21 Dec

    Table 11.18 is the table given by Wagner but augmented from the text (1986:36–44). Since
the Barok reckoned time in terms of six-month seasons, the same set of six months occurs in
each awat, i.e. twice in a year, a unit that the Barok were allegedly unaware of. The blanks in
the “Gardening” column of the table are due partly to the fact that Wagner’s table includes
them, but partly to the fact that Wagner does not mention the harvests. The numbers in the
leftmost column represent the month whose second half falls into this lunation, e.g. 01
represents the latter part of January and the earlier part of February.

    We note that this account contains one oddity: since the months in each awat have the same
names, tege ni kuka ‘moon of crabs’ occurs twice a year. In reality, however, land crab
spawning (nom11.4.8) occurs only once a year, presumably in November. This leads to the
speculations that the Barok were aware of the annual cycle (as the distribution of garden
planting described by Wagner also implies) and that the six-month cycle represents a reduction
of a set of terms that once covered the year.

: Table 11.19 Sa’a month names (adapted from Ivens 1927)

__table__
              Month name         Gloss
         09   hule i lade        ‘arrive [canarium] flowers’
         10   oku lade           ‘palolo flowers’
         11   oku mʷā            ‘palolo full’
         12   oku telu/danu      ‘palolo nets’
              oku peine          ‘palolo big’
         01   hulo lapani        ‘sponge ?’
         02   hulo laha          ‘sponge big’
           03    asi mʷane        ‘sea barren’ (we have opted to translate mʷane ‘male’ in the
                                  sense used for plants which do not produce fruit, so ‘barren’)
           04    loʔa wai         ‘month water’
           05    loʔa madala      ‘month morning star’
           06    loʔa maliʔe      ‘month [yams] cooked’
           07    āu marawa        ‘season purple’ (indicates nuts almost ripe)
           08    ŋali maelo       ‘nuts ripe’
                 ro hutohuto      ‘two froth/foam’

334 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Particular importance is attached by the Barok to the Pleiades. In one marana-kai they are
crossing the meridian at dusk on 21 February, but have already been prominent in the evening
sky for about a month. In the other marana-kai they are crossing the meridian at dawn on 22
August, and will remain prominent in the pre-dawn sky for about a month.21 This account is
puzzling, as Western Oceanic speakers typically make no use of the meridian (it is not clear
how they would identify it). A possibility is that Barok speakers observed the risings and
settings of the Pleiades. Their apparent first pre-dawn rising around 7 June would very roughly
fit the beginning of awat nere loŋ ‘season of hunger’, and their apparent pre-dawn setting
around 5 November would be a herald of the monsoon and the awat ni nien ‘season of plenty’.

11.5.4 Southeast Solomons

Sets of lunar months have been recorded for Gela (Fox 1955), To’aba’ita (Lichtenberk 2008a),
Sa’a (Ivens 1918, 1927), Kwaio (Keesing 1975) and Arosi (Fox 1978). Other dictionaries
including ’Are’are (Geerts 1970) and Owa (Mellow 2014) contain partial lists. Except for
Gela, these languages belong to the Malaita-Makira subgroup of SES.

    The most comprehensive of these lists is Ivens’ (1927:396-397) for Sa’a, shown in Table
11.19, which varies in some respects from that in Ivens (1918). In 1927 he describes the year
as “beginning with the flowers of the canarium almond in September (hule i lade ‘flowers
arrive’) and ending with the period of ripe almonds (ŋali maelo) in August”.22 August is also
called ro hutohuto ‘froth, foam’, referring to the month of wild weather and big seas. (In Arosi
the same month is referred to as waro ŋavara ‘rough weather month’.) Four months – October
to December – are prefaced by oku, the palolo worm, while three – April to June – are
prefaced by loʔa (meaning unknown, but used also as month name prefix in Lau (loa) and
possibly in To’aba’ita (loʔi). Ivens describes the loʔa months as relating to ‘the yam harvest
which is dug about the beginning of May’.

    A comparison of month names across languages shows broad agreement in Gela, Sa’a,
Arosi and ’Are’are with respect to the palolo months, although both Sa’a and ’Are’are give the
name for the palolo to four months, suggesting it now means something like ‘month, season’.
SES palolo month names are listed in §11.4.3.

[21] The two transit dates would more accurately be 26 February and 6 August. The first date does not
     strictly fit into marana-kai and seems to belong in the next lunation, but Wagner attributes minor
     discrepancies to the approximateness of the whole Barok calendar.

[22] In 1918 (under wārowāro ‘moon') Ivens wrote "the names of the months in Sa'a begin from July, the
     harvest month.".

                                                                  Seasonal cycles and lunations 335


11.5.5 Vanuatu

Unusually detailed lists of month names are available for the Torres and Banks islands of
northern Vanuatu, thanks to various anthropological studies (Codrington 1891 for Mota,
Durrad 1940 and Mondragón 2004 for the Loh dialect of Lo-Toga, François 2023 for
Mwotlap, and François pers. comm. for Lo, Mota, Mwotlap and partial Mwesen). They are
summarised in Table 11.20.23

   In the leftmost column of Table 11.20 numbers approximate western months. Terms for
October, November and December in Loh, Mota and Mwotlap make reference to the small
and big risings of the palolo (§11.4.3). Loh appears to be out of sync with Mota and Mwotlap
by a month, but this probably reflects the vague relationship between western months and the
lunar months labelled here.

   According to Durrad, five Loh months, from April to August, are named for the seasonal
Panax grass called moɣot, which springs up as winter ends (cf §11.4.6). In April the grass is
fresh (meta ‘wet’) and in May it dries off (reŋ ‘dry’). The name continues to be associated
with the next three months—becoming a seasonal name now associated with digging up first
the yam-like təmeɣ in June and then the kʷɛtə in July. A further five months, from November
to March, are named for the palolo worm, n’ut. As with moɣot the name continues beyond the
true palolo months, becoming a seasonal name. Durrad also links each month with gardening
activity, and at times, as in June and July, this is reflected in the month name. As planting is
carried out in September and October, the yam vines are in full green in February and turning
rusty red in March, giving rise to the terms for green and red in their respective month names.
Yam harvesting occurs in May, the təmeɣ [wild yam] and kʷɛtə mentioned above reaching
maturity later than cultivated yams.

   In Mota, as there are many more month names than can be fitted into a lunar year, the list
given is a selection among the possible names. Included are three maɣoto months, May to
July, two rara months, August and September, and three palolo (un) months, October to
December. The maɣoto month of May is translated as ‘fresh grass’, equivalent with Loh ‘wet
grass’. Codrington (1891:350) writes that, for Mota, maɣoto and rara, the erythrina or coral
tree (from POc *rarap, vol.3:158, 257) have become seasonal terms for summer and winter
respectively, roughly equating with the annual division of the Loh calendar (cf §11.4.6).
    Table 11.20

[23] Our thanks to Alexandre François for orthographic assistance and rich ethnographic notes for
Torres-Banks languages. He reports that his elderly Mwesen consultants did not know the old terms for other
     months, but they provided ample ethnographic information for those they could remember.

336 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross
                                                                        Seasonal cycles and lunations 337


    The Mota, Mwotlap and partial Mwesen calendars display more similarity with each other than
any of them does with Loh. The three make similar references, even when the terms are not
cognate. The terms for April, however, are cognate, reflecting what François (pers. comm.)
reconstructs as Proto Banks *lamʷas-aki dorodoro, apparently a serial verb construction
consisting of *lamʷas- ‘to hit, strike’, the applicative suffix *-aki, hence ‘strike against’, and
dorodoro ‘to rattle’. The meaning of the construction is evidently ‘to strike against so that it
rattles’, the agent being the wind, the patient the reed-like grass Miscanthus floridulus which
makes a rattling sound when the dry reeds, blown by the wind, strike each other (François, pers.
comm.).

    The terms for January, February and March in Mota, Mwotlap and Mwesen all make
oblique reference to the (monsoon) winds, in Mwotlap and Mwesen striking the reeds, and in
Mota, vusi-aru [beats casuarina], where the wind instead strikes the casuarina (aru). The terms
for January refer to the reeds thickening (Mwesen revsos), budding (Mwotlap ni-witɣoy) and
flowering (Mota wotɣoro). In February the reeds are preparing to expel their seeds. In
Mwesen they ristek taqan ‘grab hold’ (of their bellies, like pregnant women), and in Mwotlap
they towowoh ‘burst open’. In March the wind blows so hard that in Mota fragments of the
reeds break off and fly away (tete), while in Mwesen it ‘blows off white hair’ (whether the hair
belongs to the reeds or the old men is uncertain). François has no gloss for the Mwotlap terms,
but it is probable that tit is cognate with Mota tete ‘fly away’.

    Lest the explanation for the abbreviated sentences used as month names here appear too
imaginative, it is worth noting that Codrington & Palmer’s dictionary entries tell the same
story as François recorded from Mwotlap and Mwesen speakers.

    Codrington (1891:349) warns that in Mota

__blockquote__
        it is impossible to fit the native succession of moons into a solar year; months have their
        names from what is done and what happens when the moon appears and while it lasts;
        the same moon has different names. If all the names of moons in use in one language
        were set in order the periods of time would overlap, and the native year would be
        artificially made up of twenty or thirty months.

The reason for Codrington’s warning is that Mota months were named not only for the palolo
and the effect of the seasons on wild plants as in Table 11.8 but also for periods in the yam
cycle. It would be possible to list month names in order from April to December that referred
to events from preparing the yam garden to planting, maturing, harvesting and clearing.

    Because there are some cognate forms among these languages, it is possible to reconstruct
three lunar month names for Proto Torres-Banks, using Clark’s (2009) orthography, and
partially reconstruct two others.[24]

<
Proto Torres-Banks *|ud gogona| (?) ‘bitter (palolo)’ (≈ September)
  NCV: Loh                |wo ɣoɔnə |       ‘bitter (palolo)’ (≈ September) (_wo_ ‘month’?)
  NCV: Mota               |un ɣoɣona|       ‘bitter palolo’ (≈ September)
  NCV: Mwotlap            n-in-ɣon          ‘bitter palolo’ (≈ September)
>

[24] Since Mota, Mwotlap and Mwesen are closely related and Loh is clearly more distant from them than
     they are to each other, one criterion for a reconstruction is that it be reflected in Loh and one of the other
     three languages. Two reconstructions are only partially cognate, one because the Loh term reflects the
     descriptor ‘bitter' of the other two but not the topic, the other where ‘fresh' and ‘wet' are taken as
     equivalent descriptions of the new grass.

338 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

<
Proto Torres-Banks *|ud lava| ‘big palolo’ (≈ November–December)
  NCV: Loh                |n’ut lavə|       ‘big palolo’ (≈ December)
  NCV: Mota               |un lava|         ‘big palolo’ (≈ November)
  NCV: Mwotlap            n-in-lap        ‘big palolo’ (≈ November)
>

<
Proto Torres-Banks *|ud were| ‘rump of palolo’ (≈ December–January)
  NCV: Loh               |n’ut wir|        ‘rump of palolo’ (≈ January)
  NCV: Mota              |un werei|        ‘rump of palolo’ (≈ December)
  NCV: Mwotlap           n-in-wey        ‘rump of palolo’ (≈ December)
>

<
Proto Torres-Banks *mʷakoto ‘fresh/wet Panax grass’ (≈ April–May)
  NCV: Loh               |nə moɣot metə| ‘wet grass/season’ (≈ April)
  NCV: Mota              |maɣoto bʷaro| ‘fresh grass/season’ (≈ March)
>

<
Proto Torres-Banks *|mʷakoto raŋo| ‘dry grass’ (≈ May–June)
  NCV: Loh               |nə moɣot reŋ| ‘dry grass/season’ (≈ May)
  NCV: Mota              |maɣoto raŋo| ‘dry grass’ (≈ June–July)
>

    Lists of names are available to us from three Malakula languages: Atchin, Naman and
Avava. However, these display almost no cognate forms either with each other or with the
Torres-Banks languages. The exceptions are Atchin ul wele ‘little palolo’ and ul lɛp ‘great
palolo, October–November’. Moreover, Capell & Layard (1980) contains nineteen Atchin
‘month’ names, whilst in Avava the year is divided into just eight periods. Clearly, these are not
strictly lunar month terms.

    Also available are lists of month names from southern Vanuatu: Sye, Kwamera, Lenakel
and Anejom. However, apart from a brief discussion of Sye names by Crowley (1998), the
names are compiled from dictionaries without ethnographic description or interpretation of
their meanings. There are almost no cognates, even between Kwamera and Lenakel, the two
languages from Tanna island.

11.5.6 Fiji

Hale (1846:68) offers a list of twelve names for Fijian lunar months obtained from missionary
sources, with two (February and March) referring to flowering of the ŋasau reed (Miscanthus
floridulus), three (April-June) referring to garden cultivation, two (October, November) to the
palolo and two (December, January) to the nuga, a rabbitfish (Siganus vermiculatus).
However, he comments

__blockquote__
     Besides the appearance of the mbalolo, the natives have few means of determining with
     exactness the progress of time. Indeed, they pay little attention to this, and we were
     unable to obtain from several to whom we applied, the names of the months in their
     regular series. … The Feejeeans know nothing of astronomy, and have not even names
     for the most important constellations.

   Seemann (1862:296-299) refers more confidently to “the eleven months into which the
calendar is divided”, quoting “an intelligent Bauan chief and the consular interpreter.” He
comments that “the names given by me, as well as their succession, do not quite agree with
those given by Wilkes (i.e. Hale from the Wilkes expedition). The names of the months may
also be different in different parts of the group”. However, the list in Table 11.21 from
Seemann, including his comments, substantially mirrors the horticultural/faunal/floral annual
cycle, and accords with later broad descriptions such as those of Hocart (1929) for the Lau
Islands of eastern Fiji and Pawley and Sayaba (2022) for Wayan, spoken in western Fiji..[25]

                                                                  Seasonal cycles and lunations 339

: Table 11.21 Bauan Fijian month names according to Seeman (1862)

__table__
              Month names                Gloss
        06-07 vula i werewere            clearing, weeding
        08    vula i ðukiðuki            loosen ground with digging stick
        09    vula i vāvākada            putting reeds to yams to enable them to climb up
        10    vula i balolo lailai       small [rise of] palolo
        11    vula i balolo levu         big palolo
        12    vula i nuga lailai         small [few] nuga
        01    vula i nuga levu           big [many] nuga
        02    vula i sevu                offering of first yams to the priests
        03    vula i kelikeli            dig (yams)
        04    vula i gasau               reeds sprout (Miscanthus)
        05    vula i doi                 k.o. buckthorn in flower (Alphitonia zizyphoides)

He notes that Hazlewood, who published a Fijian–English dictionary in 1850, allowed four
months, from May to August, to be effectively the clearing month. Presumably this provided
the degree of flexibility necessary so that the more precise seasonal events such as the rising of
the palolo occur at the expected time.

11.5.7 Micronesia

In passing from Fiji to Micronesia we encounter a change in the way the year is envisioned. In
Micronesia, unlike the other areas examined, there is internal consistency in that stars, and
stars alone, are seen to mark the passing of time. All month names reconstructed are star or
constellation names (vol.2:166–184), reflecting a calendar with a smooth transition from one
star or star cluster to the next. Alkire (1970:37–38) writes that in Woleai “the seasons and their
subdivision of months or moons (maram) are initiated by the rising and setting of designated
stars.” The months that define the winter (approximately November to April) and summer
(approximately May to October) seasons are all named after the star or star grouping which
heralds the beginning of the period (1970:38). As names of months the Micronesian terms are
strictly speaking only reconstructable for PChk, based on month names for Truk (=
Chuuk) (Goodenough & Sugita 1990), Mortlock and Lamotrek (Christian 1899), Ponape
(Kubary 1895; Christian 1899), Woleai (Alkire 1970), Carolinian (Jackson & Marck 1991),
Puluwat (Elbert 1972) and Sonsorol (Capell 1969). However, some of the terms have non-
Chuukic cognates within Micronesia and are reconstructable at least as star or constellation
names as far back as PMic. PChk reconstructions are given here in the same
orthography as PMic, that of Jackson (1986). Terms from Mortlock and Lamotrek are given in
the orthographies of their sources, as we have insufficient information to convert them to the
orthography otherwise used in this volume.

[25] It is of passing interest that while Seeman and Hocart both identify December/January with nuga, the
     rabbitfish, which appear then in greater numbers, Pawley and Sayaba identify them with nuga, a tree,
     Decaspermum vitiense, which bears fruit at this time.

340 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Speakers from the Polynesian outlier island of Kapingamarangi, which lies roughly
midway between Mussau and the Caroline Islands of Micronesia, have largely adopted the
Chuukic calendar, ten of their twelve months according in order with the Micronesian listing
(Elbert 1948). These are treated as borrowings. A single Kapingamarangi month, matariki,
accords with a Polynesian term.

    Sources for Puluwat and Carolinian each list twelve names and link them to western
months; those for Mortlock, Lamotrek and Sonsorol list months in regular sequence from one
to twelve. The Trukese Dictionary lists fourteen names as months in the traditional sidereal
calendar, only four of which are numerically ordered. An additional one is listed as ‘named for
a month in some calendars’. Some of the cognates in the sets listed below include star names
that are not month names. Sixteen PChk terms have been reconstructed that, taken in
sequence, albeit with some overlap, represent a solar year. Of these, four (Leo, Corona
Borealis, Vega and Andromeda) are represented as month names in only two or three
languages, and are regarded as probably substitutions for other nearby stars or star clusters.

    Because each year the new moon rises eleven days earlier than in the previous year, the
time of year thus delineated moves between two adjacent western months.[26]

    We have no clear evidence that any star or star cluster is regarded in the Chuukic group as
heralding a new year. Christian begins his list with Leo for Mortlock and Corvus for Lam-
otrek, while Capell also starts with Corvus for Sonsorol, i.e. roughly September or October,
but neither author discusses his choice. In Woleai the star Arcturus, identified with November,
is identified as marking the change of seasons from summer to winter while Pegasus,
identified with May, gives its name to the summer season. Because of its dominant role
elsewhere in the Oceanic world we begin our list with the Pleiades.

<
Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic *mʷakariker ‘about July; the Pleiades’
  Mic: Ponapean         makeriker      ‘Pleiades’ (Kubary 1895:107)
  Mic: Carolinian       mʷærixar       ‘Pleiades’ (not a month name)
  Mic: Chuukese         mʷēriker       ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; the Pleiades’
  Mic: Mortlock         mariker        ‘Pleiades, month 10’
  Mic: Puluwat          mʷariker       ‘Pleiades, a month about July’
  Mic: Woleaian         maxaraxar      ‘Pleiades, a summer month’
  Mic: Lamotrek         magarigar      ‘Pleiades’ (not a month name)
>

    It is tempting to try to associate this with PPn *mataliki ‘Pleiades’ (lit. ‘small eyes’), but this
is apparently a chance resemblance.

    There is some overlap in associating the next two reconstructions with roughly the same
month. Although Lamotrek and Sonsorol attribute terms to two successive months, Mortlock
combines both for the same month. Christian (1899:393) does, however, offer alternative
Mortlock terms. Aldebaran and Orion’s Belt are close together in the night sky, and both could
be identified with the same time of year.

[26] Timing is also influenced by the precession of the equinoxes. If we date the breakup of Proto Microne-
     sian as at least two thousand years ago, this progression of stars would have occurred three or four
     weeks earlier than today.

                                                                    Seasonal cycles and lunations 341


<
Proto Remote Oceanic *u(C)unu ‘Aldebaran’ (given as PEOc in vol.2:167)
PMic *ūnu ‘Aldebaran’
  Mic: Kiribati            un               ‘star name’
PChk *ūnu ‘late July, early August; the star Aldebaran’
  Mic: Carolinian          wūn              ‘Aldebaran; synodic month approximately July–August’
  Mic: Chuukese            wūn              ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; Aldebaran’
  Mic: Mortlock            un(allual), un(elluel) ‘Aldebaran and Orion’
  Mic: Puluwat             wūn              ‘Aldebaran, a month about late July’
  Mic: Woleaian            ūẓ               ‘Aldebaran, a summer month’
  Mic: Lamotrek            ul               ‘Aldebaran, month 9’
  Mic: Sonsorol            ūr               ‘month 9’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K’marangi           |ūnu te|           ‘star name’ (Pukui & Elbert 1971)
>

<
PWMic *telu-telu ‘about August; three stars of Orion’s Belt’ (POc *tolu, PMic *telu ‘three’)
  Mic: Marshallese       cəlcəl            ‘Orion’s Belt, including sigma Orionis’
PChk *elu-elu ‘about August; three stars of Orion’s Belt’
  Mic: Carolinian        eluwel            ‘Orion’s Belt; month in the traditional synodic calendar, about August’
  Mic: Chuukese          əɾuweɾ            ‘name for a month in some calendars; Orion’s Belt’
  Mic: Mortlock          elluel            ‘Aldebaran and Orion; month 11’
  Mic: Ponapean          eliel             ‘Orion’s Belt’ (Kubary 1895:108)
  Mic: Woleaian          yeɾüyeɾ           ‘Orion’s Belt; a summer month’
  Mic: Lamotrek          oliel             ‘the constellation Orion including the star Rigel; month 10’
  Mic: Sonsorol          yoru-yoru         ‘month 10’
>

   Although the next set takes its name from the giant Bird constellation, which covers a
considerable area of the sky, it is the appearance of its brightest star, Sirius, that is most
consistently identified with the moon rising in September.

<
PMP *manuk ‘bird’
POc *manuk ‘bird; Bird constellation including Canopus, Sirius, Procyon’ (vol.2:162) [27]; ‘flying creature’; ‘animal’ (vol.4:271)
   Adm: Seimat          mān        ‘constellation including Canopus, Sirius, Procyon’
PMic *manu ‘bird; Bird constellation consisting of Canopus, Sirius, and Procyon’ (lit. ‘bird’) (Bender et al. 2003a: PCMic *manu ‘a bright star’)
  Mic: Kiribati         man        ‘a star, Canopus’
PChk *manu ‘about September; Bird constellation consisting of Canopus, Sirius, and Procyon’ (lit. ‘bird’)
  Mic: Carolinian       mān        ‘the star Sirius; month in the traditional synodic calendar, about September’
  Mic: Chuukese         mān        ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; constellation equated probably with Sirius or Procyon’
  Mic: Mortlock         man        ‘Sirius; month 12’
  Mic: Puluwat          mān        ‘a scattered group of stars, Canopus, Sirius, Procyon; a month about August’
  Mic: Satawal          mān        ‘Canopus, Sirius, Procyon’
  Mic: Woleaian         man        ‘Canopus, Sirius, Procyon’
  Mic: Lamotrek         mān        ‘the constellation Canis Major (includes Sirius and Procyon); month 11’
  Mic: Sonsorol         māûrû      ‘month 11’
  Pn:  Tikopia          manu       ‘Rigel’ (part for whole) (Lewis 1994)
  Pn:  Anutan           manu       ‘Bird constellation, consisting of Sirius (manu’s body), Canopus (east wing), Procyon (north wing) and a few stars in between’ (Feinberg 1988:100)
cf. also:
  Pn:  K’marangi        manu       ‘month name’
>

[27] *manuk is one of the few constellation names reconstructed for POc, with reflexes from the Admiralties,
     Micronesia and two Polynesian outliers. Ross (1996) conjectures that because Admiralty Islanders
     almost certainly had contact with Micronesian speakers in pre-modern times, it is possible that Seimat
     (Ninigo) mān in the sense given here was borrowed from a Micronesian language.

342 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


<
PChk *icci ‘about September, the constellation Leo’ (lit. ‘rat’) (Bender et al. 2003b)
  Mic: Chuukese       īc̣          ‘a star’ (not a month name)
  Mic: Mortlock       yis         ‘the constellation Leo; month 1’
  Mic: Woleaian       ic̣c̣i        ‘star in Leo (Hydra or Regulus) (not a month name)’
  Mic: Satawalese     ic̣          ‘a star, month (= November)’
  Mic: Lamotrek       ic̣          ‘month 12’
  Mic: Sonsorol       isi         ‘month 12’
  Mic: Pulo Annian    isi         ‘month (= December)’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K’marangi      itiit       ‘month name’
>

<
Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic *tarobolu ‘about October, the constellation Corvus’
  Mic: Ponapean         coropʷel       ‘Corvus’ (Christian 1899:388)
  Mic: Carolinian       sarobʷel       ‘star in Corvus; synodic month about October’
  Mic: Chuukese         serepʷer       ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; probably Corvus’
  Mic: Mortlock         soropʷel       ‘Corvus; month 2’
  Mic: Woleaian         sarafʷöl       ‘Corvus; a summer month’
  Mic: Lamotrek         sorabol        ‘Corvus; month 1’
  Mic: Sonsorol         talɛbʷörɨ      ‘name of a star; month 1’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K‘marangi        sarapori       ‘month name’
>

                                                            Seasonal cycles and lunations 343


    According to Christian (1899:389), Lamotrek sorabol is derived from sor ‘look’ and bol
‘taro patch’ and means ‘viewer of the taro patches’ because it shines during the taro season.

<
PChk *aremoi ‘about November; the star Arcturus’
  Mic: Carolinian       aremʷoy         ‘the star Arcturus; synodic month about November’
  Mic: Chuukese         ɔromʷoy         ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; star probably Arcturus’
  Mic: Mortlock         aramoi          ‘Arcturus; month 3’
  Mic: Puluwat          yoromɔy         ‘a star and a month, about November’
  Mic: Woleaian         yaẓemoi         ‘Arcturus; month between summer and winter’
  Mic: Lamotrek         aramoi          ‘Arcturus; month 2’
  Mic: Sonsorol         yalamauði       ‘month 2’
cf. also:
   Pn:    K‘marangi        aromoi           ‘month name’
>

   Lamotrek aramoi is allegedly derived from ara ‘conclude’ and moi ‘come’, as the ascendan-
cy of Arcturus marks the end of the NE winds that bring visiting parties to the island (Christian
1899:389).

<
PChk *cēwu ‘about December, January; constellation Corona Borealis (lit. dipping net?)’ (Bender et al. 2003b)
  Mic: Carolinian    sēw   ‘constellation Corona Borealis; synodic month about January’ (lit. ‘dipping net; seine net’)
  Mic: Chuukese      cēw   ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; a star, probably Corona Borealis’
  Mic: Mortlock      seu   ‘Corona Borealis’
  Mic: Puluwat       rōw   ‘a star and a month at the end of the breadfruit season, about December’
  Mic: Woleaian      ṣoū   ‘name of a Corona Borealis star’
  Mic: Lamotrek      cou   ‘Corona’
>

<
PMic *sumʷuru ‘the star Antares’ (Bender et al. 2003a: PCMc ‘the star Antares’) (vol.2:169: PMic *(d,z)umuri ‘Antares’)
  Mic: Kiribati          rimʷi(mata)     ‘Antares’
  Mic: Marshallese       tūmʷur          ‘stars in Scorpius; Antares’
PChk *sumʷuru ‘about January; the star Antares’
  Mic: Carolinian        tumʷur          ‘Antares; synodic month approximately December-January’
  Mic: Chuukese          tumʷur          ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; star Antares; coming in December it was the first month of the year’
  Mic: Mortlock          tumur           ‘Scorpion; month 4’
  Mic: Ponapean          tumur           ‘Antares’ (Christian 1899:388)
  Mic: Puluwat           tumʷur          ‘Antares, about January’
  Mic: Woleaian          tumʷiri         ‘Antares, a winter month’
  Mic: Lamotrek          tumur           ‘Antares; month 3’
  Mic: Sonsorol          tumuli          ‘Antares; month 3’
  Mic: Pulo Annian       tumʷuli         ‘a sidereal month equated with March’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K’marangi         tumuru          ‘month name’
>

344 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   It is tempting to associate the next reconstruction with PPn *mataliki ‘Pleiades’ (lit. ‘small
eyes’), but the similarity is evidently accidental.

<
PMic *māti-ciki ‘stars in Sagittarius’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Marshallese         (le)mec-ṛikṛik ‘star in Scorpio’ (dikdik ‘small’)
PChk *māti-ciki ‘about February; stars in Sagittarius’
  Mic: Carolinian          mæisix           ‘month in the traditional synodic calendar, about February’
  Mic: Chuukese            mæċik            ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; a star’
  Mic: Mortlock            meisik           ‘stars in Hercules; month 5’
  Mic: Ponapean            maitik           ‘star in Sagittarius?’ (Christian 1899:388)
  Mic: Lamotrek            mairik           ‘month 4’
  Mic: Sonsorol            maðisigi         ‘month 4’
  Mic: Pulo Annian         madi-siki        ‘a sidereal month equated with April’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K‘marangi           maetiki          ‘month name’
>

    Christian (1899) attributes this constellation name in Mortlock to stars in Hercules, but the
star chart suggests that Abo et al (1976) are correct in assigning it to stars in Sagittarius, as there
is nowhere near a month’s difference between Antares (the previous month) and Hercules.

<
PChk *məəl ‘about February; the star Vega in Lyra’
  Mic: Carolinian        məəl            ‘Vega’ (not a month name)
  Mic: Chuukese          məən            ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar; the star probably Vega’
  Mic: Mortlock          moel            ‘Lyra’
  Mic: Puluwat           məəl            ‘Vega, a month about February’
  Mic: Woleaian          mel             ‘Vega, a star in Lyra’
  Mic: Lamotrek          meal            ‘Vega, in the constellation Lyra’
>

  The next reconstruction, literally ‘big mati’ contrasts with PMic *mati-ciki above, ‘small
mati’ (meaning of mati unknown). Elbert (1972) attributes the meaning ‘big/old breadfruit’ to
the Puluwat term, since the Puluwat breadfruit season lasts from May until December (mæy >
Proto Remote Oceanic *maRi ‘breadfruit’). However, there is clear support for PMic *mati- as the first element.

                                                            Seasonal cycles and lunations 345


<
PMic *māti-lapa ‘the star Altair (or perhaps the constellation Aquila including Altair)’ (Bender et al 2003a: ‘Altair, constellation in Aquila’)
  Mic: Kiribati         matinapa     ‘three stars in a line in Capricorn’
  Mic: Marshallese      māclep       ‘Altair; constellation: alpha, beta, gamma Aquilae’
PChk *māti-lapa ‘about March; the star Altair (or perhaps the constellation Aquila including Altair)’
  Mic: Carolinian       mǣilap       ‘the star Altair; synodic month about March’
  Mic: Chuukese         mǣnap        ‘third month of the traditional sidereal calendar; star Altair’ (for †mǣyinap)
  Mic: Mortlock         meilap       ‘the constellation Aquila; month 6’
  Mic: Ponapean         mailap       ‘star name, Altair?’ (Christian 1899:388)
  Mic: Puluwat          mǣylæp       ‘Altair; a month about March’
  Mic: Satawal          mailap       ‘Altair’ (McCoy 1976)
  Mic: Woleaian         māirapa      ‘Altair, the most prominent star in Carolinian navigation; a winter month’ (for exp. †māsirapa)
  Mic: Lamotrek         mailap       ‘month 5’
  Mic: Sonsorol         maðirap      ‘month 5’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K‘marangi        maerapa      ‘month name’
>

<
PChk *taɨdā ‘about April; the constellation Equuleus’ (Bender et al. 2003b: ‘a star’)
  Mic: Mortlock       sota     ‘Equuleus; month 7’
  Mic: Chuukese       səəta    ‘fourth month in the traditional sidereal calendar; a star (probably Alpha Equulei)’
  Mic: Carolinian     səəta    ‘synodic month, about April’
  Mic: Puluwat        həəta    ‘a constellation, Equuleus; about April’
  Mic: Woleaian       səətā    ‘Aquarius; a winter month’
  Mic: Lamotrek       seuta    ‘month 6’
  Mic: Sonsorol       taɨta    ‘month 6’
>

   Christian (1899:394) records Yapese orthographic lagu (probably laxu) for a month around
June. If this is an early borrowing from a Micronesian language, the PMic form was probably
*laku.

<
PWMic *laka ‘stars in the constellation Pegasus’ (vol.2:170) (Bender et al. 2003a: PWMic *laka ‘stars in Pegasus’)
  Mic: Marshallese      lʷak           ‘stars in Pegasus’
PChk *laka ‘about May; stars in the constellation Pegasus’ (Bender et al. 2003b)
  Mic: Mortlock         la             ‘Pegasus; month 8’
  Mic: Chuukese         nā             ‘fifth month in the traditional sidereal calendar; a star (probably Beta Pegasi)’
  Mic: Puluwat          la             ‘star in Pegasus; month at the beginning of the breadfruit season, about May’
  Mic: Woleaian         lāxe           ‘Pegasus; seasonal name, approx. May–Oct.’
  Mic: Pulo Annian      nnaka          ‘a sidereal month equated with July’
  Mic: Lamotrek         lax            ‘month 7’
  Mic: Sonsorol         naxe           ‘month 7’
  Mic: Polo Annian      nnaka          ‘a sidereal month equated with July’
cf. also:
  Pn:  K‘marangi        rak            ‘month name’
>

346 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   PChk *kua below evidently reflects PMic *kua ‘Dolphin constellation, a constellation
including Cassiopeia and approximately equivalent to Aries’ (vol.2:170).

<
PChk *kua ‘porpoise; May/June; huge constellation including Cassiopeia and Aries’ (Bender et al. 1983)
  Mic: Mortlock      kɨɨ       ‘Aries; month 9’
  Mic: Chuukese      kɨɨ       ‘sixth month in the traditional sidereal calendar; a star probably Beta Andromedae’
  Mic: Carolinian    xɨɨw      ‘constellation Aries; synodic month about May’ (porpoise; head louse)
  Mic: Puluwat       kɨɨw      ‘Cassiopeia plus some other stars: a month about late April’
  Mic: Woleaian      xɨɨwe     ‘porpoise; constellation including Cassiopeia and Cetus (?); a winter month’
  Mic: Satawal       kɨɨw      ‘porpoise; constellation (Cassiopeia)’
  Mic: Lamotrek      kū        ‘month 8’
  Mic: Sonsorol      kuye      ‘month 8’
>

<
PChk *yalimadaɨ ‘Andromeda (within *kua constellation)’ (Bender et al. 1983)
  Mic: Carolinian      alimate        ‘Andromeda; month in the traditional synodic calendar, about June’
  Mic: Chuukese        enimatə        ‘month in the traditional sidereal calendar, named for the star’
  Mic: Puluwat         yemmātur       ‘a star and a month about June’
  Mic: Woleaian        yalimatə̄      ‘a star in Andromeda’
>

: Table 11.22 PChk progression of rising stars

__table__
         PChk    star/star group               approx. month
         *mʷakariker      Pleiades                      about July
         *ūnu             Aldebaran                     late July, early August
         *elu-elu         Orion’s Belt                  August
         *manu            Sirius                        September
         *icci               *Leo (Hydra, Regulus)       September
         *tarobolu           Corvus                      October
         *aremoi             Arcturus                    November
         *cēwu               *Corona Borealis            December
         *sumʷuru            Antares                     January
         *māti-ciki          Sagittarius                 February
         *məəl               *Vega                       February
         *māti-lapa          Aquila (Altair)             March
         *taɨdā              Equuleus                    April
         *laka               Pegasus                     May
         *kua                Cassiopeia/Aries            May/June
         *yalimadaɨ          *Andromeda                  June

                                                             Seasonal cycles and lunations 347

     The PChk reconstructions in Table 11.22 show a smooth progression of rising stars
over a year. Carolinian, Chuukese, Mortlock, Puluwat, Woleaian, Lamotrek and Sonsorol
follow this sequence closely, each containing reflexes of 12 of the 16 reconstructions, although
varying slightly as to which are not represented. The four star clusters marked with an asterisk
are those listed as calendar stars in only two or three languages and are probably alternatives for
other close stars representing the same period.

     The only Micronesian language outside western Micronesia (Marshallese + Chuukic) in
which terms for divisions of a year have been located is Kiribati, which has a rather different
sidereal calendar. Grimble (1931) provides a detailed account of Gilbertese [Kiribati]
astronomy. The year is considered to begin with the appearance of the Pleiades about 15
degrees above the eastern horizon just after sunset, in about the first week of December. The
Kiribati uniquely use the rafters of the meeting house as a grid reference by which they locate
their stars. Each six-monthly season is subdivided into eight periods called boŋ, measured by
the successive altitudes of the seasonal star at the hour after sunset as observed through the
grid of the rafters of the meeting house (1931:200). These sixteen named divisions, each a
little over three weeks long, subvert any need for a calendar based on lunar months.

11.5.8 Polynesia

11.5.8.1 Organisation of the lunar calendar

Lunar calendars are ubiquitous in Polynesia, or at least were, prior to the introduction of the
western calendar. Names commonly recur, theoretically permitting reconstruction to PPn, but
comparison of lists shows immediate problems. Makemson (1941:97–98) has noted that
different islands of the Hawaiian group use more or less the same month names, but in
different orders. Not only do starting months differ, but the order of months is often scram-
bled. The same is true of lists from Tahiti, Samoa, Tokelau and the Marquesas. Some
calendars consist of twelve months, others thirteen, while some, including Tonga, Manihiki,
Tahiti and Hawaii, have a thirteenth month interspersed occasionally. East Futuna has fourteen
months recorded but this apparently occurs because two months, December and January, each
have two names, presumed alternatives, listed. Kirch and Green (2001:310) comment that

348 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

__blockquote__
     since … the original calendar was strongly correlated with local ecological conditions
     and with yam horticulture, it is not surprising that the calendar was significantly
     reorganised once people had left the homeland region, and once their ecological settings
     and horticultural practices had changed.

:Table 11.23 The assignment to months of reflexes of reconstructed lunar month names in selected Polynesian languages (numbers approximate Gregorian months: January = 1 etc.)

__tablenh__
                                  Tongan
                                           E Futunan
                                                       Samoan
                                                                Tuvalu
                                                                         Manihiki
                                                                                    Tokelauan
                                                                                                Penrhyn
                                                                                                          Tah.itian
                                                                                                                      Hawaiian
       *mataliki                  —             6      —        —        —           —          —          —           1
       *tolu                      —             7      —        —        —           —          —          —          —
       *kau-unuunu                —         —           5   5             7           4          5          5         —
       *siliŋa kelekele            6        —          — 12/1            13          10          9         —           8
       *siliŋa maqa                7        —          — 12/1             1          11         10         —          12
       *oloamanu                  —          4          6   6             8           5          2         —          —
       *palolo muqa               —          8          7   8             9           6          6          7         —
       *palolo muri               —          9          8   9            10           7          7          8         —
       *muri(a)fa                 —         10          9 10             11           8          3          9         —
       *tokaoŋa                   —         —          — 11              12           9          4          4          7
       *lisa muqa                 12        12         — —               —           —          —          —          —
       *lisa muri                  1         1         —        —        —           —          —          —          —
       *utua muqa                 —         —          —         2        2          12         11         —          —
       *utua muli                 —         —          —         3        3           1         12         —          —
       *wai muqa                   2        12                  —        —            2         —          —          —
       *wai muri                   3         1         —        —        —           —          —          —          —
       *faka-qafu-maquri           4         2         —        —        —           —          —          —          —
       *faka-qafu                 —         —           3        4       —            3          1         —          —
       *faka-qafu-mate             5         3         —        —        —           —          —          —          —

    A further explanation for these discrepancies comes from Gill (1876:317) in his description
of lunar months on Mangaia in the southern Cook Islands:

__blockquote__
     The knowledge of the calendar belonged to the kings, as they alone fixed the feasts in
     honour of the gods, and all public spectacles. For others to dare to keep the calendar was
     a sin against the gods, to be punished by hydrocele [drowning?].

This perhaps explains why many lists have been recorded with a degree of doubt by the
informant as to their veracity. Even the earliest records show a degree of uncertainty, as in the
following 1789 account from Bligh who sought lunar month lists from Tahiti (quoted by
Oliver 1974:268):

                                                                 Seasonal cycles and lunations 349

__blockquote__
     To get a certain Knowledge of their division of time has given me much trouble, for
     altho many people pretend to know it, Yet I have found them so contradictory in their
     Accounts as convinced me they were not acquainted with the particulars of it. Tynah
     assured me only a few Old People could give me any information and that he knew it
     but very imperfectly himself.

    For practical purposes the account here relies on Williamson (1933) and Collacott (1922)
for Tongan, Rensch (1986) (based on Grézel 1878) for East Futunan, Williamson (1933)
(based on Turner 1884) for Samoan, Besnier (1981) (based on Kennedy 1931) for Tuvalu,
Makemson (1941) for Manihiki, Williamson (1933) for Tokelauan, Gill (1876) for Mangaia,
Makemson (1941) for Penrhyn, Oliver (1974) for Tahiti, and Makemson (1941) for Hawaii.

    Comparison of these lists shows frequent recurrence of lunar month names, but some
diversity in the month attributed to each name. While reconstruction of the form has been
possible, its position in a sequence has proved arguable. Twenty one reconstructions of
the name (but not the associated month) have been made, with 8 from Proto Polynesian, 11
from Proto Nuclear Polynesian and 2 from Proto Ellicean. There are a number of pairs,
identified by muqa ‘in front’ vs muri ‘behind, last’ (or toe ‘again’) and others by contrasting
terms kelekele ‘dirty’ vs maqa ‘clean’ and maquri ‘alive’ vs mate ‘dead’. Their cognate sets
appear below in §11.5.8.3.

    A major clue in the ordering of putative PPn lunar months lies in the fact that a number of
languages follow similar sequencing for up to four or five month names, as shown in Table
11.23.

    The table shows the assignment to months (January = 1 etc.) of reflexes of reconstructed
lunar month names in Tongan, East Futunan, Samoan, Tuvalu, Manihiki, Tokelau, Penrhyn,
Tahiti, and Hawaii. It can be shown that East Futunan, Samoan, Tuvaluan, Manihiki, Tokelau
and Tahiti share some sequences. These are genealogically and geographically quite widely
scattered languages, and their sequencing can be taken as a good indication that the system in
PPn was similarly ordered.

    The difficulty then becomes one of arranging the preferred sequencing into the appropriate times
of the calendar year. Names could be expected to relate to horticultural processes, particularly in parts
of western Polynesia to the yam crop, or in parts of eastern Polynesia to the breadfruit season, and to
the wet-dry seasons, while links to the palolo worm are prominent. There are also links to
significant stars or star groups. In Futuna, for example, successive months were marked by the
Pleiades, Orion’s Belt, Sirius, Regulus and a group of stars recorded as possibly the Southern Cross.
In Hawaii successive months were marked by the Pleiades, Betelgeuse, Sirius and other stars whose
names were not recorded. In particular, however, it is the appearance and disappearance of the
Pleiades that plays a significant role in the determination of the annual calendar.

11.5.8.2 Reconstructions

PPn *mataliki is reconstructable for ‘Pleiades’ (vol.2:165), but as a month name only in PNPn
(not in Tongic), where it is marked by the new moon after the first pre-dawn rising of the
Pleiades which occurred in 500 BC in mid-May, so here accorded to June. As Kirch and Green
have noted (2001:262, Table 9.4), the risings and settings of the Pleiades were widely
observed in many Polynesian societies, “where they were used to mark the change in seasons
and/or to mark the commencement of the year.”

350 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Since the internal subgrouping of Polynesian languages is relevant here, the entries below
are marked either ‘Tongic’ or ‘Nuclear Polynesian’, the two first-order subgroups within Polynesian.

<
PPn *mataliki ‘Pleiades’
-Tongic
  Pn:  Tongan      mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn:  Niuean      |(fetū) mataliki| ‘Pleiades’
PNPn *mataliki ‘month name, June’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: Anutan      matariki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: E Futunan   mataliki          ‘Pleiades; third month: June’
  Pn: Tikopia     matariki          ‘Pleiades (sign of advent of trade wind season when appears on eastern horizon before dawn, also sign for turmeric extraction)’
  Pn: Pukapukan   mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Samoan      mataliʔi          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Tuvaluan    mataliki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: K’marangi   matariki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Takuu       matariki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Rapanui     matariki          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Hawaiian    makaliʔi          ‘Pleiades; December–January; the six summer months collectively’
  Pn: Marquesan   mataʔiʔi          ‘Pleiades; June’
  Pn: Tahitian    matariʔi          ‘Pleiades’
  Pn: Maori       matariki          ‘Pleiades, the first appearance of which before sunrise indicated the beginning of the Maori year (about the middle of June)’
>

    PNPn *[kau]unu-unu is reconstructed for the next term, rather than *kaununu. It immediately
    suggests a link with PChk *ūnu ‘late July, early August; the star Aldebaran’, and an
ordering following the Pleiades and preceding Orion’s Belt as in Micronesia. The PPn prefix
*kau- had two functions: to derive a collective noun meaning a ‘group, company, bunch of s.t.’,
and to derive an instrumental noun, generally a long thin object (here PPn *kau < POc *kayu
‘tree’). The Samoan and Tahitian reflexes lack an expected initial ʔ-.

<
PNPn *[kau]unu-unu ‘June’
 Pn: Samoan            aununu       ‘May’
 Pn: Tokelauan         ka-unu-unu   ‘April’ (oa-unono: Wiliamson 1933)
 Pn: Tuvaluan          ka-unu-unu   ‘May; second month of the trade wind season’
 Pn: Manihiki          unu-unu      ‘July’
 Pn: Penrhyn           haka-unu-unu ‘May’
 Pn: Tahitian          au-unu-unu   ‘April–May’
 Pn: Tuamotuan         ka-unu       ‘December’
 Pn: Mangaian          ka-unuunu    ‘September to October’
>

                                                             Seasonal cycles and lunations 351


   Strictly speaking, the next item should not be reconstructed, as it is reflected in only one
language. However, it is noted here because it is a self-evident case of a (part-)constellation
marking a month. Orion’s Belt is a salient three-star feature in the sky. The middle star,
Alnilam, has its pre-dawn rising in late May, i.e. about two weeks after the Pleiades and a
month before Sirius, which occurs as a month name for July. Hence the attribution of *tolu to
June. Note also PChk *tolu-tolu ‘about August; three stars of Orion’s Belt’.

<
PNPn (?) *tolu ‘three; the stars of Orion’s Belt; June’ (cf. vol. 2:164)
 Pn: E Futunan        tolu        ‘three; the stars of Orion’s Belt; 4th month: July’
>

    Kirch and Green assign the two *siliŋa months to January and February, whereas here they
are assigned to June and July. Their reasons for the former assignment are that Outlier and East
Polynesian languages place them around January and February and that the second word of
*siliŋa kelekele seems to be cognate with Fijian kelikeli ‘March’. However, neither of these
grounds holds strongly. Both first-order subgroups of Polynesian, To and NPn, have reflexes
pointing towards June and July, whereas the January/February reflexes occur only in NPn,
specifically in Outlier and East Polynesian languages which are unreliable witnesses because of
their lengthy and sometimes tortuous migration histories. Tongan evidence is weighted more
strongly because it lies in the Polynesian homeland. PPn *kelekele here means ‘dirty’, in
contrast with *maqa ‘clean’, and is cognate with Fijian gelegele ‘dirty’, not with kelikeli ‘a hole
dug, a ditch’ or kele ‘pile up (yams)’.

    Unfortunately, whilst the meanings of *kelekele and *maqa are clear, the meaning of PPn
*siliŋa is not: it is probably a nominalisation of either PPn *sili ‘exceed’ or PPn *sili ‘put on
top of’ (Biggs & Clark 1993). It is possible that it is derived from the latter and denotes stages
of garden preparation. The Tuvaluan reflexes have each lost one word of the two-word phrase,
while Hawaiian has replaced hilina with hinaia (a word which crops up in several month and
star names). Penrhyn has adopted the pattern of other month pairs and replaced *kelekele and
*maqa with reflexes of *muqa and *muri. Each of these changes probably reflects the fact that
speakers no longer knew the meanings of the terms.

<
PPn *|siliŋa kelekele| ‘June’
-Tongic
  Pn:  Tongan            |hiliŋa kelekele| ‘June’ (hiliŋa ‘place where things are laid’, kelekele dirty’)
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: Tokelauan         hiliga-muamua     ‘October’
  Pn: Tuvaluan          kelekele          ‘December; third month of the westerly winds’
  Pn: Manihiki          hiriŋa-kerekere   ‘December’
  Pn: Penrhyn           siliŋa-mua        ‘September’
  Pn: Hawaiian          hinaia-eleele     ‘July’ (eleele for expected ʔeleʔele)
>

<
PPn *|siliŋa maqa| ‘July’
-Tongic
  Pn:   Tongan            hiliŋa-meaʔa     ‘July’ (meaʔa ‘fairly clean’, variant of maʔa ‘clean’)
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: Tokelauan          |toe hiliga|       ‘November’ (toe ‘once more’)
  Pn: Tuvaluan           siliŋa-mā        ‘January; seventh month of the westerly winds’
  Pn: Manihiki           hiriŋa-ma        ‘January’
  Pn: Penrhyn            siliŋa-muri      ‘October’
  Pn: Hawaiian           hiliŋa-ma        ‘September’
  Pn: Tuamotuan          hiriŋa           ‘May or July’
>

352 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    PPn *takulua is readily reconstructed as the name of a bright star (vol.2:163), and scattered
reflexes in Eastern Polynesian languages indicate that this was Sirius. The NPn languages listed
below are all Eastern Polynesian. It is assigned here to July on the grounds that its pre-dawn
rising at Niuatoputapu occurred in late June, but this may be to project too much back to the
PPn stage. In Micronesia the star Sirius is linked with September.

<
PPn *takulua ‘a bright star’
-Tongic
  Pn:  Tongan             takulua-tua-ʔalofi  ‘name of a large star’
  Pn:  Tongan             takulua-tua-fanua   ‘name of a large star’
PNPn *takulua ‘Sirius; July’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: Hawaiian           kaʔulua             ‘Sirius; February’
  Pn: Marquesan          takuʔua             ‘Sirius; July’
  Pn: Tahitian           |taʔurua tuirai|    ‘July’
  Pn: Tahitian           taʔurua-faupapa     ‘Sirius’
  Pn: Tahitian           taʔurua-e-tupu-tainaniu ‘Canopus’
  Pn: Tuamotuan          takurūa             ‘star name: may be Venus, Jupiter or Saturn’
  Pn: Maori              takurua             ‘Sirius; winter’
  Pn: Maori              takurua-whare-ana   ‘Altair’
>

    We assign PNPn *oloamanu to August (as do Kirch and Green) on the basis of its ordering
relative to other months, and especially of the fact that it precedes *palolo muqa, which cannot
be assigned earlier than September. The East Polynesian data (Manihiki, Penrhyn, Marquesan
and Tongarevan) are unreliable because of their lengthy and tortuous migration histories.

<
PNPn *oloamanu ‘August’
 Pn: Samoan           oloamanu          ‘June’ (olo ‘coo’, manu ‘bird’)
 Pn: Tokelauan        oloamanu          ‘May’
 Pn: Tuvaluan         luamanu           ‘June; third month of the trade wind season’
 Pn: Manihiki         oroamanu          ‘August’
 Pn: Penrhyn          oroamanu          ‘January’
 Pn: Marquesan        oaoamanu          ‘November’
 Pn: Tongarevan       aroamanu          ‘January’
>

    In parts of Polynesia, just as in parts of western Melanesia, the palolo worm (Eunice viridis)
spawns in a spectacular and predictable manner during October/November and November/
December during the last quarter of the moon. It is a well known phenomenon in Tonga and
Samoa, as it is in Fiji, but, as far as we can tell, either does not occur or is not recognised in
other parts of Polynesia. However, the name for the worm is known in Tuvalu and East Uvean
at least. In East Futuna palolo-muʔa and palolo-muli refer to star names and thus the lunar
months identified with these stars. In Tokelau, Mangaia, Tuamotu, Tahiti and no doubt other
parts, the terms exist apparently only as month or seasonal names.[28] Lack of Tongic reflexes
means we cannot reconstruct these terms to PPn in spite of the fact that reflexes occur in
compounds in well separated languages. PNPn *palolo muqa and *palolo muli referred to the
minor and major spawnings of the palolo. More than any of the other month names, we can be
reasonably sure of the chronological assignment of the palolo months because of the regular
pattern of the palolo’s spawning. Their association with the wrong months, even in Samoa,
indicates that they have become primarily names in a system divorced from their original
meaning.

[28] The palolo rising occurs in the Tuamotus but there it is referred to as koiri-taki-veve.

                                                          Seasonal cycles and lunations 353


<
PNPn *|palolo muqa| ‘first (minor) spawning of the palolo worm; month name, September—October’ (*muqa ‘be first’)
 Pn:  Samoan            |palolo mua   |  ‘July’
 Pn:  Tokelauan         |palolo muamua|  ‘June’
 Pn:  E Futunan         |palolo muʔa  |  ‘star, Sirius; 5th month: August’
 Pn:  Tuvaluan          |palolo mua   |  ‘August; fifth month of the trade wind season’
 Pn: Tahitian          |paroro mua   |  ‘June–July’
 Pn: Manihiki          |paroro mua   |  ‘September’
 Pn: Mangaian          |paroro       |  ‘June–July (weather very dry)’
 Pn: Marquesan         |paroro mua   |  ‘July’
 Pn: Tuamotuan         |paroro mua   |  ‘either 3rd or 10th month’
 Pn: Penrhyn           |paroro mua   |  ‘July’
>

<
PNPn *|palolo muli| ‘second (major) spawning of the palolo worm; month name, October–November’ (*muli ‘be last’)
 Pn: Samoan              |palolo muli| ‘August’
 Pn: Tokelauan           |toe palolo | ‘July’ (toe ‘again’) (also palolo lua)
 Pn: E Futunan           |palolo muli| ‘star, Regulus; 6th month: August–September’
 Pn: Tuvaluan            |toe palolo | ‘September; sixth month of the trade wind season’
 Pn: Manihiki            |paroro muri| ‘October’
 Pn: Marquesan           |paroro muri| ‘August’
 Pn: Tahitian            |paroro muri| ‘July–August’
 Pn: Tuamotuan           |paroro muri| ‘either 4th or 11th month’
 Pn: Penrhyn             |paroro muri| ‘August’
>

    Kirch and Green (2001:268– 271) cite the Bauan Fijian terms balolo lailai ‘small balolo’
and balolo levu ‘big balolo’, respectively October and November, as external evidence for the
PPn terms. Although the words for ‘small’ and ‘big’ in Fijian have been replaced in PPn by ‘be
first’ and ‘be last’, this is a legitimate inference. The durability of these month names can
perhaps be attributed to the co-occurrence of three events: the major palolo spawning, the last
post-dusk setting of the Pleiades, and the beginning of the wet season and the season of
abundance. Together, these events made *palolo muli a highly marked time in the Polynesian
annual cycle.

    Kirch and Green assign PNPn *munifa to December. Although the meanings of its reflexes
do not give much support to this reconstructed meaning, they seem to be correct, as the month
denoted by its reflexes immediately follows *palolo muri in E. Futunan, Samoa, Tokelau,
Tuvalu, Manihiki and Tahiti. The term may be more correctly muri-afā ‘end of storms’ (< POc
*muri + *apaRat), referring to the end of the trade-wind season. Tuvaluan murifa seems to
represent a halfway stage en route from PNPn *munifa to Proto Eastern Polynesian *muriafa.

354 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

<
PNPn *munifa ‘November–December’
 Pn: Samoan          mulifa          ‘September’
 Pn: Tokelauan       mulifa          ‘August’
 Pn: E Futunan        munifa          ‘constellation, Southern Cross (?); 7th month, October’
 Pn: Tuvaluan        murifa          ‘October; first month of the season of westerly winds’
Proto Eastern Polynesian *muriafa ‘November–December’
 Pn: Manihiki        muriaha         ‘November’
 Pn: Penrhyn         muriaha         ‘March’
 Pn: Tahitian        muriaha         ‘September’
 Pn: Tuamotuan       muriaha         ‘either 5th or 12th month’
 Pn: Mangaian        muriaʔa         ‘April to May’
>

   PNPn *takaoŋa is attributed to January because it follows the Tuvaluan and Penrhyn month
whose name reflects *muri(a)fa. Makemson (1941:214) and Pukui and Elbert (1971) both
write that it is the name of a star in Hawaii.

<
PNPn *takaoŋa ‘January’
 Pn: Tokelauan         takaoŋa         ‘September’
 Pn: Tuvaluan          takaoŋa         ‘December–January; second month of the westerly winds’
 Pn: Manihiki          takaoŋa         ‘extra (thirteenth) month’
 Pn: Penrhyn           takāŋa          ‘March’
 Pn: Tahitian          tāoa            ‘March’ (for expected taʔoʔa)
 Pn: Hawaiian          kaʔaōna         ‘June’
>

   The next two month names contain the term *lisa ‘louse’s egg, nit’. Kirch and Green
(2001:271) attribute them to July and August. They cite Collocott (1922:167), who explains
that little protuberances (“nits”) appear on the seed yams during these months as they are
forming roots. PPn *muqa and *muri respectively mean ‘be first’ and ‘be last’. Month names
are instead attributed here to December and January on the basis of the glosses of their reflexes.
They are at best weakly supported reconstructions.

<
PPn *|lisa muqa| (?) ‘December’
-Tongic
  Pn:  Tongan         |liha muʔa|          ‘December’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan      |lisa muʔa|          ‘11th month: December (first month of strong winds)’
>

<
PPn *|lisa muri| (?) ‘January’
-Tongic
  Pn:     Tongan           |liha mui |        ‘January’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan           |lisa muli|        ‘12th month: January (second month of strong winds)’
>

                                                           Seasonal cycles and lunations 355


   The reconstruction of PNPn *utua muqa ‘January’ and PNPn *utua muli/ *toe utua
‘February’ is fairly straightforward, as the meanings of their component words are clear and
match the horticultural season in which their glosses place them. PPn *utu meant ‘harvest
yams’, its nominal form utua referring to ‘yam harvest’.

<
PNPn *|utua muqa| ‘January’
 Pn: Samoan            utu-va-mua      ‘January: start of yam harvest’ (utu ‘yam harvest’, mua ‘be first’)
 Pn: Tokelauan         |utua muamua|   ‘December’
 Pn: Tuvaluan          utua-e-mua      ‘March; fifth month of westerly winds’
 Pn: Manihiki          |utua mua|      ‘February’
>

<
PNPn *|utua muli| ‘February’
PNPn *|toe utua| ‘February’
 Pn: Samoan             toe-utuva       ‘February: remains of yam harvest’ (toe ‘again’, utu ‘harvest yams’)
 Pn: Tokelauan          |utua lua|      ‘January’
 Pn: Tuvaluan           toe-utua        ‘April; sixth month of westerly winds’
 Pn: Manihiki           utua-muri       ‘March’
>

   PNPn *tākelo ‘Orion’s Belt or Betelgeuse; January’ is attributed to January on a combina-
tion of clues. It appears to have referred to stars in the constellation of Orion. Whereas *tolu
above evidently marked their pre-dawn rising in June (as does the Marquesan reflex of
*tākelo), the glosses of the Samoan (‘January’) and Nukuria (‘February’) reflexes together with
a Samoan comment that this is ‘a month of wind and storms’ (Henry 1928:234), imply that
*tākelo referred to the post-dusk rising of the stars in Orion’s Belt in December.

<
PPn *tākelo ‘name of a star or stars, possibly in Orion constellation’ (vol.2:163)
-Tongic
  Pn:    Tongan            takelo           ‘two stars in the northern sky’
PNPn *tākelo ‘Orion’s Belt or Betelgeuse: January’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: Samoan              taʔelo           ‘January: a month in the wet season’(?)
  Pn: Nukuria             dākero           ‘February’
  Pn: K’marangi           takero           ‘constellation of three stars in a row; month name’
  Pn: Hawaiian            kāʔelo           ‘a star, perhaps Betelgeuse; name of a wet month, January’
  Pn: Marquesan           takeo            ‘a star; June–July’
  Pn: Tahitian            taʔero           ‘Mercury’
  Pn: Tuamotuan           tākero           ‘Orion’s Belt’
  Pn: Maori               tākero           ‘an unidentified star; Mercury’
>

    Kirch and Green interpret PPn *wai muqa and *wai muri, where *wai is ‘fresh water’ or
‘rain water’, as referring to the months at the end of the wet season. The three Sa’a (SES)
months which make reference to wai ‘fresh water’: Feb. loʔa wai mwai-mwai ‘small water’,
March loʔa wai paine ‘big water’ and April loʔa wai (meaning of loʔa unknown) also fall in
the same period (Ivens 1927).

356 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

<
PPn *|wai muqa| ‘February–March’ (*wai ‘fresh water’, *muqa ‘be first’)
-Tongic
  Pn:    Tongan         |vai muʔa|       ‘February’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan        |vai muʔa|       ‘11th month (first month of heavy rains)’
  Pn: Tokelauan        |vai noa |       ‘January–February’ (‘just water’)
>

<
PPn *|wai muri| ‘March–April’ (*wai ‘fresh water, *muri ‘be last’)
-Tongic
  Pn:    Tongan        |vai mui |         ‘March’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan       |vai muli|         ‘12th month (second month of heavy rains)’
>

    Kirch and Green’s (2001:272) reconstructions for the next two months contain the word
*faka-qafu ‘cause to be heaped up’ (*faka- ‘causative’ + *qafu ‘[be a] heap’). They take this to
denote the preparation of gardens for yam planting at the beginning of the dry season. Howev-
er, the Tongan and East Futunan reflexes point to PPn *faka-afu (*afu ‘shoot or sucker’).

<
PPn *|faka-afu maquri| ‘a month name, April–May’ (*maquri ‘be alive’)
-Tongic
  Pn:    Tongan          fakāfu-moui    ‘April’
PNPn *faka-afu ‘a month name, April–May’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan         fakāfu-ola     ‘13th month: February (winds diminish)’
  Pn: Samoan            faʔāfu         ‘March’
  Pn: Tokelauan         fakāfu         ‘February’
  Pn: Tuvaluan          fakafu         ‘May; first month of the trade wind season’
  Pn: Tahitian          faʔāhu         ‘January–February’
  Pn: Maori             fakāhu         ‘Castor; spring’
  Pn: Tuamotuan         fakāhu         ‘September’
  Pn: Mangaian          ʔakaʔu         ‘December to January’
>

<
PPn *faka-afu-mate ‘a month name, May’ (*mate ‘be dead’)
-Tongic
  Pn:   Tongan          fakāfu-mate   ‘May’
-Nuclear Polynesian
  Pn: E Futunan        fakāfu-mate   ‘14th month: March (winds cease)’
  Pn: E Uvean          fakaʔafu-mate ‘May–June’
>

   It seems that the Polynesians were more systematic than speakers in western Melanesia in
tying names specifically to lunar months rather than just to times of year. Although we have
established a more or less sequential order of month names, we need to be cautious. Perhaps we
need to be reminded here that a) the idea of a year as a fixed period of time did not exist for
early Oceanic speakers (note Williams’ Maori definition of tau as ‘season, year, the recurring
cycle being the predominating idea rather than the definite time measurement’), and b) times
identified within a year were identified not by their length but rather by their central focus. It is
easy but mistaken to read the lists through western eyes, and interpret them as fully equivalent
to western calendar months. The interpretation is reinforced because we have little option other
than to translate local terms for time of year either with western month names or by numbering
lunar months from 1 to 12, with an arbitrary starting point. But there was no attempt by
local speakers to fit the lunar months into a fixed period of time. The lists were not fixed;
rather they were ready lists of more or less sequential markers of time within an annual cycle
that could be moved or added to if moons became out of step with natural features.

                                                                Seasonal cycles and lunations 357


: Table 11.24 Lunar month names in Polynesian interstage languages after Kirch and Green (2001) and as reconstructed here

__table__
           Kirch and Green (2001:271)               The present analysis
                                                                                                 category
                                                                                                 Semantic
           PPn              PNPn          Proto Eastern Polynesian      PPn              PNPn             Proto Eastern Polynesian
June                                                —                *mataliki        <          star
                                                    —                *[kau]unu-unu    <          star
                                                    —                (?) *tolu        —          star
                                                    *siliŋa kelekele <                <          agri.
July       *li(h,s)a mua    <             *kau-     *siliŋa maqa     <                <          agri.
                                            nunu
                                                    —                —                *takulua   star
August     *li(h,s)a muli   <             *oroa-    —                *oloamanu        <          ?
                                            manu
Sept–Oct   *palolo mua      <             <         —                *palolo muqa     <          palolo
Oct–Nov    *palolo muli     <             <         —                *palolo muri     <          palolo
Nov-Dec                                             —                *munifa          muriafa    star?
Decem-     …                *munifa       *murifa   *lisa muqa (?)   …                …          agri.
  ber
Dec–Jan    …                …             *takaoŋa                                               —
January    *siriŋa kelekele *siliŋa       <        *lisa muri (?)    …                …          agri.
                               kelekele
                                                    —                *takaoŋa         <          ?
                                                    —                *utua muqa       …          agri.
                                                    —                *tākelo          <          star
February *siriŋa maqa       *siliŋa ma    <         —                *utua muli, *toe …          agri.
                                                                        utua
Feb–    *wai mua            <             *utua     *wai muqa        …                …          wea.
  March                                     mua
March– *wai muli            <             *utua     *wai muri        …                …          wea.
  April                                     muli
        —                   —             *wai                                                   —
                                            (noa)
April–     *faka-qafu       <             …          *faka-qafu        <                <        agri.
  May         muli                                      maquri
May        *faka-qafu       <             *faka-afu *faka-qafu mate …                   …        agri.
              mate

Abbreviations in rightmost columd: agri. = agriculture; star = star name; wea. = weather.


   Two particular checkpoints – the rising and setting Pleiades and the palolo rising – are
those around which most people fitted their month names. The first are fixed in their annual
cycle, the second move to and fro according to the lunar cycle. The palolo rising is thus
separated from the others by slightly variable periods, with the result that the number of
moons between these markers sometimes varies. If one had to be omitted early, another could
be slotted in later, maintaining more or less the same reference to the agricultural cycle. But
their sequencing could not be fully fixed.

358 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   What we have reconstructed, therefore, is a lunar month calendar with assumed built-in
flexibility. Kirch & Green (2001:271) have also reconstructed a list, varying from ours in
some of its month assignments and in the interstage to which a number of terms are
reconstructed. Under our analysis fairly complete sets of month names are reconstructed for
PNPn and Proto Eastern Polynesian, and a partial set for PPn. The two calendars are reproduced as Table 11.24,
where “<” means ‘a reflex of the term to the left’.

   As the rightmost column of the table shows, month names are largely a mixture of
agricultural terms and star names. However, none of the PPn terms as reconstructed here are
star names, and it is a reasonable speculation that PPn had a set of month names based on the
yam cycle, the weather and the palolo risings, and that star names replaced some of these as
Polynesian speakers moved further eastward and left their yam-growing culture behind them.


11.6 Moon phases

Sets of moon phase terms in Oceanic languages show considerable variety. This may be due in
part to the possible incompleteness of sets that have been retrieved from entries scattered
across a dictionary. Even so, this variety shows certain patterns, described below, but provid-
ing only vague pointers to the POc set. No cognate sets have been found, except among very
closely related languages. The two phases that are most often named are the full moon and the
new moon. The latter raises a glossing snag that we return to in §11.6.2.

11.6.1 Full moon and associated terms

One piece of evidence that month names primarily label full moons (§11.5) is found in the
distribution of moon phase terms. Almost all available moon phase sets have a term for ‘full
moon’. Some WOc languages (Dobu, Manam, Halia) have no other phase terms listed. Other
languages have terms that cluster around or after the full moon, and these are shown in Table 11.25.
The leftmost column numbers the approximate 29 nights of a lunar month, counting the
western “new moon” (the night when the moon does not appear) as ‘1’ and the night it is last
seen before the next “new moon” as ‘30’. The second column labels the phases by their
conventional western names.

   A striking feature of Table 11.25 is the number of empty cells in it. Kilivila and Maringe
(Table 11.26) also have a set of moon phase terms, but not the remaining languages. The blanks
highlight the fact that each of these languages has names for the days in a sequence that includes
the full moon,30 but no names for the rest of the days of the month.31 Evidently, the time around
the full moon was the most important part of the lunar cycle in these communities, and the full
moon was (at least until recently) still celebrated through the night in some Oceanic communities.[32]


[29] “Approximate” because the lunar cycle lasts 29.53 days.

[30] No Atchin term has been found for full moon. This is perhaps an omission from Capell & Layard
     (1980).

[31] The Motu terms are exceptional in labelling periods between the full moon and the third quarter. A few
     Oceanic languages have a name for every day of the month: see §11.6.4.

                                                                   Seasonal cycles and lunations 359

: Table 11.25 Terms for phases that cluster around full moon

__table__
        Phase      Kilivila   Roviana           Kokota       Maringe      Kwaio            Atchin
      9 First      kalubuwotu —                 —            —            —                —
        quarter    tubukola
     10 Waxing     bitovila   —                 —            —            —                —
        gibbous
     11            urokaywo       —             —            —            —                —
     12            yomkovila      —             —            hakla-faɣalo —                —
     13            yapila         —             —                         —                —
     14            valaita        —             —            natʰoklu     —                —
     15            woulo          gaba          —                         —                —
     16 Full moon toulukʷaya      hobo rimata ɣlaba nare ɣlaba-rane       ʔeletoʔo         —
     17 Waning    mamisa          puta koburu ŋalu baisu     tithibuhi    fulufuluʔi alo   bat roʃer
        gibbous
     18           taygagibuli     —             fa-birho suli —           logo ni kʷalaŋa roʃer to-nac
     19            misilowa       —             —            —            lalatalu         lihʷen nav
     20            misidagu       —             —            —            ʔisu-fulaafola   horhor mare
     21            —              —             —            —            —                fur hamben
     22            —              —             —            —            —                lok-malac
     23 3rd quarter —             —             —            —            —                lok mulac
                                                                                           melmel

    The only cognate terms for ‘full moon’ are Kokota ɣlaba nare and Maringe ɣlaba-rane,
literally ‘moon daylight’. Roviana hobo rimata evidently has similar sense, as rimata means
‘sun’ (the meaning of hobo is unknown). Many terms for ‘full moon’ and other moon phases
are partly or wholly unglossable, but the available terms reveal certain semantic patterns. In
many languages ‘full moon’ is ‘moon’ plus an attribute meaning ‘all, whole, entire’.

__formgroup__
  NNG: Manam      |kalea zomzom |          ‘full moon’ (zomzom ‘all, whole, entire’)
  NNG: Mangap     |puulu munŋana|          ‘full moon’ (munŋana ‘all’)
  NNG: Bariai     |taiko dodol  |          ‘full moon’ (dodol ‘whole’)
  NNG: Kove       rorolu                   (VI) ‘whole, unbroken; full, of moon’
  NNG: Mutu       |kaiyo dodoli|           ‘full moon’ (dodoli ‘full, complete, whole’)
  NNG: Yabem      |ayoŋ ke-tu sàmuʔ|       ‘full moon’ (sàmuʔ ‘whole, all’)
  MM: Babatana    tavabela                 ‘full moon’ (tava ‘day’, bela [perhaps] ‘openly, fully’)
  SES: Lau        |sinali laulau|          ‘full moon’ (bubu ‘whole, full’)
  SES: Owa        |fafaɣaenani na faɣaifa| ‘full moon’ (faɣaenani ‘whole, complete’)

Elsewhere the attribute makes reference to roundness:

[32] In the 1980s Ross observed nightlong Takia full moon celebrations.

360 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

__formgroup__
  PT:  Iduna     |vaikohi gi-vivilina| ‘(the) moon became full’ (-vivilina ‘form a circle’)
  SES: Gela      |vula vovoɣo|         ‘full moon’ (vovoɣo ‘encircle’)
  SES: Kwaio     ʔeletoʔo              ‘full moon’ (ʔele ‘round’)

And elsewhere the attribute is ‘big’:

__formgroup__
  MM: Teop              |sivao a bēra|   ‘full moon’ (bēra ‘big’)
  SES: Lau              |[wa]wane baita| ‘full moon’ (wane ‘male, man’, baita ‘big’)
  SES: Arosi            |hura ahora|     ‘full moon’ (ahora ‘broad’)
  NCV: Ambrym           kolol            ‘be fat, swell’; ‘(of moon, be full)’
  Fij: Wayan Fijian     |vula levu|      (N & V) ‘full moon’ (levu ‘big’)

Beyond these semantically obvious terms, a number of metaphorical expressions are found,
some, no doubt, making references that cannot be retrieved. Indeed, some of the unglossable
terms for ‘full moon’ presumably fall into this category.

__formgroup__
  PT:   Motu        matoa                       ‘full moon’; ‘plant, Typhonium sp., the root of which is eaten in famine time’
  MM:   Nakanai     e-balala                    ‘full moon’; ‘a very large coiled basket’
  MM:   Halia       saloboto                    ‘full moon’ (lit. ‘be greedy’)
  SES:  Kwaio       fulabala                    ‘full moon, night when it is light from moonrise to dawn’; ‘four string shell valuable, all white shell, old and traditional’
  SV:   Lenakel     |mouk ramepʷepʷ n-mʷanuvie| ‘full moon’ (lit. ‘moon pats pandanus’)
  NCal: Drehu       |deu uma teu|               ‘full moon’ (deu ‘cooked beneath the embers’, uma ‘house’)

11.6.2 New moon

The vast majority of Oceanic languages also have a term for ‘new moon’. However, there is a
terminological snag here. The western “new moon” anachronistically denotes the time when
there is no visible moon in the sky. This is also true of some Oceanic languages, but in at least
some of these this reflects post-contact western influence (and the term is a word-for-word
translation of ‘new moon’). In others, it is clear from its literal meaning that the term glossed
‘new moon’ actually denotes the very first trace of a waxing crescent moon. In Longgu, for
example, we find madamai vaolu-i [moon new-DEF], calqued on the English term and
contrasting with tada madamai [face-up moon] ‘new moon’, which evidently denotes the first
visible trace of the moon’s crescent rising convex edge upward, as seen from a few degrees
south of the equator.

   Terms for a night when no moon appears usually refer to darkness (Drehet [Adm] puŋ
lokxop [moon darkness], Bariai [NNG] taiko i-mata dodom [moon its-face dark] Kwaio [SES]
logo bulubulu [darkness stars]) or contain a verb alluding to the moon’s absence (Mangseng
[NNG] ŋov i lou [moon it run.away], Numbami [NNG] kambalaŋa i-soloŋa [moon it-
go.inside], Yabem [NNG] ayoŋ ke-so [moon it-go.inside], Banoni [MM] madava ke mate
[moon it died], Maringe [MM] ɣrugu-lehe (moon-die), Lau [SES] sinali ka liu [moon it
pass.by]).

                                                           Seasonal cycles and lunations 361


   Terms for a newly appeared moon, a very thin crescent, fall into three groups. In the first
group are expressions that mean ‘the moon is rising’ or ‘the moon is appearing’:

__formgroup__
  NNG: Mangap                |pūlu i-pet         |    [moon it-appear]
  MM: Banoni                 |madava ke puke vāgu|    [moon it break today]
  SES: Sa’a                  |wārowāro e raŋa    |    [moon it rise]
  NCal: Drehu                |la mama teu        |    [the visible moon]
  Fij:  Wayan                |toko na vula       |    [rise the moon]

The second group has glosses that refer to the ‘immaturity’ of the moon:

__formgroup__
  MM:     Nehan              |koburu-ŋ bialoko|       [immature.fruit-LIGATURE moon]
  SES:    Lau                |sinali rirī     |       [moon small] ‘new moon, when first seen’
  SES:    Sa’a               |raŋa i gare     |       [rise the child]
  SES:    Owa                |kare-na faɣaifa |       [child-its moon]

The third group uses metaphors denoting the appearance of the young moon:

__formgroup__
  PT:     Iduna              |vaikohi bakabakalina|   [moon serrated]
  PT:     Motu               doɣaɣi                   ‘pearl-shell crescent’
  MM:     Nakanai            kalisu                   ‘nose-plug made of pearlshell’
  MM:     Maringe            peko                     ‘war canoe’

11.6.3 Half moon

Fewer languages have a term for the half moon (the ‘quarter moon’ in western phase terminology)
and a number of them mean ‘a piece of the moon’.

__formgroup__
  Adm: Drehet                |kisiʔe puŋ        |     [moon piece]
  NNG: Kairiru               |qareo [mʷaŋ,valuŋ]  |     [moon piece]
  NNG: Bariai                |taiko ilia        |     [moon piece]
  NNG: Mutu                  |kaiyo sirivu      |     [moon piece]
  NNG: Yabem                 |ayoŋ ŋa-makɛŋ(gɛŋ)|     [moon its-piece]
  NCV: Mwotlap               |no-wol na-ɣayte-ɣi|     [DEF-moon DEF-piece-SUFF]

11.6.4 Sets of phase terms

Setting aside phase term sets that only have terms for the new moon and the full moon, phase
term sets fall into two types. Type 1 sets include terms that indicate whether the moon is
waxing or waning. Terms in a type 2 set describe only the shape of the moon (so that, for
example, a waxing half moon and a waning half moon are both described by a single term).
Strictly speaking, the latter are not phase terms proper, but shape terms. Both types include
terms for full moon and for new moon, and it would be possible to divide the terms in §11.6.1
and §11.6.2 into phase terms and shape terms, but we have elected not to do so, partly because
there are full and new moon terms that have no explanatory gloss.

   Sets of both types differ along another dimension, namely how many phases or shapes they
distinguish. This presupposes that the source from which we derive each set includes all
members of that language’s set. The sets in §11.6.4 are each made up of phase terms, but these
are short phases clustering around the full moon. Table 11.26 is a tabulation of the Maringe
moon phase terms found in various entries in White et al. (1988).

362 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


    Maringe terms for specific days cluster after the new moon and full moon, and the
remaining terms cover the periods in between. Where other meanings for the terms are known,
these are shown in the column headed ‘Glosses’. Some are descriptive, like khakla-fagalo
‘hibiscus leaf’ = waxing gibbous moon, and ɣlaba-rane ‘daylight moon’ = full moon. Others
are perhaps drawn from narratives associated with the moon, e.g. kakhana-ɣolihe ‘the spirit
reappears’ = second day of the waxing crescent moon, and faŋala-baʔesu ‘the shark bites’ =
second day of the waning gibbous moon. The likelihood that the latter belongs to a narrative is
supported by an alternative term for the previous night, fafiau-fihalu baʔesu, glossed by White
et al. as “‘shark sniffs (the moon)’ as it waits under cover of darkness for the moon to rise”.
The Maringe term for the western ninth day (first quarter) appears odd, as it contains the word
fitu ‘seven’, but White et al. explain that it marks the seventh day (the middle) of the period
between bugaɣra, the first crescent moon, and the full moon, i.e. the seventh day if the day
following bugaɣra, i.e. kakhana-ɣolihe, is counted as the first.

: Table 11.26 Moon phase terms in Maringe (MM, Santa Isabel)

__table__
   Day      Western phase          Maringe           Glosses
   1        New Moon               ɣrugu-lehe        ɣrugu ‘darkness’; lehe ‘die’
   2        waxing crescent        bugaɣra
   3        waxing crescent        kakhana-ɣolihe    kakhana ‘reappear’; ɣolihe ‘spirit’
   4–8      waxing crescent        khafa
   9        First quarter          fitu-phiephile    fitu ‘seven’; phile ‘half’
   10       waxing gibbous         tiotiro-phegu     tiro ‘look out down’; phegu ‘cliff’
   12–13    waxing gibbous         khakla-fagalo     ‘hibiscus leaf’
   14–15    waxing gibbous         nathoklu
   16       Full moon              ɣlaba-rane        ɣlaba ‘moon’; rane ‘be daylight’
   17       waning gibbous         tithibuhi         ‘ocean, sea’
   18       waning gibbous         faŋala-baʔesu     faŋala ‘bite’ (?); baʔesu ‘shark’
   19–22    waning gibbous         ɣrasemusi
   23       Third quarter          nakro
   24–27    waning crescent        fada-ka-rugu      fada ‘shoot’; ka PREP; rugu ‘darkness’
   28–30    waning crescent        ɣrugu             ‘darkness’

   The Maringe set nicely illustrates the use of metaphor and of allusion to narrative in
Oceanic moon phase terms, and shows why the origins of moon phase terms may often be lost
to us. It is either a more elaborated or a less eroded set of moon phase terms than those found
in many Oceanic languages. A more usual set comes from the Kavataria dialect of Kilivila
(PT) (Ralph Lawton, pers. comm.):

  kapatu                      ‘new moon’ (-kapatu ‘become small’)
  tubu-geguda                 ‘first quarter’ (i.e. waxing crescent—MR) (tubukola ‘moon’,
                               geguda ‘unripe, green’)
  kalubuwotu tubukola         ‘second quarter, 8th or 9th day’ (i.e. half moon—MR) (tubukola
                               ‘moon’)
  bʷata                    ‘full moon’
  odubiliveka              ‘last quarter’

                                                          Seasonal cycles and lunations 363


Another set comes from Motu (PT). Note the clustering of terms after the full moon, some-
what like the sets in Table 11.25.

  doɣaɣi              ‘crescent-shaped new moon’ (doɣaɣi ‘crescent shaped pearl-shell’)
  hua karukaru        ‘young moon’ (karukaru ‘undercooked, immature’)
  matoa               ‘full moon’ (plant, Typhonium sp., its root eaten in famine)
  hua daulao          ‘moon soon after full’ (hua ‘moon’; daulao ‘grope after; go and touch;
                      to reach out towards s.t.’).
  hua haeno           ‘moon next to daulao’ (haeno, used euphemistically of unmarried
                      people having sex)
  hua matoa-torea     ‘moon about three-quarters; moon after haeno’

   Lichtenberk (2008a) includes the following To’aba’ita (SES) terms. These are verbs,
forming clauses like madami e siki [moon it small] ‘it’s new moon’. Note the second stage of
waxing, which can be glossed as ‘like a hibiscus leaf’, semantically the label that Maringe
applies to the same phase.

  siki       ‘be new (of moon)’
  sūsuʔiuʔa ‘be just past the new stage’ (‘still have sharp points’)
  reʔefakaθo ‘be in the second stage of waxing’ (reʔe ‘leaf’, fakaθo ‘tree sp., Hibiscus
              tiliaceus’)
  dolosuʔu   ‘be in the last waxing phase before being full moon’ (dolo ‘giant clam sp.’)
  arakʷa     ‘be full (of moon)’
  dekʷe      ‘be past the full phase, beginning to wane’ (dekʷe VI ‘break into pieces; break,
              crack open’)
  taθa       ‘be in the final waning stage before new moon’ (taθa ‘go past’)

   Similar sets evidently occur further east, but the data are sparse. The Mwotlap (NCV) set
consists of clauses with the subject no-wol ‘the moon’ —

  no-wol tɔgyɔw                ‘new moon’ (togyow ‘appear’)
  na-ŋyeŋye mes                ‘crescent moon’
  no-wol na-gayte-gi           ‘half moon’ (gayte ‘piece’)
  no-wol ni-tpʷɛtpʷɛ-pʷɔ       ‘waxing gibbous moon’ (lit. ‘the moon becomes a pig’s belly’)
  no-wol wɔnwɔn                ‘full moon’ (wɔnwɔn ‘complete’)
  no-wol ni-tpʷɛtpʷɛ-pʷɔ lok   ‘waning gibbous moon’ (lit. ‘the moon becomes a pig’s belly
                               again’)

—and the Lenakel (SV) set of clauses with the subject mouk ‘moon’ (John Lynch, pers.
comm.).

  mouk vi                          ‘new moon’ [moon new] (English calque?)
  mouk rə-nail etuatu              ‘first quarter’ [moon it-stand straight]
  mouk r-amepʷepʷ nəmʷanuvie       ‘full moon’ [moon it-pat pandanus]
  mouk rə-napinap                  ‘last quarter’ [moon it-is dark]

364 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

: Table 11.27 Moon phases in Hawaiian[33]

__tablenh__
                     1 New Moon                        muku
                     2 waxing crescent                 hilo         ‘twisted’; ‘navigator’
                     3 waxing crescent                 hoaka        ‘crescent’
                   4–6 waxing crescent                 kū-          [stand-]
           8–11, 22–24 (9=) First quarter              ʔole-kū-     [not stand-]
                    12 waxing gibbous                  huna         ‘hidden horns’
                    13 waxing gibbous                  mōhalu
                    14 waxing gibbous                  hua          ‘fruit, seed, egg’
                    15 waxing gibbous                  akua         name of a god
                    16 Full moon                       hoku
                    17 waning gibbous                  māhea-lani
                    18 waning gibbous                  kulu
                 19–21 waning gibbous                  lāʔau-kū-    [plant-stand-]
                 25–27 waning crescent                 kāloa-kū-    ‘sacred to the god Kanalo’
                    28 waning crescent                 kāne         name of a god
                    29 waning crescent                 lono         name of a god
                    30 waning crescent                 mauli

    The seemingly most articulated set of Oceanic moon phase terms is found in Hawai-
ian, where every day of the lunar cycle has a name, as in Table 11.27. However, a little
deconstruction shows that a number of the phase terms fall into smaller sets, and the days
within each set are numbered. Thus days 4–6 share kū- ‘stand’, giving kū-kahi [stand-1],
kū-lua [stand-2], kū-kolu [stand-3], kū-pau [stand-last]. The ʔole-ku- ‘not stand’ set for
days 8–11 recurs, counting again from kahi ‘1’, as days 22–24. Presumably kū- was once a
term covering several days, in the same way as certain Maringe terms in Table 11.26 covered
several days. Numbers were later added to enumerate the days within that phase. Days with
their own names cluster around the full moon (as in Table 11.25) and the new moon. The
glosses appear to reflect a mixture of names of Hawaiian deities and names designating good
(kū- ‘stand’) and bad (ʔole-kū- ‘not stand’) planting and fishing days.

    In its full listing the most complex set of moon shape terms is from ’Are’are (SES), listed
by Geerts under hura ‘moon’, but the analysis in Table 11.28 shows that it is less complex
than it looks. The days from 1 to 14, i.e. the days before the full moon, are labelled in pairs.
Thus day 1 (new moon) is tari-waro ara, day 2 tari-waro oreta. Each pair is labelled with ara
‘first’34 and oreta ‘last’. Days 15 and 16, the latter the full moon, are inoni ara and inoni oreta,
after which days 17–30 repeat the pair labels of days 1–14 but in reverse order, so that day 17
is hura-para ara and day 18 is hura-para oreta, and so on. The terms are at least partly
metaphorical.

[33] Glosses of the Hawaiian terms are based on on Pukui & Elbert (1971) and on those at http//:www.in-
     stanthawaii.com/cgi-bin/hi?Weather.moon (accessed 25 February 2022).

[34] Geerts (1970) has no gloss for ara in this context.

                                                            Seasonal cycles and lunations 365

: Table 11.28 Moon phases in ’Are’are

__tablenh__
  1-2, 29–30 new moon (=1)   tari-waro [get-moon]
  3-4, 27–38 thin crescent   husi      ‘banana’
                                       ‘black lipped pearl shell used as scraper for co-
  5-6, 25–26 medium crescent roa
                                       conut’
  7–8, 24–26 thick crescent  hehere    ‘pounded taro’
 9-10, 21–22 half-moon       akoru     ‘gnawed’
  11–12, 19–
             just gibbous    ruruai    ‘a pair’
          20
  13–14, 17–
             very gibbous    hura-para [moon-white]
          18
       15–16 full moon (=16) inoni     ‘person’

   Other shape terms, for example, in Bariai (NNG), are simpler. ‘Moon’ is taiko.

  taiko i-tal dodom        ‘night with no moon’ (i-tal ‘it causes’; dodom ‘dark(ness)’)
  taiko i-mata dodom       ‘new moon’ (i-mata ‘its face’; dodom ‘dark’)
  tue iragia               ‘crescent’ (tue ‘small black mussel shell’; iragia ‘shard or frag-
                           ment, especially of seashell’)
  taiko ilia               ‘half moon’ (ilia ‘part’)
  taiko dodol              ‘full moon’ (dodol ‘whole’)

In Owa (SES), ‘moon’ is fagaifa.

  kare-na faɣaifa          ‘new moon’ (lit. ‘moon’s baby’)
  rau-ni afanaru           ‘quarter moon’ (rau ‘leaf’; ni ‘of’; afanaru ‘plant sp.’)
  ura-faɣaoto              ‘be half moon’ (ura ‘moon’ [archaic?]; faɣaoto ‘straightened’)
  rau-ni apato             ‘gibbous moon’ (rau ‘leaf’; ni ‘of’; apato ‘plant sp.’ (?))
  fafaɣaenani na faɣaifa   ‘full moon’ (faɣaenani ‘whole, complete’)

    Languages with shape terms rather than phase terms also have expressions meaning ‘the
moon is waxing’ or ‘the moon is waning’, which, in combination with shape terms allow them
to refer to a given moon phase.

11.6.5 Moon phases in Proto Oceanic?

What does the account in §11.§11.6.1–6.4 tell us about POc moon phase terms? As no terms
can be reconstructed, it tells us nothing with certitude, but the following are reasonable
inferences:

__block__
 1. There were terms for full moon (§11.6.1), for the nights of darkness and the newly
   appeared crescent moon (§11.6.2), and a little less certainly for the half moon (§11.6.3).
 2. The structure of the set of terms centred on the full moon, such that days around the full
   moon (and perhaps around the new moon) had dedicated labels, whereas other phases had
   labels that covered more than one day (§11.6.1).
 3. The names of the phases may have alluded to narratives or to shapes. Shape terms often
   depended on comparisons with common objects. Only one such comparison, of a crescent
   moon to a crescent-shaped piece of shell, occurs across subgroups (Bariai [NNG] tue
   iragia ‘shard of mussel shell’, Motu [PT] doɣaɣi ‘crescent shaped pearl-shell’, ’Are’are
   [SES] roa ‘black lipped pearl shell used as scraper for coconut’). However, the possibility
   of the same comparison being made independently in different places is too high to allow
   a POc reconstruction.


366 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


11.7 Summing up

Apart from the Micronesian and Polynesian month terms reconstructed respectively in §11.5.7
and §11.5.8, very few reconstructions of terms denoting seasonal cycles or lunar ‘months’
have resulted from the research reported in this chapter. However, our exploration of the data
when seen in the light of various insightful quotes from ethnographers has resulted in a better
understanding of the way in which POc speakers conceptualised time. Our conclusions may
be summarised as follows.

11.7.1 Proto Oceanic speakers saw time in terms of recurring cycles.

The times they used as reference points came from various cycles – plant cycles, weather
cycles, wild life cycles – all subsumed under POc *taqun ‘any regular seasonal cycle’, and all
moving within a grand unified scheme controlled by the sun. POc *taqun did not refer to a
fixed period of time. It could be used to refer to the season appropriate to different contexts,
perhaps most commonly the growing season of the yam (§11.3). If speakers wished to talk of
the dry time or the time of voyaging they could refer more specifically to *raki ‘dry season
when the southeast trades blow’, or if referring to the wet season or the period when bad
weather affected their fishing, to *apaRat ‘wet season when northwesterlies blow and the sea
is rough’ (§11.4.7). They recognised another cycle, the lunar cycle (POc *pulan ‘moon’), as
one that moved to a different beat, independently of the others.

11.7.2 POc speakers had no concept of a year as a fixed period of time or unit of measurement.

A year was simply a cyclic entity (§11.2). If speakers conceived of a cycle encompassed by
the sun’s annual path, they could refer to it either by *taqun or by any natural feature recurring
in that cycle. As recurrent cycles they could be counted but not as fixed periods of time.
Hence, people might talk about something happening three yam seasons ago or three wet
seasons ago. Reflexes of *taqun have more recently been widely adopted to refer to the
western concept of ‘year’.

11.7.3 Lunar months were useful for planning but named lunar months could not be added together to form a system.

If POc speakers had regular names for times of year, they did not form a fixed list. Lunar
months, like seasons, are named by the events that define them. They are identified by their
focus and not their length. It is impossible to say when one named period ends and another
begins. Periods may blend into each other or overlap or leave gaps. Alternative names may be
possible. Hence they cannot be added together to form a system. And because for POc
speakers there was no concept of a year as a fixed period of time, there was no point in trying
to combine them into a fixed list that could be aggregated to form a solar year. Instead, it was
important that names be used flexibly so that adjustments could be made when necessary so
that a month name matched its designated time of year. Where fixed lists exist, or have been
reconstructed, they are usually seen as an attempt to integrate the western conception of time,
and unless recognised as independent of the moon, must carry some way of intercalating the
lunar and solar systems. The list reconstructed for PChk ignores lunar months, being
based purely on star movements as they trace a solar year.

                                                              Seasonal cycles and lunations 367


    Although similar kinds of checkpoints identifying times in the annual cycle were recog-
nised throughout the Oceanic world, few POc reconstructions have been possible. There are
reconstructions only to PEOc (*(o,u)du) and PCP (*balolo) for the palolo worm as a specific
marker of time. And although we have reconstructed a rather tentative POc *bulu(q) for the
Pleiades, the constellation carries little weight in named lunar month terms. The inclusion of
its name in a Micronesian list is purely as part of a star sequence while in Polynesia it serves
either as the start an annual cycle or as a seasonal term.

11.7.4 Moons could be named as one-offs but not as part of a system.

For those communities where the palolo rising was celebrated, two successive moons might
be named by the event. They might then form part of a regular seasonal pattern as in the Torres
and Banks Islands (Table 11.20). But the names, now referring to weather and plant cycles,
could not continue to refer strictly to moons. Those who tried to connect regularly named
times of year with the lunar cycle would quickly get out of sync. So if particular moons other
than the palolo moons were named, they were moons identified by their relationship with
some event in village life. Malinowski offers an explanation for naming particular moons. He
writes that in the Trobriands:

__blockquote__
     the whole scheme is not a division of the year into a number of moons, rather a method
     of calculating moons, especially full moons, standing for important tribal movements,
     which cover interesting and dramatic times of the year. And as the year—that period of
     garden cultivation and other important tribal events—interests them first with regard to
     gardens and supply of food, so moons which are relevant in these respects are named
     and known by name and are divided into a scheme of growth represented by plenty and
     scarcity. (1927:215)

For instance, he writes (1927:211), that Milamala is the moon of festivities after the harvest,
and that the names of Milamala, Kuluwasasa, the preceding month when harvesting is done,
and Yakosi, the moon that follows Milamala “are universally known to the natives and they
are used by everybody” (p32). See also §11.5.1.1 (Table 11.10) for three moons similarly
marked in Wogeo. It seems that a community might name a small number of full moons that
mark a special time in their cultural life. A situation when 12 or 13 are named would mean a
fixed list with some way of adjusting to the solar year, an exercise for which there was no
evidence in POc times.

11.7.5 The stars were the ultimate markers of time.


368 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

Stars could be relied on when careful planning was required (§11.4.2). Although there is
considerable variation among communities today in their degree of familiarity with the stars,
the Pleiades, POc *bulu(q), are widely recognised throughout the Oceanic world as significant
markers of the annual cycle. Star knowledge may have been considered of greater importance
before the introduction of the western calendar. Evidence ranges from almost total lack of
interest among the Maenge (Panoff 1969:156; cf §11.5.1.2) to Muyuw’s recognition of
thirteen stars or star groups as calendar stars (Damon 1990:37–40; cf §11.5.2.1) and to the
knowledge of the Micronesian (§11.5.6) and Polynesian (§11.5.8) navigators, for whom the
night sky effectively served as both calendar and compass (Lewis 1972), (vol.2, ch.6). It
seems that although probably everyone in a community could identify a few stars or constella-
tions, there were usually some people of authority, such as in the Trobriands, who were
expected to have more detailed knowledge of the night sky. When more precise planning
became necessary for trading voyages or ritual events, people would turn to experts in
astronomical knowledge. Alkire (1970:38) writes that in Woleai “seasonal time keeping [is] a
responsibility of the chiefs, the Star of the Seasons (füsalïrag)”, while Gill writes that in
Mangaia the responsibility for such planning lay with the king himself (1876:317).



12 Talking about speaking

12.1 Introduction[1]

One thing people often talk about is what they and others say. When they talk about speech,
they often conceptualise it as an act: ‘she promised me’ or ‘he accused me’ or ‘I reprimanded
him’ or ‘he lied to me’ or ‘they congratulated you’ or ‘I persuaded her to …’. The list of
possible ‘speech acts’ is long, and has generated a substantial literature. Much of this of a
philosophical bent extending the work of Austin (1962) and Searle (1969; 1976; 1998). Some
of it more inclined toward linguistics in that it deals with the pragmatics of speech—how we
interpret and respond to what someone says (e.g., Leech 1983, ch.8; Shuy 2015), or with the
structure of conversations (e.g., Sinclair & Coulthard 1975; Tsui 1994; O’Grady 2010).

    Here, however, we set these matters aside and focus on speech act verbs, the verbs that
speakers use to refer to the kinds of act exemplified above. Alongside these, languages have
speech manner verbs like shout, stammer, and whisper, about which the literature has much
less to say as they are relatively uncontroversial. Both speech act verbs and speech manner
verbs are reconstructed below.

12.1.1 Categorising speech act verbs

   A number of studies have examined the meanings of speech act verbs. Verschueren (1980)
and Wierzbicka (1985a,b; 2003) argue that we must not assume that each language encodes
the same set of speech acts in its speech act verbs. Vershueren’s (1980:4) claim is that only the
speech acts which are relevant within the given culture will be lexicalised (that is, have words
or expressions that denote them) and thus the analysis of speech acts and their classification
should be done through detailed analysis of different languages’ speech act verbs (Vershueren
1980:34). Wierzbicka (1987, 2003) presents similar argumentation, stating that

__blockquote__
      every language imposes a certain categorization on the universe of speech acts, by
      offering labels such as exclaim, promise, complain, reproach, and so on. These labels
      are language-specific. This means the categorization offered by one language is
      different from that offered by another (1987:10).

[1] The division of labour among the authors is roughly as follows: BE compiled most of the cognate sets and
    contributed to the introductory sections; MO did the research underlying §12.6 and suggested various
    revisions of the text; and MR wrote most of the text of the chapter.

370 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


She argues that these categorisations are ‘crucially important to the way we perceive the world
we live in— the world of human relationships and human interaction.’ (1987:3). Further, “the
primary act of speech act verbs consists in interpreting people’s speech acts, not in performing
speech acts,” (1987:16) and thus

__blockquote__
        The set of English speech act verbs reflects a certain interpretation of the world of
        human action and interaction’…‘but the categories for which English does provide
        names are evidently seen by the speakers of English as particularly important. They
        shape their perception of human attitudes and human relations (1987:10).

Thus the only way to understand this categorisation in a given language and through it its
speakers’ interpretations of human actions and interactions, is to first analyse the structure of its
speech act verbs (Wierzbicka 1987:9).

    Ideally, then, this chapter would pursue two questions: (i) What types of meaning are
lexicalised in Oceanic languages and appear to have been lexicalised in Proto Oceanic; and (ii)
what is the grammatical behaviour of these lexemes, both in the modern languages and in
Proto Oceanic? However, the available data limit what can be done. Dictionary definitions of
speech act verbs are often only one or two words, and we are left guessing how a term is/was
used in practice. As a result there are more question marks against reconstructed glosses in this
chapter than elsewhere in these volumes. Sometimes examples tell us about a term’s
grammatical behaviour, but we find that cognates differ in behaviour, so that (ii) has proven
largely unachievable, other than that the subject is usually the speaker.2

    Although absence of exact equivalence between speech act verbs in different languages is
the norm, Leech (1983:205–226) sorts speech act verbs into five broad categories based on
their sense and on the grammatical constructions in which they occur. We re-label four of them
in order to avoid some of the jargon that has grown up around speech acts and speech act
verbs.3 English constructions and examples follow.4 We take a following clause or to + verb
phrase to be the verb’s complement, while objectA refers to an addressee. The morpheme
introducing a complement is called a complementiser. In this terminology, then, that, if/
whether and to are complementisers.

1)       a. report verbs (Leech’s assertives): e.g. say, declare, argue, mention
            verb + object noun phrase            I said a few words.
            verb + [that] clause                 I said that I was coming.
            verb + clause with wh-word           I said what they wanted to hear.
         b. question verbs (Leech’s rogatives), e.g. ask, enquire, discuss, wonder
            verb + object noun phrase           She asked a question.
            verb + if/whether clause            She asked if/whether the school would be closed.
            verb + clause with wh-word          She asked who would be invited.
       c. influence verbs5 (Leech’s directives), e.g. tell, urge, order, request, ask
          verb + objectA + [that] clause      I told the children that they should go home.
          verb + objectA + to verb phrase     I told the children to go home.
       d. commitment verbs (Leech’s commissives), e.g. offer, promise, agree, refuse
          verb + [that] clause           We agreed that we would paint the schoolroom.
          verb + to verb phrase          We agreed to paint the schoolroom.


[2]  Very few Oceanic dictionaries meet our criteria. Those that do include Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen (2007;
     Mangap), Samson et al. (2018; Sursurunga) and Pawley & Sayaba (2022; Wayan Fijian).

[3]  Leech admits that his categorisation, based on Searle’s (1976), has rough edges, but nothing better has
     appeared, and it serves our comparative purposes well enough.

[4]  For simplicity’s sake the examples given in (1a) and (1b) have simple transitive verbs. Some report verbs,
     e.g. tell, inform, advise, add an objectA to the constructions above (e.g. I told John that I was coming), as do
     some question verbs (e.g. We asked the inspector if/whether the school would be closed). The constructions
     in (1) are indicated informally and omit various stipulations that are not relevant here.

                                                                      Talking about speaking 371


Influence constructions resemble commitment constructions, except for the addition of an
addressee object (the person the speaker seeks to influence) in influence constructions.

   Semantic definitions of the four classes in (1) are inevitably wide. Report verbs refer to
speech acts by which speakers convey the information in the complement to their addressee(s)
(§12.3.1). A question verb refers to a speech act that seeks from some other person a verbal
response to the complement (§12.3.3). An influence verb refers to a speech act that seeks to
have the addressee(s) perform an act described in the complement (§12.3.4). A commitment
verb refers to a speech act whereby the speaker(s) undertakes to perform (or in the case of
refuse, not to perform) an act described in the complement. No commitment verbs are
reconstructed below, a lacuna that is discussed in §12.3.5.

   Leech’s expressives, e.g. greet (s.o.), thank (s.o. for s.t.), excuse (s.o. from s.t.), accuse (s.o.
of s.t.), praise (s.o. for s.t.), congratulate (s.o. on s.t.), apologise (to s.o. for s.t.) differ from
report verbs in that they usually occur without a complement clause because the speech act’s
semantic content is expressed by the speech act verb itself (Leech 1983:217–218). Expressives
are particularly specific to their speakers’ culture in the sense discussed by Verschueren and
Wierzbicka, but we do find a few cognate sets that permit the reconstruction of earlier
expressive speech act verbs (§12.4).

   In both English and many Oceanic languages the same verb may occur in different
constructions with different meanings. Tell, for example, is both a report and an influence verb.
The distinction is made by the complement construction: report I told him that I was going
home vs influence I told them that they should go home or I told them to go home. Ask is both
a question and an influence verb: We asked if the school would be closed vs We asked the
children to go home. Thus it is the verb and the construction together that convey whether the
speech act being talked about is conceived as reporting, questioning, influencing or
committing.[6]

   In light of the above, data for this chapter were assembled in two ways. First, as usual, we
searched all the available lexical sources for speech act and speech manner verbs. We also
searched grammatical descriptions for examples of speech act verb usage in the context of the
constructions with which they occur. Examples from sixty or so Oceanic languages were
collected, but these are sometimes incomplete. Often we do not find construction data for
commitment verbs. This is apparently a result of the distribution of the four classes in the data.
Where ‘>’ means ‘is more frequent than’, we find report > influence > question >
commitment.

[5] The labels of 370c and 370d are borrowed from Sag & Pollard (1991).

[6] Leech (1983:211) notes that the constructions themselves also occur with non-speech-act verbs. They
    convey speech act meaning only with a speech act verb.

372 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


12.1.2 Complements in Oceanic languages

    The framework above seems messy: a few English speech act verbs belong to two or more
of the four classes, and some English constructions occur in more than one class. The apparent
mess reflects the interaction of numerous factors which we gloss over here. What is interesting
is that each Oceanic language for which there are adequate data on the co-occurrence of
constructions with speech act verbs displays a similar set of overlaps. Just as the
complementiser that occurs with English report, influence and commitment verbs, in
Sursurunga (MM, St George, south New Ireland) the complementiser ŋo occurs with all four
classes. And just as a conditional should or would occurs in the that-complement of an English
influence or commitment verb, so the verb in the complement of a Sursurunga influence or
commitment verb is in the irrealis mood, as in (5) and (6). We saw from (1c) and (1d) above
that English influence and commitment constructions differ only in the addition of an
addressee object to influence constructions, an addition that follows from their semantics. The
same difference is reflected in (5) and (6) below.

    In each of (2) to (6) the speech act verb is underlined and the complement clause is
surrounded by square brackets. The complementiser is bolded.

2)    report
      mutwən      dan ə     Uiam di lu parai [ŋo a lu arpukus]
      river.mouth river ART U. S:3P HAB say C S:3S HAB dangerous
      ‘The mouth of the Uiam river, they say that it is dangerous….’ (Samson et al. 2018:105)
3)    question: polar
      kalilik di gatna [ŋo də-k               lu kas       ioh        mə]…
      guys S:3P ask C           S:3P.IRR-SEQ HAB dig,up earth.oven now
      ‘The guys asked if they could open the earth oven now, …’ (Samson et al. 2018:96)
4)    question: wh-
      Mə pəkənbuŋ iau gəlta di [ŋodənih a loŋoi ə               kalik er ə-k      taŋ,…]
      CJ then        S:1S ask O:3S C what S:3S do         spec child dem S:3S-SEQ cry
      ‘And then I asked them what that child had done so that he cried, …’
       (Samson et al. 2018:203)
5)    influence
      əi tata a dos-i              iau suri [ŋo ina       sari lamas          munaŋ,.…]
      D:3S dad S:3S command-TR O:1S PURP C       S:1S.IRR climb coconut.tree that.below
      ‘Dad told me to climb that coconut down there …’ (Samson et al. 2018:715)
6)    commitment
      … tan kələmul di sorməŋət mai muswan                 [ŋo da       tur  talum
         PL person S:3P assent           with faithfulness C S:3P.IRR stand together
      suri    loŋoi ə        rumə-n      aratintin kə-n       elementiri]
      PURP    build ART house-P:3S teaching PCL-P:3S elementary
      … the people undertook faithfully to stand together to construct an elementary school
      building. (Samson et al. 2018:483)

   Another instance of similarity between English and Oceanic is that some speech act verbs
occur in more than one category. English tell and Wayan Fijian veðe ‘tell’ both occur as both
report (7) and influence (8) verbs

                                                                          Talking about speaking 373


7)       a    nei veðe-i au o Taina [me gu dau vakateke-i Adi]
         S:3S HAB tell-TR O:1S ART T.           C S:1S     HAB spoil-TR    Adi
         ‘Taina used to tell me that I always spoiled Adi.’ (Pawley & Sayaba 2022)
8)       gu sā                veðē      [me vakarau laka]
         S:1S PERFECTIVE tell.O:3S C           prepare go
         ‘I told her to get ready to go.’ (Pawley & Sayaba 2022

The same can be said of Mussau ue, Wuvulu -ware, Lou pa, Kele pe, Mangap -so, Bariai -keo,
Yabem -sʊm, Minaveha -vone, Tawala -baha, ’Ala’ala -tani-, Bola taki-, Nakanai vei, Tabar
oeŋ, Siar war-, Halia hate-, Teop sue, Papapana -vatani-, Zabana kahe-, Kokota ōe, Maringe
ceke-, Gela bosa, Tolo koe, Longgu ili-, Arosi woi, Teanu -ko, Vurës ɣaɣnɛɣ, Mwotlap vap,
Maskelynes -kel, Tamambo viti-, NE Ambae veve, Neverver -ver, Paamese vite, Lewo -pisa,
Nêlêmwa xabʷe, Tinrin hĩḍɔ, Kosraean fæk, Marshallese ciṛoŋ, Mokilese pʷēŋ, Boumaa Fijian
tuʔu-, Tongan tala, Tuvalu fai. The fact that the same word can be used with both report and
influence constructions in so many Oceanic languages points to the likelihood that POc also
had verbs similar in sense to English tell, meaning roughly ‘communicate (s.t. to s.o.)’. Two
such verbs are tentatively reconstructed in §12.3.2. But the fact that the just listed verbs form a
number of cognate sets (or belong to no known set) is a warning that speech act verbs are quite
labile in Oceanic languages.

    Of all these verbs, just two also occur as question verbs: Tawala baha and Boumaa Fijian
tuʔu, probably because they are general verbs of saying.

    Although English ask occurs as both a question and an influence verb, the only clear
Oceanic instances of this semantic range in our data are Micronesian: Kosraean siyʌk,
Marshallese kaccitʌk. This is not really surprising, as English ask is unusual in this regard.
Many languages, it seems, use different speech act verbs in contexts that approximately
correspond to English ask, e.g. German fragen (question) vs bitten (influence), Spanish
preguntar vs rogar, Russian sprosit’ vs poprosit’, Hungarian kérdezni vs kérni (Verschueren
1980:27), Japanese tazuneru vs tamomu, Mandarin wèn vs yào.7 Note, however, that there is a
derivational relationship between the two verbs in Russian and in Hungarian.

    One difference between English and many Oceanic languages resides in the fact that
English question, influence and commitment verbs have an alternative construction, to + verb
phrase. This is an instance of “desententialisation” (Lehmann 1988), the tendency across
languages for non-report verbs to occur with reduced complements that are no longer
sentence-like. Like Sursurunga in (2)–(6), most Oceanic languages appear to lack reduced
complements. Of the sixty or so Oceanic languages examined, only four have them. One is
Teop (MM, Northwest Solomonic, north Bougainville), where influence verbs occur with two
constructions. In (9) the complement clause is marked with the imperative preverbal clitic =re,
and is a full clause. Alone, but with a second-person plural pronoun, its clause would be an
imperative: ‘You go to the garden!’.

9)       na tariko ma=e Saritavi [enam=re                    nao mohina].
         R ask      DIR=ART S.           D:1EP IMPERATIVE go        garden
         ‘Saritavi asked us to go to the garden.’ (Schwartz et al. 2007: 227)


[7]  These examples simply support the claim that English ask is unusual in its semantic range. It is almost
     certainly not the case that the members of these pairs are semantically equivalent across languages.

374 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


In (10) the complement is reduced: the complementiser is purposive tea and the subject is
deleted as it is identical with the addressee (mōn ‘female’) of the influence verb sue ‘tell’.

10)     e      iā     na sue ki      bona mōn        [tea mamata bono matavu]
        ART mother R     tell PREP ACC female C open               ACC door
        'Mother told the girl to open the door.' (Mosel & Thiesen 2007, §10.1.4)

Other languages in which we have found reduced complements are Wayan Fijian (see example
8), Kosrean (Lee 1975:307) and Mokilese (Harrison 1976:293–294).8

    English and Oceanic complement clauses differ in another respect. It is well known that the
complements of English speech verbs (‘indirect speech’) are potentially affected by two
phenomena relative to the clauses they are allegedly quoting. Thus a direct quotation like ‘I
don’t want to be here,’ John said becomes John said [he didn’t want to be there]. The first
phenomenon is deictic shift. As the speaker of the latter sentence is not John and is not at the
place where John had spoken, the I of direct quotation becomes he and here becomes there.
The second phenomenon is tense shift. As the speech act verb said of the latter sentence is in
the past tense, the present tense verb don’t want of direct quotation shifts tense to past didn’t
want. Oceanic languages employ deictic shift, but to our knowledge none shift tense. This
appears to be a common pattern around the world.

    It should be noted here that in Oceanic narrative texts direct quotation is much more
common than indirect speech.

12.1.3 Ways of referring to speech acts

Thus far, we have assumed that speech acts are referred to by dedicated verbs, and indeed
sometimes they are, as shown by the reconstructions in the following sections. But languages
differ in this regard. For example, Mangap (NNG) has numerous apparent compounds that
refer to speech acts. These consist of a verb plus an element that may be an adverb, a noun or
another verb. The dictionary usually treats an adverb or noun as a separate word but joins a
second verb to the first as a single word.9 Some of these compounds are semantically quite
transparent, especially those with adverbs, e.g. -so katkat ‘speak frankly’, where -so means ‘say,
speak’ and katkat means ‘openly, directly’. Others are fairly opaque, like -so-pe ‘advise (s.o.),
instruct (s.o.)’, where -pe is ‘be firm, be settled’. Further compounds with -so are shown in (11).

11)         Compound      gloss                             second element with gloss
            -so katkat    ‘speak frankly’                   katkat    ‘openly, directly’
            -so sorok     ‘speak baselessly’                sorok     ‘insignificant, ordinary’
            -so-kāla      ‘cut s.o.’s talk short’           -kāla     ‘go on top of’
            -so-pe        ‘advise (s.o.), instruct (s.o.)’  -pe       ‘be firm, be settled’
            -so-kere      ‘talk s.o. into doing s.t. wrong’ -kere     ‘lead, take the lead’
       -so-yāra       ‘speak publicly, proclaim’        -yāra     ‘shine, give off light’

[8] In many Oceanic languages every verb has a prefixed or proclitic subject pronominal. This is also true of the
    verb in a complement clause whose subject is coreferential with the subject or object of the speech act verb.
    Teop is different: a subject pronominal is phonologically independent of the verb, allowing its deletion in a
    complement clause, giving clause reduction. Whether this is true of other Oceanic languages with clause
    reduction is a matter for research.

[9] No attempt is made here to investigate how ‘apparent compounds’ fit into the grammars of the languages in
    which they occur, nor what their history is. For this, see papers in Bril & Ozanne-Rivierre (2004).

                                                                  Talking about speaking 375


   The compounds above are report or influence expressions. Compounds formed with wi-
‘ask’ are question expressions, as seen in (12). Alone, -wi A pa B (pa is a multipurpose
preposition) means either ‘ask A about B’ or ‘ask A for B’.

12)    Compound gloss                                            second element with gloss
       -wi kankāna ‘ask stupid questions, ask a rhetorical       kankāna ‘stupid’
                   question’
       -wi kinkin ‘interrogate, persist in asking’               kinkin ‘persistently’
       -wi tapāra ‘ask repeatedly’                               -tapāra ‘repeatedly’
       -wi-sese    ‘interrogate, ask repeatedly’                 -sese   ‘sew up, mend’
       -wi-nanāna ‘investigate, ask many people’                 -nanāna ‘chase’
       -wi-pe      ‘ask in order to hear well’                   -pe     ‘be firm, be settled’

   A number of other speech act compounds are listed in (13). The first verb is one of -suŋ,
-kuru and -ŋgal. Alone -suŋ A pa B means ‘ask A for B’. The other two verbs are not speech
act verbs when used alone: -kuru means ‘thread (s.t.) through a hole, put into a container’, and
-ŋgal ‘throw’ or ‘pierce’.

13)    Compound          gloss                                       second element with
                                                                     gloss
       -suŋ sosor     ‘wish evil, threaten, curse’                   sosor ‘wrongdoing’
       -kuru kopo-    ‘stir up, incite, provoke (s.o.)’              kopo- ‘stomach’
       -kuru lele-    ‘stir up, incite, provoke (s.o.)’              lele- ‘inside’
       -kuru sua pa A ‘accuse A falsely’                             sua    ‘talk (N)’
       -ŋgal sua pa A ‘accuse A (often falsely)’ (= ‘throw talk at’) sua    ‘talk (N)’
       -ŋgal lele-    ‘speak publicly, proclaim’ (= ‘pierce the      lele- ‘inside (N)’
                      inside’)
       -ŋgal talŋa-   ‘tell a secret, tip off’ (= ‘pierce the ears’) talŋa- ‘ear’
       -ŋgal-rāma     ‘teach (s.o.), instruct (s.o.)’                rāma ‘be together’
       -ŋgal-sek pa A ‘forbid someone from doing s.t.’               -sek ??

    Among the expressions in (13) is (in two versions), -kuru/-ŋgal sua pa A ‘accuse A falsely’.
It includes the noun sua ‘talk’. Mangap has many speech act expressions that include sua, and
a sample is listed in (14).

14)    Compound                  gloss                          semi-literal gloss
       -ur sua pa A              ‘order A, command A’           ‘put talk to A’
       -piri sua pa A            ‘curse A, speak badly to A’    ‘toss (bad) talk at A’
       -gībi sua pa A            ‘curse A, speak badly to A’    ‘throw talk at A’
       -suk sua pa A             ‘accuse A’                     ??
       -tōro sua                 ‘speak figuratively’           ‘turn talk’
       -kam sua pa A             ‘rebuke A, exhort A’           ‘do talk to/about A’
       -kam sua bōzo pa A        ‘complain about A’             ‘do a lot of talk about A’
                                                                  ‘tie talk to A concerning
          -mbuk sua pa A pa B ‘promise A concerning B’
                                                                  B’
          -la sua lelē-ne           ‘have an in-depth discussion’ ‘go (to) the talk's inside’
          -so le-A sua              ‘have a chat with A’          ‘say A's talk’

376 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


The last entry above perhaps needs explanation. The noun sua ‘talk’ is indirectly possessed, that
is, the possessor suffix is attached not to the possessed noun sua but to the possessive classifier
le- to give le-n sua ‘their talk’ in (15).

15)     zin mōri ti-zzo                le-n       sua
        PL   girl10
                      S:3P-REDUP.say PCL-P:3P talk
        ‘The girls were having a chat.’ (more literally, ‘The girls were saying their talk.’)

    Finally, (13) includes four body-part expressions, -kuru kopo- ‘stir up, incite, provoke
(s.o.)’, -kuru lele- ‘stir up, incite, provoke (s.o.)’, -ŋgal lele- ‘speak publicly, proclaim’, ŋgal
talŋa- ‘tell a secret, tip off’, which include the body-part terms kopo- ‘stomach’, lele- ‘inside’
and talŋa- ‘ear’. Body-part terms play a large role in denoting emotions in Oceanic languages
(vol.5, ch.9), and—not unexpectedly—Mangap kʷo- ‘mouth’ figures in a number of speech act
expressions. Some of these appear in (16).

16)       Compound            gloss                                  semi-literal gloss
          kʷo- iŋgal          ‘warn, remind’                         ‘mouth pierces’
          -yo kʷo- pa         ‘complain about (s.o)’                 ‘collect mouth concerning’
          kʷo- i-belek pa     ‘mock, ridicule (s.o)’                 ‘mouth despises’
          kʷo- i-kanan        ‘nag, be after’                        ‘mouth is biting/eating’
          kʷo- i-pun          ‘attack verbally, tear into, rip into’ ‘mouth hits’
          kʷo- i-pusuk        ‘urge, push someone to do s.t.’        ‘mouth pushes’
          kʷo- i-sala OR i-se ‘raise one’s voice’                    ‘mouth ascends’
          kʷo- i-su           ‘talk calmly’                          ‘mouth descends’
          kʷo- i-sala ŋwa- ‘order one’s superiors around’            ‘mouth ascends on top of’
          kʷo- i-sala ute-    ‘talk disrespectfully to people        ‘mouth goes over the head’
                              older than oneself’
          kʷo- sanāna         ‘cry out, yell, scream, shriek’        ‘mouth is bad’

The grammar of these expressions is straightforward. The noun kʷo- ‘mouth’ essentially stands
in for the speaker, so that in (17) kʷo-ŋ [mouth-P:1S] ‘my mouth’ stands in for ‘I’. As the subject
of the clause is ‘my mouth’, the verb takes a third person singular subject coreferencing prefix
i-.

17)     kʷo-ŋ       i-belek   pa             mōri     tana   ….
        mouth-P:1S S:3S-mock PREP            girl     DEM
        ‘I mocked that girl…’

   The distribution across Oceanic languages of compounds like those in Mangap is
impossible to ascertain, as typically neither dictionaries nor grammars pay much attention to
them. However, Lewo (NCV) makes plentiful use of speech act compounds that resemble
those in (11) and (12). These are described by Early (1993), and (18) gives a selection of his
examples.[11]

[10] More accurately mōri means ‘unmarried female’.
                                                                                 Talking about speaking 377

18)       Compound            gloss                               semi-literal gloss
          visa-ari            ‘promise’                           say-duration
          visa-kare           ‘criticise’                         say-spoil
          visa-lupʷari        ‘forbid’                            say-prohibit
          visa-wali           ‘announce’                          say-away
          visa-mumu           ‘grumble’                           say-crush
          visa-lawe           ‘say without thinking’              say-thoughtless
          visa-lua            ‘command’                           say-separate
          visa-ro             ‘interrupt’                         say-divide
          visa-yu             ‘discuss’                           say-extend
          viun-kare           ‘ask impolitely, be nosey’          ask-spoil

   Motu (PT) gʷau ‘say, speak’ behaves like Lewo visa ‘say’, as a glance at Lister-Turner &
Clark’s (1954) dictionary shows. Wayan Fijian tata ‘say, speak’ behaves similarly, as shown
by the examples from Pawley & Sayaba’s (2022) dictionary listed in (19).

19)       Compound              gloss                 second element with gloss
          tata beði-            ‘speak belittlingly of s.o.’
                                                      beði        ‘fail to show respect for
                                                                  s.o.’
          tata ðakaðā     ‘swear or speak vulgarly’ ðakaðā        ‘be bad, of poor quality’
          tata leke       ‘speak briefly’             leke        ‘be short’
          tata moðe       ‘talk in one’s sleep’       moðe        ‘sleep’
          tata musuki-    ‘interrupt s.o.’            musu        ‘be cut crossways’
          tata gʷau       ‘boast, tbe a loud mouth’ gʷau          ‘be too big, over-sized’
          tata matani-    ‘scold or criticise s.o. to mata        ‘opening, interstices as in
                          their face’                             the mesh of a net’
          tata sese       ‘speak idly’                sese        ‘without normal
                                                                  constraints’
          tata vaka-mōmō ‘speak with dignity’         mōmō        ‘chief’ (vaka- MANNER)
          tata ðadruðadru ‘stutter, stammer’          ðadruðadru ‘keep picking things out’
          tata āsagasaga ‘speak in a trembling voice’ āsagasaga ‘be unsteady, shake’

    However, one cannot assume that all Oceanic languages function like Mangap or Lewo. A
search of the Wayan dictionary suggests that not many Wayan speech act verbs behave like
this. Instead, there are many different lexical verbs, and the language also employs
derivational affixes to produce verbs with senses that are sometimes not predictable from the
root. Thus tata occurs in a basic transitive tata-ni- ‘speak to (s.o.)’, an applicative tata-takini-
‘talk about (s.t), complain or speak angrily about (s.t.)’, a reciprocal vī-tata-ni ‘converse, talk
to one another’, and a frequentative tātata, ‘talk a lot, be talkative’. The verb kʷai ‘say (s.t.),
mention (s.t.)’ (transitive: kʷaya) appears not to occur in compound expressions, but only in
derived forms: the frequentatives kʷakʷai (transitive: kʷakʷaiti-) ‘gossip (about s.o.), talk
critically or slanderously about s.o. in their absence’ and kʷaya-kʷaya ‘keep mentioning (s.t.),
keep talking about (s.t.)’. The same is evidently true of rō (transitive: rōti-) ‘send a request to
s.o. (asking for s.t.), give information to s.o.’ with its derived forms vaka-roti- ‘go and tell
(s.o.)’ (vaka- causative) and vīrōroti ‘invite or summon people, bring in or gather people or
animals’. Similar derivations occur with many other speech verbs.

[11] In accord with his descriptive framework Early calls these ‘nuclear layer serialisations’.

378 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


12.2 Reconstructing Oceanic speech act and speech manner verbs

Various obstructions stand in the way of speech act verb reconstruction. One is their lability,
(§12.1.2). Another is that reconstructions are often difficult to gloss. This, too, is partly due to
lability: the meaning of a POc speech verb’s reflexes can change considerably as one moves
eastward. But, more importantly, it is because many sources gloss them too briefly, leaving us
with no information as to which class(es) of speech act verb a verb belongs to or, if the verb is
transitive, whether its object is the speaker’s addressee or an indirect speech complement or a
piece of direct speech (§12.1.1). Reconstructing POc usage is thus fraught with uncertainties.

   One development that occurs at various times and places in the development of Oceanic
speech act verbs is the occasional grammaticalisation of one of these verbs as a
complementiser.

   The first stage in this development is represented by Paamese (NCV). In (20) the verb -vit
‘say’ functions as a report verb. In (21) it is the second verb of a serial verb construction that
consists of the question verb -vīsi- ‘ask (s.o a question)’ and -vit ‘say’. Here -vit simply has
the function of introducing the complement clause, but it is syntactically a verb, as it takes a
subject prefix (‘they asked me . . . they said…’).

20)   a-vit     [eimas kan keilu]
      S:3P-say sorcery eat D:3D
      ‘They said that the two of them were killed by sorcery.’ (Crowley 1992:20)
      (more literally: ‘They said that sorcery ate the two of them.’)

21)   a-vīsi-nau    a-vit     [vakili ona-k       mat]
      S:3P-ask-O:1S S:3P-say canoe PCL-P:1S       die
      ‘They asked me if my canoe had capsized.’ (Crowley 1982:74)

   Nêlêmwa (NCal) represents the second step. In (22) the verb xabʷe ‘say’ functions as a
report verb and is preceded by a subject pronoun.

22)   i    xabʷe [io      kio        i      uya]
      S:3S say     FUTURE NEGATIVE S:3S arrive
      ‘He said he would not come.’ (Bril 2002:457)

In (23), xabʷe follows the verb fāɣēn ‘ask’, but this is no longer a serial construction like (21),
as xabʷe has lost its subject pronoun and become grammaticalised as a complementiser.
Example (24) confirms this nicely, as it contains the verb i u xabʷe ‘he said’ and then the
complementiser xabʷe that no longer has semantic function, only the syntactic function of
introducing the complement.

23)   na fāɣēn [xabʷe buca da               hōli]
      S:1S ask    C        noise what that
      ‘I asked what that noise was.’ (Bril 2002:460)

                                                                               Talking about speaking 379


24)     ix u             xabʷe ʃi     pʷayiliy [xabʷe io ix       u          ã]
        S:3S PERFECTIVE say      PREP P.        C        FUT S:3S PERFECTIVE depart
        ‘He said to Pwaili that he would leave.’ (Bril 2002:457)

A third stage in this development occurs when a complementiser is phonologically reduced.
Some of these appear in the cognate sets below.


12.3 Complement-taking speech act verbs

Reflexes of the report, question, influence and commitment verbs reconstructed in §§12.3.1–
12.3.5 are commonly found with an indirect speech complement, as described in §12.1, and
one may infer that this was also true of the reconstructed verbs.

   Some of the POc report verbs reconstructed below were very probably also used in senses
that went beyond their speech act senses. Data supporting this inference are given in §12.6.

12.3.1 Report verbs

We infer from the glosses in the cognate sets below that POc *kʷa/*kʷai- and *pʷa/pʷai-, both
‘say, tell’, were perhaps the most neutral POc report verbs. Their similarity in form is probably
fortuitous, and we see no difference in reconstructable meaning. Reflexes of both are well
distributed across Oceania, although there are areas where one or the other predominates: *kʷa/
kʷai in Guadalcanal (SES), in northern Vanuatu and in Fiji; *pʷa/pʷai in Western Oceanic, in
Malaita (SES), in central Vanuatu and in Polynesia. The two coexist in Micronesia.

    Some of the reflexes of both verbs are complementisers, glossed simply with (C). We infer
that complementisers of the form ka reflect intransitive *kʷa, while those of the form ke
reflect transitive *kʷai-. A parallel observation applies to complementiser reflexes of *pʷa/
pʷai-, but with complications due to the reflexes of *pʷ-, which are discussed in connection
with POc *pʷaca(q) below. Maskelynes ke, true to the description in §12.2, is an instance of a
form that survives as both a verb and a complementiser, like Nêlêmwa xabwe in (23) and
(24). The same is true of NE Ambae -vo and Mafea -v.

    Just a few reflexes of *kʷa, *kʷai- appear also to be influence verbs, either because their
glosses show this (Arosi, Kosaean, Rotuman) or because we have influence examples
(Vurës). Similarly there are influence examples of reflexes of *pʷa, *pʷai- (Tolai, Papapana,
Mwotlap, Kosraean and Marshallese). These seem to be an extensions of the use of a ‘say’
verb in various languages rather than a feature reconstructable to POc.

    POc *kʷa was inherited from a PMP form which Reid (2012) writes *kuwá, with final
stress. It is easy to see that this might have been pronounced *kʷa.

<
PAn *kuaS ‘say’ (Wolff 2010:878)[12]
PMP *kuwá ‘say’ (Reid 2012)
POc *kʷa, *kʷai- ‘say, tell’ (Ross 2011:29-30)
 Adm: Seimat          ka-k             ‘talk’ (reduplication?)
 Adm: Seimat          ka               (C)
 NNG: Gitua           ɣai              ‘say, tell’
 NNG: Mumeng          kəy-aŋ           (N) ‘speech, talk’ (-aŋ NOM)
 PT:  Gapapaiwa       kae              ‘tell a story, ask (a question), ask (for s.t.)’
 MM:  Halia           ka               (C)
 MM:  Blablanga       o-ʔoe            ‘say’
 MM:  Kokota          oe-ni            ‘say’
 SES: Gela            ko-koe           ‘converse’ (reduplication)
 SES: Birao           koe-             ‘say’
 SES: Talise          koe-             ‘say’
 SES: Lengo           kɔe-             ‘say’
 TM:  Äiwoo           kɒ-              ‘say, think, want to’
 NCV: Vurës           kʷa-kʷ           ‘talk, speak, say’ (reduplication)
 NCV: Mwotlap         ka-ka            ‘tell story’ (reduplication)
 NCV: Lonwolwol       ke               (C)
 NCV: Rerep           ke               (C)
 NCV: Maskelynes      -ke              ‘say’
 NCV: Maskelynes      ke               (C)
 NCV: Port Sandwich   -ka, -kae        ‘say’
 SV:  Anejom          -ka              ‘say’
PMic *kai ‘inform’ (Bender et al. 2003a )
 Mic: Kosraean        kai              ‘talk to; warn, advise; admonish, instruct, persuade’
 Mic: Chuukese        æ                ‘tell it, sing it’
 Mic: Carolinian      æ-               (N, VI) ‘say, speak’
 Mic: Woleaian        xāi-u            ‘tell, mention, say’
 Mic: Ulithian        kay-a            ‘say’
PCP *kʷai ‘say, tell’
 Fij: Rotuman         ʔe-              ‘say, tell, instruct, request’
 Fij: Wayan           kʷai-            ‘say s.t., mention s.t., talk about s.o.’
 Fij: Nadrau          kʷay-a           ‘say’ (Geraghty 1983:45)
 Fij: Bauan           kai              ‘say’ (mostly used in kai-naki ‘it is said’)
 Pn:  Tongan          ke               (C)
 Pn:  Tuvalu          kē               (C)
PNPn *kai ‘traditional story’
 Pn:  Tikopia         kai              ‘traditional tale’ (originally from Firth)
 Pn:  Nukuoro         kai              ‘legend, story’
 Pn:  K’marangi       kai              ‘recount, history of’
 Pn:  Nukuria         kai              ‘legend, story’
 Pn:  Māori           kai              ‘riddle, puzzle, toy’
 Pn:  Tuamotu         ka-kai           ‘story, tale, fable’
>

[12] This renders Wolff’s *kuwas in the ACD orthography used in these volumes. Blust’s ACD does not list PAn
     *kuaS. He reconstructs PWMP *kua ‘whatchamacallit, filler for word that cannot be recollected’ and *kua-n
     ‘quotative [complementiser]’. The latter is almost certainly an undergoer voice form (vol. 5:27) of *kua. The
     glosses of some reflexes of both forms suggest that the reconstructions can be glossed ‘say’ and ‘what is said’
     respectively. Reid (2011) gives Kambera wà ‘say’, providing a CMP reflex.

380 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


  It is tempting to associate POc *pʷa/*pʷai- ‘say, tell’ with *[pʷa]pʷa(q) ‘inner
mouth’ (vol.5:128), but it seems more probable that this is a chance resemblance. The earliest
convincing ancestor of *pʷa/*pʷai- is reconstructable as PCEMP *bai ‘say’. Non-Oceanic
evidence for the latter consists of PCMP *bei ‘say’ (ACD) and PSHNG *ba/*be.[13]

                                                                      Talking about speaking 381


   The forms listed under ‘cf. also’ are probably reduplications of reflexes of *pʷa and *pʷai-.

<
PCEMP *bai ‘say’
POc *pʷa, *pʷai- ‘say, tell’
 Adm:  Mussau            ba                 (C)
 Adm:  Wuvulu            pa                 (C)
 Adm:  Lou               pa                 ‘say’
 Adm:  Baluan            pʷa                ‘say, express, think’
 Adm:  Pak               pʷay               ‘say, tell’
 Adm:  Titan             pʷa                ‘say’
 Adm:  Kele              -pe                ‘say’
 Adm:  Loniu             -pʷay              (VT) ‘say’
 NNG:  Mangap            be                 (C)
 NNG:  Kaulong           vo                 ‘talk, say, speak; suppose, intend’
 NNG:  Bebeli            pʷa                ‘say, express, think’
 NNG:  Mato              ba                 (C)
 NNG:  Gedaged           pai                ‘tell, say, speak to, declare, impart, announce, acquaint, proclaim’
 NNG:  Manam             be                 (C)
 NNG:  Yabem             -be                ‘think, mean, want’
 NNG:  Yabem             (ge)be             (C) ‘it means’
 NNG:  Labu              -pɛ                ‘say’
 NNG:  Mumeng            vʸa                (N) ‘talk, language, speech, animal noise’ (vʸ- < POc *pʷ-)
 PT:   Misima            ba                 ‘say’
 PT:   Bunama            be                 (C)
 PT:   Tawala            -pa                ‘say’
 PT:   Tawala            pa                 (C)
 PT:   Motu              -gʷa               (VI) ‘speak’
 MM:   Nakanai           vei-               (VT) ‘say’
 MM:   Tabar             va                 (C)
 MM:   Tolai             ba                 (C)
 MM:   Tolai             ve                 ‘tell’ (Franklin et al. 1974)
 MM:   Papapana          wa                 (VT) ‘say’
 MM:   Banoni            va                 ‘say’
 MM:   Sisingga          vö                 ‘say’
 SES:  Lau               bae                ‘speak, talk, say, tell’ (also in compounds)
 SES:  Lau               bae-a              (N) ‘speech, word’
 NCV:  NE Ambae          -vo                ‘say’
 NCV:  Mafea             -v                 ‘say’
 NCV:  Sa                vé                 (C)
 NCV:  Tirax             -ve                ‘say, tell’
 NCV:  Uripiv (Atchin)   wa                 (C)
 NCV:  Lewo              ve              (IRREALIS) ‘say’
 NCV:  Lewo              pe              (REALIS) ‘say’
 NCal: Paicî             páa                ‘speak, discuss’
PMic *pʷā (VT) ‘tell’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic:  Kosraean          fæ-k               (VT) ‘say, tell, announce’
 Mic:  Marshallese       pʷa                (VT) ‘tell’
 Mic:  Marshallese       pʷe                (C, DEONTIC)
 Mic:  Mokilese          pʷa                (V; C) ‘say’
 Mic:  Ponapean          pʷa                ‘say’
 Mic:  Woleaian          fʷe                (C)
 Mic:  Ulithian          vʷo                (C)
 Pn:   Tongan            fai                ‘do, utter, tell’
 Pn:   Tongan            pe                 (C)
 Pn:   Samoan            fai                ‘do, say’
 Pn:   Samoan            |fai mai, fai atu|   ‘say’
 Pn:   Tuvalu            fai                ‘say’
cf. also:
 SES:  Longgu            vava               ‘speak’
PNCV *vava ‘speak, say’
 NCV:  Mota              vava               ‘speak, say’
 NCV:  Lolovoli          veve               ‘tell (s.o. s.t.), tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NCV:  Raga              veve               ‘say’
 NCV:  Tamambo           veve(nasa)         ‘whisper’ (Jauncey 2011:397)
 NCV:  Apma              vep                ‘say, speak’
>

[13] Supporting SHWNG reflexes are (Rajah Ampat) Kawe, Laganyan ba, (CB) Serui-Laut (a)fa, Dusner ve,
     Biak (a)p, Waropen -fa (< *mba) (Dalrymple & Mofu 2012; Kamholz 2014:205; Mofu 2010).

382 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


    POc *pʷaca(q), *pʷaca(q)i- ‘speak, say’ appears to have been a straightforward report
verb. The near-absence of ‘tell’ from the glosses of its reflexes suggests that it it was not used
as an influence verb. Exceptions are the Tawala transitive form bahe- and Gela bosa-, which
are recorded in both report and influence constructions.

    Intransitive *pʷaca(q) may have been used in the sense of ‘speak’, i.e. to denote the act of
speaking. The glosses of the Tawala, Gela, Longgu, Chuukese and Boumaa Fijian reflexes
suggest that this POc form was also used as a noun meaning ‘word, speech, language’.

    The reconstruction of the POc consonant *pʷ is discussed in vol.1:16, and it has since been
investigated in some detail by Lynch (2002). Its rarity of occurrence means that its reflexes
have not been fully formulated. Lynch (2002:337) finds that it is in any case unstable. The
sequence *pʷa often becomes *po or *bo, or simply *pa, and it is a combination of these
reflexes that points to POc *pʷa, as Lynch’s examples show. This is also true of the cognate set
below.

    Given the overall rarity of forms in POc *pʷa-, one wonders whether there is a historical
connection between *pʷaca(q) below and *pʷa above, but if there is, it probably lies too far
back in time to be elucidated.

                                                                    Talking about speaking 383

<
PAn *bajaq ‘tell, inform, ask, enquire, know, understand’ (ACD)
POc *pʷaca(q) (V) ‘speak’; (N) ‘word, speech, language’
POc *pʷaca(q)i- ‘speak (s.t.), say (s.t.)’
  Adm: Lou             poso-ek            ‘talk slowly’
  NNG: Bariai          -posa-posa         ‘speak’
  NNG: Kove            -posa              ‘speak’
  NNG: Sio             pai                ‘speak to someone; address’ (-i < POc *-s/C)
  PT:  Tawala          -baha              (VI) ‘speak, talk’; (N) ‘word’
  PT:  Tawala          -bahe              (VT) ‘tell (s.o.)’
  MM:  W Kara          ve-bos             ‘speak’
  MM:  Teop            boha               (VT) ‘say (s.t.), speak, talk, converse’
  SES: Gela            bosa               (V; N) ‘say, speak, talk, tell, command; word, command)’
  SES: Lengo           bosa               ‘say’
  SES: Longgu          bosa               (N) ‘word, language’
  SES: Arosi           potaʔi             (VT) ‘beg, beseech; ask for s.t.’
PNCV *vʷasa ‘speak, say’
  NCV: Nokuku          ve-vas             ‘invite’
  NCV: Kiai            vosai              ‘advice, admonishment’
  NCV: Tamambo         vasa               ‘speak’
  NCV: Namakir         (manu)vas          ‘title of man who speaks on behalf of the chief’
  NCV: Nguna           vasa               ‘talk, speak, preach’
  Fij: Bauan           vosa               ‘speak, talk’
  Fij: Bauan           vosa-k-            ‘speak to’
  Fij: Boumaa          vosa               (V; N) ‘speak, talk; language, word’
>

   Cognate sets supporting the reconstructions below are far more limited than those above,
and the data do not show whether these were complement-taking verbs.

   The distribution of reflexes of *bʷala ‘say, speak’ is sufficient to support a POc
reconstruction.

<
POc *bʷala ‘say, speak’
 NNG: Mato                bo                 ‘say’
 NNG: Mato                bala               ‘tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NNG: Gedaged             -bol               ‘speak’
 NNG: Takia               -bol               ‘say (s.t.), speak, tell story’
 NNG: Ulau-Suain          -bʷar              ‘speak’
 PT:  Gumawana            bo-bʷala           ‘speak about (s.t.)’
 NCV: Maskelynes          |bʷol (mai-i)|       ‘tell (story to her/him)’
 Fij: Wayan               bolē               ‘offer to (do s.t.)’
>

    It is possible that PWOc *sowa, *sowai- ‘say, speak’ was a reflex of PMP *sau ‘word;
talk; conversation; language’ (ACD). Although the ACD’s gloss classes this as a noun, its non-
Oceanic reflexes show that it was also a verb root.

<
PWOc *sowa, *sowai- ‘say, speak’
 NNG: Mangap            -so                ‘speak’
 NNG: Mangap            -so-soa            ‘speak’
 NNG: Sio               sowe               ‘speak’
 NNG: Mindiri           suawi              ‘speak’
 MM: Teop               sue                ‘say’
 MM: Tinputz            soē                ‘say (s.t.); parable’
cf. also:
 NCV: Mwotlap           so                 (C)
>

384 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


   The cognate set supporting PEOc *bata ‘speak, utter’ is entirely from Bender et al.
(2003b).

<
PEOc *bata ‘speak, utter’
  SES: Kwaio               bā(tafe-)          ‘praise, extol’ (tafe- ‘praise, cheer, applaud’)
  SES: Sa’a                pā(lahe)          ‘praise’ (lahe- ‘praise, extol’)
PChk *pata ‘spoken, said, uttered’ (Bender el al. 2003b)
  Mic: Puluwatese          (a)paha            ‘say s.t.’
  Mic: Mortlockese         (a)pasa            ‘say s.t.’
  Mic: Mortlockese         (kka)pas           ‘word, speech, talk, language’
  Mic: Chuukese            (a)pasa            ‘speak, utter it’
  Mic: Chuukese            (kka)pas           ‘talk, speech, utterance, language; talk, speak’
  Mic: Satawalese          (a)pasa            ‘speak about it’
  Mic: Carolinian          (a)pasa            ‘say s.t.’
  Mic: Carolinian          (kka)pas           ‘word, speech, talk, language’
>

12.3.2 Report/influence verbs

The reconstructed forms in this section appear to have been used both as report verbs and as
influence verbs, as described in §12.1.

    The most widely reflected of these is POc *waRa, *waRai- ‘say (to s.o.), tell (s.o.)’. The
Mussau, Wuvulu (Adm) and Siar (MM) reflexes are known to be used as both report and
influence verbs, the Araki (NCV) reflex as an influence verb, and the Mafea (NCV) reflex as a
report verb. In Araki and NE Ambae the object is the addressee. In Mussau and Wuvulu the
object is the complement. In Siar the object is the complement when warai is used as a report
verb but the addressee when it is used as an influence verb. We have inferred that POc
*waRai- behaved like Siar, as the other configurations can be derived from it via analogy, but
this is weak evidence.

    This verb was evidently already present in PEMP, as there is an EMP reflex, Dusner (CB)
vre ‘say’.

<
POc *waRa, *waRai- ‘say (s.t.), tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 Adm: Mussau          ue            ‘say, tell’
 Adm: Wuvulu          ware          ‘say’
 Adm: Lou             war           ‘call’
 PT:  Sudest          vare          ‘tell’
 MM:  Sursurunga      wor           ‘speak’ (occurs only as first verb in a compound)
 MM:  Sursurunga      wor-wor       (VI) ‘talk, converse’
 MM:  Siar            warai         (VT) ‘say (s.t.), tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 MM:  Ramoaaina       wara-ŋa       (N, VI) ‘call, name’ (nominalisation)
 MM:  Label           wara          ‘speak’
 MM:  Konomala        were-k        ‘speak’
Proto Southeast Solomonic *waRa- ‘speak’ (Geraghty 1990: 80)
 SES: Lau             kʷala             ‘curse, use bad language, mention human dung’
 SES: Lau             kʷala-ŋi-         ‘curse, swear at’
 SES: Kwaio           kʷala             ‘blame, accusation’
 SES: Kwaio           kʷala-            (N) ‘voice’
 SES: ’Are’are        wara              ‘speak’
 SES: ’Are’are        wara-             ‘word, voice, speech, sound, language’
 SES: Sa’a            wala-             ‘word, speech, voice, language’
 SES: Sa’a            wala-aʔi          (VT) ‘speak’
 SES: Sa’a            wala-ʔaŋa         ‘speech’
 SES: Ulawa           wala-ʔa           (N, VT) ‘speak’ (ADJ used as VERB)
 SES: Arosi           |(rai ni) wara|   (N) ‘speech at a gathering to collect a debt’
PNCV *vʷara ‘speak, say, call’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota            vʷara             ‘the cry of an owl; to cry in that way’
 NCV: Lolovoli        ware              ‘call (s.o.)’ (Catriona Malau, pers. comm.)
 NCV: Raga            ware              ‘call, beckon’
 NCV: Kiai            vara-vara         ‘speak, talk’
 NCV: Kiai            vara              (N) ‘language, story’
 NCV: Araki           vara              ‘tell, say’
 NCV: Mafea           -varai            ‘tell’
 NCV: Sa              war               ‘speak, say’
 NCV: Nese            var               ‘tell, say’
 NCV: Big Nambas      -ð̼ara             ‘call out’
 NCV: Ninde           wor               ‘yarn, tell stories, talk,’
 NCV: Naman           var               ‘say, think’
 NCV: Neve’ei         vʷer              ‘say’
 NCV: Uripiv          wera              ‘say’
 NCV: Rerep           forei             ‘says it’
 NCV: Nguna           pa-vara           ‘say’
 Pn:  Takuu           vā-               (VT) ‘say’
 Pn:  Hawaiian        wā                (N, VI) ‘make a noise; gossip, talk loudly back and forth, to reason’
>

                                                                   Talking about speaking 385


    It is difficult to see a difference in meaning between POc *pʷiti((r,R)), *pʷiti((r,R))i- ‘say
(s.t.), tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’ below and POc *waRa, *waRai- above. Evidence that the former
was used as both a report and an influence verb is relatively strong. Its reflexes in Buma,
Tamambo, Paamese and Tirax are all used as both. Its reflexes in Mangap, Sursurunga and
Vinitiri are used as influence verbs, those in Tolai and Lewo as report verbs.

    The POc form was apparently inherited from PEMP, as there is a cognate in the Raja
Ampat language Biga (= Misool), namely bitino ‘say’. As usual, the parentheses around stem-
final *r, *R indicate that we cannot tell whether the POc consonant was *r or *R. The extra set
of parentheses says that, as we have only reflex, Minigir vitiri, the presence of the stem-final
consonant is uncertain.

386 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


<
POc *pʷiti((r,R)), *pʷiti((r,R))i- ‘say (s.t.), tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NNG: Mangap                 -pit                    ‘talk; tell story’
 MM: Sursurunga              bit                     ‘tell (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 MM: Minigir                 vitiri                  ‘say (that s.o. should do s.t.)’ (Van Der Mark 2007)
 MM: Tolai                   biti                    (V, VC) ‘say’
 SES: Kahua                  visi-                   ‘say’
PNCV *viti ‘speak, say’ (Clark 2009: *veti)
 NCV: Mota                   vet                     ‘say, speak, give the word; lead off (a song)’
 NCV: Nduindui               viti                    ‘say’
 NCV: Nokuku                 veti-                   ‘say’
 NCV: Tamambo                viti                    ‘speak, talk, tell story; say (to s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NCV: Tamambo                viti-                   ‘tell (s.t.)’ (Jauncey 2011:397)
 NCV: Paamese                vit                     (V, C) ‘say’ (see §12.2)
 NCV: Paamese                vite-ni-                ‘say (to s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NCV: Tirax                  -vɛr                    ‘say (to s.o. to do s.t.)’
 NCV: Ninde                  -mbiti                  ‘say’
 NCV: Port Sandwich          uc                      ‘speak, talk’
 NCV: Port Sandwich          uc-in-i                 ‘speak somebody’
 NCV: Lewo                   visi                    ‘talk, pass on message’
 NCV: Baki                   veri                    ‘say’
 NCV: Bieria                 mbetin                  ‘say’
 NCV: Namakir                vet-og                  ‘tell, say, speak’
>

12.3.3 Question verbs

Somewhat surprisingly only three high-order question verbs can be reconstructed, one each for
POc, PWOc and PEOc. Why so few? In our construction data there are a number of languages
for which we found no examples of indirect questions, probably because indirect speech is
infrequent in texts, and indirect questions are rarer than report or influence constructions. On
the other hand our search for question verbs in lexical sources found plenty, but they do not
form cognate sets. How is this explained? Words that are less frequently used are replaced more
rapidly than more frequently used words, and this is perhaps why there are so few question
verb reconstructions, and why the reconstructions that can be inferred have relatively few
reflexes.

    A single question verb is tentatively reconstructed to POc, *nanasa, *nanasai- ‘ask’. Its
question verb reflexes are restricted to WOc, as the Arosi reflex is not a question verb.

<
POc (?) *nanasa, *nanasai- ‘ask’
 PT:     Motu           he-nanadai          ‘ask’
 MM: Bola               nana, nane-         ‘ask’
 MM: Roviana            nanasa, nanasi-     ‘ask’
 MM: Hoava              nanasa-ni-          ‘request’
 SES: Arosi             nanasi              ‘wait for, expect’
>

                                                                     Talking about speaking 387


    It is hard to be sure of the meaning of PWOc *tore. Only the Lukep and Iduna reflexes are
question verbs. The reflexes in the close relatives Maringe and Kokota are influence verbs,
but this is not completely surprising, as the shift from ‘ask a question’ via ‘ask whether s.o.
will do s.t.’ (still a question) to ‘ask s.o. to do s.t.’ (an influence construction) is intuitively
quite probable, even if infrequent (see §12.1.2). The shift to a report verb in Notsi, however,
is curious, but we would need far more than the available data in order to elucidate this.

    If the Kwaio form reflects *to(r,R)e, then the reconstruction is promoted to POc.

<
PWOc * tore ‘ask, enquire’ (?)
 NNG: Lukep (Pono)        -toru                 ‘ask’
 PT:    Iduna             toli                  ‘enquire’
 PT:    Iduna             toli-ena              ‘enquire about s.t.’
 MM: Notsi                tole                  ‘speak’
 MM: Maringe              tore                  ‘ask for, make a request’
 MM: Maringe              tore-ni               ‘ask (s.o. to do s.t.)’
 MM: Kokota               tore-                 ‘ask (s.o. to do s.t.)’
cf. also:
 SES: Kwaio               olisi-              ‘ask, question; replace’
>

PEOc *vaizu/*vaizuni- is a more solid reconstruction than either of those above.

<
PEOc *vaizu, *vaizuni- ‘ask, enquire’
  SES: W Guadalcanal vesu-                      ‘ask’
  SES: Talise             vaisu-                ‘ask’
  SES: Malango            veisu-                ‘ask’
  NCV: Lewo               viun                  ‘ask’
  Pn:   Tongan            fehuʔi                ‘ask, inquire’
  Pn:   Nukuoro           heui                  ‘ask question’
>

    To the three reconstructions above, we add the following cognate set, but make no
reconstruction, as there is a semantic mismatch between the three MM languages clustered
around the St George Channel between southern New Ireland and northeastern New Britain,
and the Malaita-Makira languages (SES). Reflexes in the St George languages are all glossed
‘ask’, whereas those in the Malaita-Makira languages are all report verbs. We are encouraged
to think that they may reflect Proto Southeast Solomonic *tili- by the fact that the one NCV reflex is also a report
verb. This would allow us to reconstruct a POc speech act verb *tiRi-, but what exactly would
it mean.?

__formgroup__
  MM: Ramoaaina             tiri                ‘ask’
  MM: Minigir               tiri                ‘ask’
  MM: Tolai                 tir                 ‘ask’
Proto Malaita-Makira *ili- ‘say’
  SES: Longgu               ili-                ‘say it, tell it’
  SES: Lau                  ili-ʔai-            ‘tell (news)’
  SES: Kwaio                ili-                ‘say, tell, think’
  SES: ’Are’are              iri-                ‘say, speak, talk, tell’
  SES: Oroha                 iri                 ‘say’
  NCV: Lelepa                til                 ‘say’

388 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


   It is not clear whether PNCV *usi- meant ‘ask (a question)’ or ‘ask (s.o. for s.t.)’. As noted
above, the shift from ‘ask (a question)’ to ‘ask (s.o. for s.t.)’ is probable. A shift in the opposite
direction seems less likely, so PNCV *usi is included here rather than in §12.3.4.

<
PNCV *usi ‘ask’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Vurës              vör-us                  ‘ask’
 NCV: Mota               var-us                  ‘ask, enquire, enquire for’
 NCV: Baetora            usi                     ‘ask’
 NCV: Nduindui           uhi                     ‘ask’
 NCV: Nokuku             usi                     ‘ask, ask for’
 NCV: Tolomako           usi                     ‘call, invite’
 NCV: Kiai               usi-                    ‘ask, ask for’
 NCV: Tangoa             a-usi                   ‘ask’
 NCV: Mafea              -us                     ‘ask’
 NCV: Paamese            vīsi-                   (VT) ‘ask (s.o. for s.t.)’
 NCV: Nese               us                      ‘ask (s.o.)’
 NCV: Naman              us-us                   ‘ask (a question), ask (s.o. for s.t.)’
 NCV: Neve’ei            wus-wus                 ‘ask (s.o.)’
 NCV: Uripiv             os-us-i                 ‘ask’
 NCV: Maskelynes         -us                     (VT) ‘ask’
>

   PPn had two question verbs that are reflected across the whole subgroup: *huqi ‘ask (a
question)’ and *sili ‘ask questions’.

<
PPn *huqi ‘ask (a question)’
  Pn:   Tongan             fe-huʔi-              ‘ask’
  Pn:   Nukuoro            he-ui-                ‘question carefully’
  Pn:   Pukapukan          ui                    ‘ask’
  Pn:   Rarotongan         ui                    ‘ask’
  Pn:   Tahitian           ui                    ‘to question’
  Pn:   Tuamotuan          ui                    ‘ask a question’
  Pn:   Hawaiian           ui                    ‘ask’
  Pn:   Māori              ui                    ‘ask, enquire’
  Pn:   Marquesan          ui                    ‘to question’
  Pn:   Mangarevan         ui                    ‘to question’
>

<
PPn *sili ‘ask questions’
  Pn:      Tongan            fe-hili             ‘ask’
  Pn:      Samoan            fe-sili             ‘ask, question, inquire’
  Pn:      E Futunan         ve-sili             ‘ask’
  Pn:      Luangiua          va-sili             ‘ask’
  Pn:      Pileni            fe-ili-a            ‘ask’
  Pn:     Pukapukan          yili-yili          ‘ask, question’
  Pn:     Rennellese         he-sigi            ‘ask questions, inquire’
  Pn:     Tikopia            siri               ‘ask, inquire’
  Pn:     Tikopia            fe-siri            ‘ask, inquire’
  Pn:     Tokelauan          fe-hili            ‘question, inquire’
>

                                                                     Talking about speaking 389


12.3.4 Influence verbs

It was noted in §12.3.2 that there appear to have been POc verbs that served as both report and
influence verbs. We also mentioned in §12.3.3 that some question verbs meaning ‘ask (s.o. a
question)’ seem to have had the influence sense ‘ask (s.o. to do s.t.)’. This leaves only a few
other influence verbs, all meaning ‘ask s.o. for s.t.’, ‘ask s.o. to give self s.t.’.

    The two sets supporting POc *noŋi and PEOc *noqi below entail some formal puzzles. In
fact, we infer that they have a single origin, but we have few data to undergird this inference.

    The regular reflex of PMP *ŋeni is POc *ŋoni, but the latter is reflected only in Labu and
in an alternant Arosi form. All other Oceanic forms reflect a metathesised *noŋi, the form
reconstructed by Milke (1968). We surmise with Blust (ACD) that Arosi ŋoni may be a chance
(re)metathesis.

    The second set, reflecting putative PEOc *noqi, is suspect on two grounds. First, it is
reflected only in Guadalcanal (in Ghari and Tolo) and in Pn languages. Gela, in the same
major subgroup within SES as Ghari and Tolo, reflects *noŋi. Second, the Ghari and Tolo
forms are not regular cognates of PPn *noqi. The expected cognate form is †noɣi or †noi.

    A possible explanation of the the Ghari and Tolo forms is that speakers reanalysed reflexes
of *noŋi as transitives. In many EOc languages the transitive is marked by -Ci, where C is
one of several consonants, and so *noŋi was apparently reanalysed as *no-ŋi, giving an
intransitive root *no, reflected in Ghari. This *no in turn became the root of newly innovated
transitives like *no-ki (cf Tolo noki) or PPn *no-qi.

    There is another minor complication in the reflexes of POc *noŋi. The Central Papuan
languages Aroma, Motu, Gabadi and Roro have forms that could reflect *noŋi, *noki or
*noqi. They are interpreted as reflexes of *noŋi because this is the source of all other WOc
forms.

<
PMP *ŋeni ‘beg, ask for’ (ACD)
POc *noŋi, *ŋoni ‘beg, ask (for s.t.)’ (Milke 1968: *noŋi; ACD: *ŋoni)
 NNG: Tami               noŋ                ‘beg’
 NNG: Labu               ŋʊ-                ‘ask’
 NNG: Mangseng           noŋ                ‘beg, pray, shout’
 PT:     Aroma           noɣi-noɣi          ‘beg’
 PT:     Motu            -noi-              (VT) ‘ask for s.t.’
 PT:     Gabadi          noi-noi            ‘ask for, beg’
 PT:     Roro            noi-noi            ‘beg’
 MM: Kara (E)            nuŋ                ‘ask a favour; pray to a spirit’
 MM: Label               nuŋ                ‘ask for’
 SES: Gela               noŋi               ‘ask for’
 SES: Gela               noŋi-              ‘ask him, ask for s.t.’
 SES: Arosi              ŋoni, noŋi         ‘ask for, beg’
 SES: Owa                noŋi               (VT) ‘ask for s.t.’
>

390 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond

<
PEOc *noqi ‘ask for, beg’ (?)
  SES: Ghari                no-no               ‘ask for’
  SES: Tolo                 noki-               ‘ask for, request’
Proto Eastern Polynesian *noqi ‘ask for, solicit’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Pukapuka            noi-noi             ‘be greedy’
  Pn:   Rapanui             no-noʔi             ‘ask, beg, request, implore, pray, solicit’
  Pn:   Rarotongan          noi-noi             ‘covet, desire greedily’
  Pn:   Māori               (i)noi              ‘beg, ask for s.t.’
  Pn:   Hawaiian            noi                 ‘ask for s.t., make a request’
>

   Compared with the above, POc *suga, *sugai- ‘ask s.o. for .s.t.’ is a straightforward
reconstruction.

<
POc *suga, *sugai- ‘ask s.o. for .s.t.’
  NNG: Mangap              suŋ                   (VI) ‘ask s.o. for .s.t.’
  MM: Tolai                uge                   ‘agree; sing in tune with s.o.’
Proto Southeast Solomonic *suga, *sug(a,e)ti- ‘desire (s.t.), ask for (s.t.)’
  SES: Gela                huga, hugati          ‘keep talking about a gift’
  SES: Birao               suŋeti-               ‘ask’
  SES: Talise              suge                  ‘ask’
  SES: ’Are’are            suka                  ‘ask to be given (s.t.)’
  SES: Sa’a                suke                  ‘beg, ask for (s.t.), borrow, ask permission’
  SES: Arosi               sukat-                ‘long for, grieve for’
  Fij:  Bauan              suge                  ‘try to obtain, stir s.o. up’
>

   POc *taman ‘ask’ is something of a mystery, in two respects. First, we cannot provide a
more specific gloss than ‘ask’ because only the non-Admiralties reflexes below have
extended glosses. Second, the initial consonant of the Admiralties reflexes other than Seimat
—members of the Eastern Admiralties subgroup— reflects Proto E Admiralty *ntaman.
Whilst initial prenasalisation is expected on a noun, it is not expected on a verb (Ross
1988:337–341).

<
POc *taman ‘ask’
 Adm: Seimat                 ame-i              ‘ask’
 Adm: Lindrou                dremeñ-a           ‘ask, question’
 Adm: Loniu                  temen-ani          (VT) ‘ask’
 Adm: Bipi                   damen              ‘ask’
 Adm: Sori                   dimeŋ              ‘ask’
 MM: Maringe                 tamn-ai            ‘prayer, church service’ (-ai < POc *-aki)
 Fij:   Wayan                taman-i            ‘ask s.o. to give services/help in a considerable task’
>

                                                                     Talking about speaking 391


12.3.5 Commitment verbs

It is possible that Longgu alaŋaʔi, Lau alaŋai, Wayan Fijian ala and Bauan Fijian yala reflect a
PEOc *ala(ŋ) ‘promise’. Otherwise no reconstructions of commitment verbs have been made.
One reason for this is that commitment verbs are the least frequently occurring of the four
complement-taking classes of speech act verbs (§12.1.1). Another is that verbs meaning
‘promise’ are often compounds, as listed in (25).14 There is some evidence (Tolo, Tamambo,
Lolovoli) that there was a PEOc term for ‘promise’ made up of the verbs ‘say’ and ‘put’ (POc
*taRu(q), vol.5:449).

25)      language speech act expression       gloss                   semi-literal gloss
         Mangap mbuk sua pa A pa B            ‘promise A regarding B’ tie talk to A about B
         Yabem    sʊm su                      ‘promise (s.t.)’        say away
         Motu     gʷau-ha-mata                ‘promise’               say-CAUSATIVE-foremost
         Teop     sue vaovoi                  ‘promise (s.t.)’        say bless
         Zabana   nakai uŋene                 ‘promise (s.t.)’        leave speak
         Tolo     koe talu                    ‘promise (s.t.)’        say put
         Tamambo viti tauhi                   ‘promise (s.t.)’        say put-TR
         Lolovoli vara-tau                    ‘promise (s.t.)’        say(?)-put
         Lewo     visa-ari                    ‘promise’               say-DURATION


12.4 Expressive speech act verbs

When speakers use an expressive speech act verb, they categorise the intention or meaning of a
speech act. For this reason most expressive speech act verbs are not followed by a complement
clause

12.4.1 Respond co-operatively to another speaker

The single verb in this category refers to interactive conversational structure. A questioning
speech act requires an answer and an influencing speech act requires agreement to do what the
influencer wants. That is, the first speaker looks for a co-operative response from the addressee,
and this response is the meaning of POc *taRam, *taRami- ‘answer, agree’.

    A minor formal mystery is that final -m of the root seems to have become *-mʷ- in the
transitive form in NCV (Clark 2009).

    The Admiralties forms under ‘cf. also’ seem at first sight to be reflexes of *taRami.
However, they reflect a putative POc †*ja(Ra)mʷi, and we are at a loss as to how to explain
the difference in the initial consonant from POc *t-.

<
PEMP *taRam (V) ‘answer, agree’
 CB: Biak              karem               ‘answer, assent’
POc *taRam, *taRami- ‘allow, agree, co-operate’
 NNG: Yabem            tɪlam               (N, VI) ‘shout over distance’
 PT: Misima            talam               ‘let, allow, permit, give’
 PT: Saliba            talam               (N, VI) ‘answer’
 MM: Sursurunga        taram               (VI) ‘obey, cooperate; go along with, accede to’
 MM: Sursurunga        tərmai              (VT) ‘obey’
 MM: Ramoaaina         taram               ‘obey, agree, serve, answer to a call’
 MM: Patpatar          taram               ‘obey, listen, hear’
 MM: Tolai             tarami              (N, VI, VT) ‘obey, agree, consent’
 SES: Gela             tala-               (VT) ‘answer; allow, permit; agree, be willing’
 SES: Gela             talam-aɣi           (VT) ‘agree to, allow, obey’
 SES: Kwaio            ala                 ‘agree’
 SES: Kwaio            alami-              ‘allow, permit’
 SES: ’Are’are         arami-              (VT) ‘permit, consent, allow’ (ACD)
 SES: Sa’a             ʔala, ʔala-ʔala     ‘answer, obey, give attention to’
 SES: Arosi            ara                 ‘answer, agree mutually’
 SES: Arosi            arami-              (VT) ‘answer, acknowledge, assent to’
PNCV *taRamʷi ‘allow, accept, agree’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota             tarama              (N, VI) ‘answer a call’
 NCV: Mota             taram-aɣ            (N, VI) ‘answer another’
 NCV: Nokuku           tami, tame          ‘answer’
 NCV: Kiai             tame                ‘allow, consent’
 NCV: Araki            raɾami              ‘meaning, symbolic or magic significance’
 NCV: Tamambo          darami              ‘answer s.o.’
 NCV: W Ambrym         rɛma, rɛma-nɛ       ‘allow, let, agree (to)’
 NCV: Port Sandwich    ⁿramʷ-ini           ‘let, permit’
 NCV: Atchin           tamʷe               ‘salute, welcome, receive’
 NCV: Lewo             tamʷ-ani            ‘allow, permit, vote for; agree to, lend to, admit, confess’ (-ani TRANSITIVE)
cf. also:
 Adm: Lou              samʷi               ‘answer’
 Adm: Titan            camʷi               (VT) ‘agree, permit, reply’
 Adm: Loniu            cumʷi               ‘agree with’
>

[14] Mangap and Lewo are copied from (14) and (18). Sources not listed in the Appendix are Fitzsimons
     1989:147 (Zabana), Jauncey 2011:397 (Tamambo) and Hyslop 2001:393 (Lolovoli).

392 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond



12.4.2 Tell a story

Storytelling was an important activity in perhaps all traditional Oceanic-speaking societies. The
PNPn term *[ka]kai ‘traditional story’ is reconstructed in §12.3.1 above under POc *kʷa, *kʷai-
‘say, tell’. In §6.3.7 two speech-act verbs meaning ‘tell a story’ are reconstructed: POc *takunu
‘tell a story, narrate’ and PPn *tala ‘tell stories; tale, story’.

12.4.3 Call out

In a small community where many of the people one relates to are within hailing distance,
calling out is a fairly frequent occurrence. It seems to fall into two distinct speech acts: calling
out to greet or welcome someone (§12.4.3.1) and calling out to attract attention (§12.4.3.2).

                                                                                Talking about speaking 393


12.4.3.1 Greet

The verb for calling out a greeting was evidently POc *paila/*pela. The form *paila is
reflected only in Iduna, but the unidirectionality of sound change means that it is the older
form, and *pela is (only slightly?) more recent.

<
POc *paila, *pela ‘greet/welcome loudly; exclamation of welcome’
POc *pelapela ‘shout, exclaim’ (ACD)
 Adm: Levei-Drehet        pele              ‘voice’
 NNG: Kaulong             pel               ‘shout, yell’
 NNG: Takia               pele              ‘greeting, welcome exclamation’
 PT:     Iduna            -faina(ena)       ‘shout at, abuse angrily’
 MM: Nakanai              bela-bela         ‘talk about, gossip’ (b- for †p- or †v-)
 MM: Halia                ele               ‘speak strongly, loudly, speak with authority’ (zero for †p or †h.)
 MM: Roviana              vela-vela         ‘shout (as an official at a gathering, or in anger, etc.)’
 SES: Longgu              velo-             ‘rouse on, get cross with’
 SV:     Anejom           pec               ‘greeting, reply to pō’ (pō ‘greeting to s.o. met suddenly)[15]
 Fij:    Bauan            velavela          ‘interjection of surprise’
>

    The only other form reconstructable with this meaning is POc *kʷaro, for which just three
reflexes are known to us.

<
POc *kʷaro ‘call out a greeting’
 Adm: Lou                   -uaro             ‘hail, call out’
 Adm: Nauna                 -ualu-y           ‘call out, hail (s.o.)’
 MM: Patpatar               karo              ‘shout at (s.o.) with words or beckoning) as a greeting’
>

12.4.3.2 Call to attract attention

Two POc terms and one PEOc term meaning ‘call out to s.o.’ can be reconstructed. The first,
*pato, *patoli- ‘say or call s.o.’s name; say, speak’ seems to be focussed on the act of calling
itself. The second, *soRo(p) ‘call, summon’ also includes the intention to attract someone’s
attention or to summon them. The third, *kai has a similar meaning to *soRo(p), but the glosses
of its reflexes suggest an added element of forcefulness.

    The *-l- of *patoli-, the transitive form, is reconstructed on the basis of the stem-final
consonants of the Mangap, Kwaio and Arosi transitive reflexes.

<
POc *pato, *patoli- ‘say or call s.o.’s name; say, speak’
 NNG: Mangap        -patil-i        ‘keep calling s.o.’s name’
 NNG: Poeng         pato            ‘say’
 NNG: Poeng         pato-e          (V) ‘address s.o., call, name’
 NNG: Takia         -pate           ‘confer a name, call out (s.t.), say s.o.’s name’
 PT:  Sudest        varo-varo       ‘call’
 PT:  Gumawana      vatoi           (N, VT) ‘say s.t.’ (-i TR)
 PT:  Saroa         vato            (V) ‘to mention, say’
 PT:  Motu          hato-           ‘pronounce a name’
 MM: Lamasong       pata            ‘say’
 MM: Tinputz        vatō            ‘talk’
 MM: Torau          ato             ‘speak’
 MM: Hoava          pato            ‘say’
 SES: Gela          patopato        ‘forbid’
 SES: Kwaio         faol-eʔenia     ‘talk out against, talk about one’s failure to meet norms of kinship obligation’
 SES: Arosi         haor-aʔi        (VI) ‘give a name to’
 Mic: Woleaian      ffas            (VI) ‘call’
 Fij: Bauan         vato            ‘utter a wish; invoke evil with a ceremony’
>

[15] Anejom -c for †-l, as POc *l > c before *i, *e or *o, but remains l before *a or *u.

394 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


   Putative stem-final *-p of POc *soRo(p), *soRo(p)i- below is reconstructed on the basis of
the stem-final consonants of the Arosi and Wayan Fijian transitive reflexes. However, the
consonant can be reconstructed with certainty only for PEOc, as the only non-EOc transitive
form, Minaveha hone-i, lacks a stem-final consonant.

<
POc *soRo(p), *soRo(p)i- ‘call, summon’
 NNG: Mapos Buang       rɔ̄                     ‘express love, greet, send greetings’
 PT:  Minaveha          hone-i                 ‘call s.o.’
 MM:  Tolai             oro                    ‘call’
 SES: Gela              holo-                  (VT) ‘call, name’
 SES: Tolo              solo-                  (VT) ‘beckon, call by gesture’
 SES: Arosi             toro                   ‘shout, give news’
 SES: Arosi             toroh-aʔi              (VT) ‘shout to (s.o.)’
 NCV: Araki             soɾo                   (V; N) ‘talk, say; language, dialect’
 NCV: Araki             soɾoh-i                ‘speak of, mention’
 Mic: Chuukese          -o-sɔra, o-sɔrēy       ‘call, cause to be summoned’
 Fij: Wayan             ðō                     ‘call, call out’
 Fij: Wayan             ðōv-i-                 ‘call s.o. or s.t.. to come’
 Fij: Wayan             ðōv-akini-             ‘call for s.o. or s.t.’
>

    Although the forms listed below look as if they could be reflexes of POc *kʷa, *kʷai- ‘say,
tell’ (§12.3.1), on closer inspection this is implausible, first because the base form of the
reconstruction below is clearly *kai, whereas the base form of the reconstruction in §12.3.1 is
*kʷa, and second because there is a clear difference in meaning between the set in §12.3.1
and the set below. Also to be noted is an extension of the meaning to the vocalisations of
animals in the southernmost languages of the set, Nguna and Xârâcùù.

<
PEOc *kai ‘call out to (s.o.), say forcefully’
Proto Malaita-Makira *ɣai, *ɣai(li)- ‘shout to s.o., insist on s.t.’
 SES: Longgu               aili-             ‘call s.o.’
 SES: To’aba’ita           ʔai               ‘shout, yell, call out’
 SES: To’aba’ita           ʔaili-            ‘shout to s.o., call s.o.’
 SES: Kwaio                ʔai-              ‘insist, force’
 SES: Kwaio                ʔai-taʔi          ‘be insistent, insist on s.t.’
 SES: Arosi                ʔai, ʔaiʔai-      ‘incite, urge’
PNCV *kai ‘call out (to s.o.), vocalise loudly’ (Clark 2009: ‘call out’)
 NCV: Raga                 (bi-)ɣai-ɣai      ‘argue’
 NCV: SE Ambrym            kei               ‘call’
 NCV: Lonwolwol            ke                ‘call, call out, mention’
 NCV: Big Nambas           ɣai               ‘sing’
 NCV: Nāti                 ʔāi               ‘call, shout to’
 NCV: Uripiv               -kai              ‘cry out, shout’
 NCV: Rerep                ke                ‘cry out, shout, cooee’
 NCV: Rerep                ke-ke             ‘sing’
 NCV: Port Sandwich        kai               ‘call s.o.’
 NCV: Port Sandwich        ka-kai            ‘sing’
 NCV: Nguna                kai               ‘cry, sing (birds)’
 NCal: Xârâcùù             xa                ‘speak, bark, sound’
>

                                                                      Talking about speaking 395


12.4.4 Talk behind someone’s back

In any human community there are inevitably some speech acts that are perceived as
unpleasant. These are the subject of this section, §12.4.5 and §12.4.6.

   Blust’s reconstruction of PWMP *kunu ‘it is said, people say…’ (ACD) as an impersonal
expression is supported by his western Malayo-Polynesian reflexes. He also cites Arosi ʔunu
as a reflex, and this clearly belongs to the SES cognate set below. POc *kunu can be
reconstructed, but without Admiralties or WOc reflexes its gloss is uncertain.

<
PMP *kunu ‘it is said, people say…’ (ACD)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *kunu ‘gossip, talk negatively about s.o.’
  SES: Gela                kunu, kunuhi-      ‘beg’
  SES: Kwaio               kunu-              ‘gossip about be jealous of; accuse of infidelity’
  SES: Sa’a                ʔunua              ‘say, bid, tell, reckon’
  SES: Arosi               ʔunu               ‘speak, name, call’
  SES: Arosi               ʔunu-ʔunu          ‘slander, gossip, talk angrily, quarrel’
>

12.4.5 Talk negatively to someone

The verb reconstructed below is reflected only in NNG and MM languages. The gloss ‘speak
negatively or scornfully to (s.o.)’ is reconstructed on the basis of the Buang and Nakanai forms.
They are far enough apart geographically and genealogically to be independent pieces of
evidence. In the Schouten languages Wogeo and Manam, reflexes of *pile have lost their
negative element and are verbs of speaking in general. The Kaulong reflex, it seems, cannot be
explained without more local knowledge.

396 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond

<
PWOc *pile ‘speak negatively or scornfully to (s.o.)’
 NNG: Kaulong      pil              ‘sing to warn others of one’s presence, whistle to lure game’
 NNG: Wogeo        -fila-fila       ‘speak’
 NNG: Manam        pile             (VI) ‘say; speak, talk’
 NNG: Buang        plɛ              ‘scoff, mock, inspect, examine’
 MM: Nakanai       vile             (N, VI) ‘scorn, be critical of’
>

12.4.6 Deceive, tell a lie

Working with dictionaries, it becomes obvious that many Oceanic-speaking communities
recognised various degrees of lie-telling, rather like English fib, white lie and lie. Unfortunately,
the available data do not allow us to rank the eight verbs of lie-telling reconstructed below,
although POc *balau stands out as having a more specific gloss than the others.

<
POc *rupʷas, *rupʷasi- ‘tell lies to s.o., deceive s.o.’
 NNG: Takia           -rpai           ‘tell’
 PT:    Tawala        luposi          ‘lies regarding sex’
 PT:    Saliba        lupoi           ‘trick s.o.’ (Margetts 1999:280)
 MM: Roviana          rupasa          ‘using different words to convey a certain meaning’
 NCV: Paamese         luvos           (VI) ‘tell lies, pretend’ (-s unexpectedly retained)
 NCV: Paamese         luvosi          (VT) ‘trick, deceive; lie to’
 Mic: Kosraean        læfʌ            (VT) ‘deny, deceive; disclaim, contradict’ (-f- for †0̸)
>

   The three items that follow have few reflexes, but they are in each case sufficiently
distributed genealogically for, respectively, a POc, a PEOc and a PCP reconstruction ro be
made.

<
POc *koron ‘lie, tell a lie’ (ACD)
 Adm: Mussau            koron-ana          ‘false; lie’ (-ana ADJECTIVISER)
 NNG: Gedaged           koɬ                ‘rumour, hearsay, tittle-tattle, gossip’
 NNG: Manam             koro, koro-koro    ‘lie, tell a lie’
>

<
PEOc *sori(t) ‘lie, tell a lie’
  SES: Gela                   sori              ‘lie deliberately, cheat’
  SES: Gela                   sori-sori         ‘false, lying’
  Fij: Wayan                  ðori              ‘lie, tell lie/falsehood, fib’
  Fij: Wayan                  ðori-ðori         ‘tell lies; a liar’
  Fij: Wayan                  ðoriti-           ‘lie to (s.o.), deceive (s.o.)’
  Pn:  Māori                  hori              ‘speak falsely; false, untrue’
>

<
PCP *lasu ‘tell a lie, deceive’
  Fij:   Bauan               lasu                (V; ADJ; N) ‘tell a lie; false; a lie’
  Pn:    Luangiua            lahu                ‘trick, deceive’
>

                                                                    Talking about speaking 397


   POc *lami seems to have added an element of temptation or enticement to the telling of a lie.

<
POc *lami ‘tell a lie’
 MM: Sursurunga          lem        ‘lie’ (lem is more serious than fibbing, but less serious than strong lying)
  MM: Ramoaaina          lami       ‘tempt, tantalise, by offering and withdrawing’
  MM: Tolai              ləm        ‘entice, deceive, coax, tempt, decoy, tantalise, lead astray’
  Fij: Bauan             lami       ‘tell a lie’ (archaic)
  Pn:  Tongan            lami       ‘conceal from sight’
>

   Finally, POc *balau has non-Pn reflexes that appear simply to mean ‘lie’, but Pn reflexes
that roughly mean ‘lie by exaggeration’. Unfortunately, evidence that would narrow down the
meaning reflected in non-Pn languages is not known to us.

<
POc *balau ‘lie (by exaggeration?)’
  Adm: Lou                parawa               (N; ADJ) ‘lie; false’ (Blust 1998a) (-r- for †-l-)
  NNG: Kairiru            bil                  ‘lie’
  SES: Bugotu             pilau                ‘deceive’ (POLLEX)
  SES: Bugotu             pia-pilau            ‘tell a lie’ (POLLEX)
PPn *palau ‘lie by exaggeration’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan           pālau                ‘talk much, do little’
  Pn:    Rarotongan       parau                ‘pride, conceit’
  Pn:    Hawaiian         pālau                ‘tell tall tales, exaggerate’
>

12.5 Speech manner verbs

Speech manner verbs are those which refer to the manner in which an utterance is produced,
without assigning a particular significance to the utterance,. The reconstructions in this section
denote speaking loudly or shouting, whispering, stammering and speaking a foreign language
or something that sounds like one.

    The evidence for POc *kabat ‘call or speak loudly’ is drawn almost entirely from
Micronesian reflexes, but the apparent cognacy of Lou (Adm) kapat ‘speak out’ and Nakanai
(MM) aba ‘call, announce (loudly)’ makes this a POc term. However, the Lou and Nakanai
terms attest to POc *kapʷat (or possibly *kabʷat), while the Micronesian forms reflect
*kapʷata, with unexplained final *-a. Vangunu kepoto ‘say’ is shown under ‘cf. also’ because
its gloss doesn’t match those of other cognates. It is a regular reflex of POc *kapʷat.

<
POc *kapʷat ‘call or speak loudly’
  Adm: Lou               kapat            ‘speak out’
  MM: Nakanai            aba              ‘call, announce , esp. loudly’
PChk *kapʷata ‘call loudly, shout’ (Bender 2003b)
  Mic: Chuukese          apʷas, akkapʷas  ‘shout or cry wehuhu as an exclamation at falling down or narrowly escaping an accident’
  Mic: Puluwat           yapʷah           ‘shout’
  Mic: Puluwat           yakkapʷaha       ‘shout’
  Mic: Carolinian        abʷas, akkabʷas  ‘shout, call loudly’
  Mic: Carolinian        abʷasǣxæli       ‘call loudly to s.o., call over to s.o.’
  Mic: Satawalese        apʷəs, akkapʷasa ‘scream, shout’
  Mic: Woleaian          xefʷata          ‘yell, shout, bark’
  Mic: Pulo Annian       kkavʷatɨ         ‘scream, shout’
cf. also:
  MM: Vangunu             kepoto          ‘say’
>

398 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


   Only a few reflexes of POc *ŋulu ‘in a whisper’, *ŋulu-ŋulu (v) ‘whisper’ are known to
us, but their distribution requires a POc reconstruction.

<
POc *ŋulu ‘in a whisper’
POc *ŋulu-ŋulu (V) ‘whisper’
 Adm: Loniu              (-pʷa)ŋunu-ŋun    (VI) ‘whisper’ (-pʷa ‘say’)
 NNG: Sio                ŋuru-ŋuru         ‘whisper’
 SES: Kwaio              (kʷala)ŋulu       ‘whisper’ (kʷala ‘speak’)
 SES: ’Are’are           (wai)nuru         ‘murmur, whisper’ (wai does not occur independently)
cf. also:
 SES: Bugotu             ŋuŋū              ‘whisper’ (†-l- is absent)
>

   It is possible that the two terms for ‘stammer’ below are independent innovations. A verb
ta ‘speak’ occurs in Bola and Tolai, and it is possible that tata and tatata are onomatopoeic
formations based on it.

<
PEOc *[ta]tata ‘stammer’ (?)
  SES: Gela               tatata              ‘stammer’
  Fij:   Bauan            tata                ‘stammer, speak indistinctly’
>

    The two reconstructions below are verbs meaning ‘talk in a foreign languages’, but some
reflexes of Proto Remote Oceanic *kato are perhaps metaphorical variations on the meaning. Proto
Micronesian appears to have changed the final vowel from *-o to *-a.

    It is just possible that PPn *kote does reflect Proto Remote Oceanic *kato, but with unexpected changes in
its vowels.

<
Proto Remote Oceanic *kato (V) ‘speak a foreign language’; (N) ‘speech, language, foreign language’
  NCV: Vurës          ɣat               ‘say’
  NCV: Mwotlap        ɣatɣat            (V; N) ‘speak, speak another language; language, dialect’
  NCV: Mota           ɣato              (V; N) ‘speak, speak another language, talk nonsense in delirium; foreign language’
  NCV: Lolovoli       kato              ‘talk, speak’
PMic *kata (N) ‘speech, language, foreign language’; (V) ‘talk, chatter, talk a foreign language’ (Bender 2003a: ‘talk loudly’)
  Mic: Kosraean       kæs               (N) ‘word, speech, language’
  Mic: Kosraean       kæs-kæs           (V) ‘talk, chirp repeatedly’
  Mic: Kiribati       kaka(rabakau)     ‘talk together, conspire, plot insurrection’ (*t > k after *k)
  Mic: Marshallese    kac, kkac-kac     (N) ‘idiom, language, motto, pun, saying, slang’
  Mic: Carolinian     kkas, kkasa-      (N) ‘language, speech’
  Mic: Chuukese       kasa-kas          ‘talk aloud’
  Mic: Woleaian       kkase             (N; V) ‘speak in foreign language; foreign language’
>

                                                                     Talking about speaking 399

<
PPn *kote ‘talk incomprehensibly, talk in a foreign language’
  Pn:    Tongan           kote                 (VI) ‘talk in a foreign language, talk jargon’
  Pn:    Samoan           ʔote                 ‘scold, tell s.o. off’
  Pn:    E Futunan        kote                 ‘talk in a foreign language’
  Pn:    Tikopia          kotē                 ‘babble, chatter’
  Pn:    W Futuna         kote                 ‘speak a foreign language’
  Pn:    Māori            kote-kote            ‘make a smacking noise with lips’
>

12.6 Other uses of report verbs

In a number of Oceanic languages verbs with a report sense (§12.3.1) are also used like English
‘think’, in the sense of ‘opine’, as we noted in vol.5:542–544:

__blockquote__
      … OPINE is quite often expressed by a language’s default verb of saying, so that in
      Baluan (Adm), for example, it is sometimes difficult to tell whether the speaker intends
      the complement of pʷa to be spoken or simply thought (Dineke Schokkin, pers.
      comm.).

This is also true of Mangap (NNG) -so ‘say, think’. Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen (2007)
gloss the Mangap sentence in (26) as both ‘I say that is not good’ and ‘I think that is not
good’.

26)    nio aŋ-so ina      aᵐbai som
       I 1SG-say that.DEM good not

The Äiwoo (TM) verb -kæ/kɒ- is also used in both senses (Næss 2016:48–49):

27)    kä      demo         kä pæko
       say.ITR hermit.crab say okay
       ‘The hermit crab said, “Okay”.’

28)    kɒ-mʷæ       idoo
       say.TR-A:2A what
       ‘What do you think?’

  The Äiwoo verb -kæ/kɒ- has a further extension of meaning: it is also used in the sense of
‘want’ (Næss 2016:49):

29)    kɒ-mʷæ     mi-kuwæ ñɒ?
       say-A:2A S:2A-go      where
       ‘Where do you want to go?’

400 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


Verbs of speaking in a number of Oceanic languages are also used in the sense of ‘want’ or
‘intend’, as the following sentence examples show.

30)      Kele (Adm) (Ross 2002a:139)
         yu u-pe          k-u-le
         D:1S        S:1S-say    IRR-S:1S-go
         ‘I wish(ed)/intend(ed) to go.’

31)      Yabem (NNG) (Streicher 1982:35)
         ae ga-be ya-ᵑgom
         D:1S S:1S-say S:1S-IRR:do
         ‘I want to do it.’

32)      Lamen (NCV) (Early 2002:680)
         ne-vere        ne-va
         S:1S-IRR:say S:1S-IRR:go
         ‘I want to go.’

The hallmark of this construction in the last three examples is that when the verb of saying is
used in this sense, it is followed by an irrealis complement.[16]

    Intuitively it seems likely that the sequence of extensions was ‘say’ > ‘think’ > ‘want’/
‘intend’, but the evidence is insufficient to test this.

    It seems likely that at least POc *pʷa, *pʷai- ‘say, tell’ and *pʷaca(q), *pʷaca(q)i- ‘speak,
say’ were used in these senses. It might be argued that in the ‘think’ and ‘want’/‘intend’ senses,
these are no longer speech act verbs, as nothing is actually uttered. However, the extensions of
meaning occur precisely because speakers apprehend thinking and wanting as unuttered
speech.

    The following list of examples where ‘say’ can also mean ‘think’ or ‘want’/‘intend’ is
expanded from that given in vol.5:544. A number of these verbs are listed in the cognate sets
in §12.3.1.

__formgroup__
     Adm: Baluan           pʷa                  (VT) ‘say, express, think’
     Adm: Lou              pa                   (VT) ‘say, want’
     Adm: Nyindrou         aña                  ‘think, say’
     Adm: Kele             pe                   ‘say, wish, intend’
     NNG: Yabem            -be                  ‘say, want, will, desire, like, mean, think, intend’
     NNG: Numbami          -ᵑgo                 ‘say, scold (s.o.), tell (s.t.), talk (to s.o.), intend (to do s.t.)’
     NNG: Bariai           oaga                 ‘think, say’
     NNG: Kaulong          vo                   ‘talk, say, speak; suppose, intend’
     NNG: Mangap           -so                  ‘say, speak, communicate, talk, tell; think’
     NNG: Kairiru          wot                  ‘say; intend, wish’
     PT:  Iamalele         vo                   ‘say, think’; [quotative marker] (= C)
     MM: Nakanai           vei                  ‘think, opine, talk, tell, say’
     MM: Sursurunga        ŋo-                  ‘say, think’
     MM: Teop              boha                 ‘think, say’
     SES: Gela             ne                   ‘say, think’
     SES: To’aba’ita      sore-                 ‘say, think’
     SES: Kwaio           ili-                  ‘say, tell, think’
     TM: Aiwoo            -kæ, kɒ-               (VI,VT) ‘say, want’
     NCV: Lamen           vere                  ‘say, want’

[16] These are not serial verb constructions, as the two verbs of a SVC match in reality status (realis or irrealis).

                                                                               Talking about speaking 401


   It is noted that expressions like ‘I want/hope/wish’ sometimes take the form of a body-part
metaphor like those described in volume 5, ch.9. This metaphor is literally translatable as ‘my
insides say’. Examples are:

33)      Takia (NNG) (Ross, field notes)
         ilo-g        i-bol…
         insides-P:1S S:3S-say
         ‘I want…’

34)      Sursurunga (MM) (Samson et al. 2018:474)
         ŋo-i   i      bəl
         say-TR TOPIC stomach
         ‘I want…’


12.7 Conclusion

In the foregoing sections 22 POc speech act verbs have been reconstructed, along with two
PWOc, six PEOc, four PPn and one each for Proto Southeast Solomonic, PNCV and PCP. In making this count only
a cognate set’s highest-order reconstruction has been counted. Reconstructions at levels older
than POc have been ignored.

    These numbers are low in comparison with the multiplicity of speech act verbs in the
Fijian languages or in English, a fact accounted for by paucity of data17 and the presence of
numerous compound speech act expressions in some, perhaps many, Oceanic languages
(§12.1.3). Gaps in the data prevent us making a more specific generalisation. In the
discussion of compound expressions in §12.3.5 we noted that PEOc perhaps had a compound
speech act expression for ‘promise’ consisting of the verbs ‘say’ and ‘put’. Further research
would probably lead to further findings of this kind.

    We have also examined the grammatical behaviour of speech act verbs (§12.1.2), and seen
that the same verb used with different grammatical constructions may have distinct senses.
Understanding this behaviour and its grammaticalisation allows us to recognise that at least
some complementisers are derived from verbs (§12.2).

    Reconstructable expressive verbs—verbs, that is, that need no complement as they express
propositional meaning themselves—include some of the normal interactions of any human
conversation: replying (§12.4.1), talking behind someone’s back (§12.4.4), abusing them
(§12.4.5) and lying to them (§12.4.6). But telling stories (§12.4.2), calling out a greeting
(§12.4.3.1), calling to attract attention (§12.4.3.2) and shouting loudly (§12.5) reflect the
essentially oral communication of traditional Oceanic societies.

[17] One factor perhaps contributing to paucity of data is that direct quotation is apparently much more common
     in Oceanic narrative texts than indirect speech. Where an English speaker says She asked him about …, an
     Oceanic speaker seems likely to quote the question as direct speech. This reduces the frequency of speech act
     verbs. In this respect the Oceanic narrative genre seems different from anything that might be regarded as its
     English counterpart. But how one might measure or define this difference lies outside the scope of this
     chapter.

402 Malcolm Ross, Bethwyn Evans and Meredith Osmond


   The data in §12.6 support the possibility that POc report verbs were in some cases also
used in the senses ‘think, opine’ and ‘want, intend’.



13 Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession

13.1. Introduction

This chapter aims first to describe the development of trade and exchange in early Oceanic
society. It includes any activity carried out for the benefit of its participants involving not only
the transfer of goods but also intangibles like labour and knowledge (§§13.1–2). The nature
of wealth is described (§13.2, §13.5). It then takes a wider view of verbs involved in the
transfer of possession, subsumed under verbs of giving and receiving (§13.6).

   In Melanesia as a general rule, food and shelter are available to all members of a
community. Land is owned by the family or clan, and industry alone is required to provide
food. For shelter, the bush provides the material, everyone knows the rudiments of house-
building, and the assistance of relatives is readily secured for a slight compensation. As
Powdermaker (1933:223) writes, describing life in Lesu (= Notsi), a small village of Oceanic
speakers in New Ireland:

__blockquote__
     There is no problem in securing the fundamentals of food, shelter and clothing. Yet
     there is private property; ornaments, implements of work, currency, pigs, knowledge,
     medical and magical, are all privately owned. There is wealth and there are rich men,
     but poverty does not exist. … The importance of wealth is that it allows a man to make
     the elaborate rites for his dead ancestors, and so gain prestige for himself. Wealth is not
     hoarded but is always being put in circulation at the constant ritual feasts. And there is
     no reason why wealth should be saved over any long interval. Old age does not mean
     economic insecurity. For every old person is well taken care of by either his own
     children or by classificatory ones. The old people, men and women, are the most
     respected members of the community, and it is unthinkable that any one of them
     should be in want.

As Powdermaker summarises on p.225, “the underlying social forces – the principle of
reciprocity, the desire for prestige, respect for the old, the mutual obligations within the
kinship system – are the animating principles for the economic organisation.”

404 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Nonetheless, no community can claim to be fully self-sufficient. There will be times when
subsistence crops are affected by drought or disease. There will be desire for a greater variety
of foodstuffs. There will be the urge to acquire what other communities have – better cutting
implements or cooking pots. Within the community, individuals will have particular needs for
an accumulation of wealth to be available for brideprice, for feasts to mark ritual occasions
(§14.1.2.1), for payment in restitution or to cancel a debt, and for sacrifice to the ancestors.
There will be people who have specialised skills that others want and there will be people
ambitious for prestige. Above all, wealth is desired because it permits generosity, the essence
of goodness. All these needs act as motivation for some sort of transfer of wealth.


13.2. Development of trade patterns

It is archaeology (Kirch 1997; Spriggs 1997) rather than linguistic reconstruction that
provides our best evidence for early trade. Archaeology has shown that the early Lapita
period, from about 3400 to 3100 BP, the period leading to the consolidation of POc, was a
time of intensive exchange. One of its most prominent markers was obsidian, volcanic glass
that served as a fine cutting implement, used for hair cutting and shaving and in surgical
operations. Oceanic speakers sourced it first from Lou island in the Admiralties and Talasea
on the Willaumez Peninsula of New Britain, and it has been found widely distributed in
Lapita sites (Galipaud & Kelly 2007; Summerhayes 2009). Reconstructed terms include POc
*koto ‘obsidian head of spear; obsidian knife or blade’, POc *nad(r)i ‘flint, obsidian, stone
with a cutting edge’, and PWOc *qa(r,R)iŋ ‘obsidian; razor’ (vol.1:93). Flint or chert were
also exchanged as useful sources for flake tools, and reflexes of reconstructions for obsidian
at times refer to such alternatives. Oven stones with good heat-retention qualities, useful in
lining earth ovens or boiling food by being dropped into wooden bowls containing food and
liquid (vol.1:150), were also in demand. Mussau, which evidently occupied a central position
in the early exchange network, shows a considerable range of imported goods in this period:
trade in obsidian, chert, oven stones and adzes (Kirch 1997:242; Spriggs 1997; Summerhayes
2001).

    The early Lapita communities were settled on the islands of the Bismarck Archipelago,
many of them small islands. Moving around by canoe was a part of the daily life of people,
and there would have been regular movement between sister communities. The earliest kinds
of interaction would have existed to satisfy material needs of newly established settlements
and settlements on small islands where resources were limited, as well as meeting social
needs such as obtaining spouses. Roger Green (1979:38) describes this early trade as “a
network of reciprocal exchanges between related communities that maintained frequent
contact.”

    As the Lapita people ventured further afield, to the Reefs-Santa Cruz group, Vanuatu, and
beyond, so did the trading networks cover greater distances. Kirch (1988) writes that the
remarkable rapidity and success in colonising new Lapita settlements was largely due to the
maintenance of contacts with the ‘mother’ communities.

__blockquote__
     The importance of exchange for Lapita communities did not lie in assuring access to
     certain material resources such as obsidian or temper, but as a formal mechanism assuring
     a lifeline back to larger and securely established homeland communities. In the formative
     period of a new settlement, such linkages could be crucial in the event of unpredictable
     hazards (drought or cyclone), or to augment demographically small and unstable groups
     with suitable marriage partners. The ability to draw upon the total range of social and
     demographic, as well as material, resources of a homeland community could have meant
     the difference between survival and extinction. (Kirch 1988:113–4)

                            Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 405


    Pawley (1981:295) writes that “for a time the sister communities continued to regard
themselves as people of one stock and, for a longer period, as people of one language. As the
centuries passed, however, contacts between scattered sister communities tended to become
relatively less important and less frequent. Adaptive changes in economic and social life led
to … weakening of the lines of communication.” Kirch (1988:107) describes the emergence
of two distinct Lapita trading networks, a western one from the Bismarcks to New Caledonia
which lasted over 700 years, and an eastern one involving Fiji, Tonga and Samoa, and several
of the smaller isolated islands (Niuatoputapu, Futuna, Uvea), which “may not have operated
for much more than two or three centuries, if even that long”. The two networks were
separated by a water gap of 850–1000 km between Vanuatu and Fiji which was sufficiently
large to inhibit regular two-way voyaging contacts and maintenance of exchange
relationships.

    Over time, as populations increased and spread, coastal settlements moved inland and into
locations where geographic resources dictated differences in diet. Among the simplest forms
of trade was exchange of foodstuffs recognised as equivalent in value. Blackwood (1935:439)
describes the exchange of fish and taro between coastal and inland villages in Buka, while
Hogbin (1939:17) recognises a similar exchange of fish and vegetables in Malaita between
the bush and the saltwater people.

    Reciprocal exchange typically becomes regulated, occurring at fixed times and widened in
scope to include a greater variety of produce. Communities take advantage of natural
resources to develop specialisations, often manufactured items, and regular trade patterns
emerge as a result. They may be undertaken both individually and collectively, and may be
planned months in advance so that the items to be traded can be collected, and undertaken
when the sailing season is at its most reliable.

    The following accounts describe ways in which a range of trade patterns have developed
over time. They vary in scale, from the small Manam trade exchange (Wedgwood 1934) to
the large hiri expeditions of the Western Motu (Seligman 1910), and in complexity, with
goods moving through multiple stages as in the Kula Ring (Malinowski 1922) and Vitiaz
Straits (Harding 1967) networks. They also vary in intent, with the primary need for material
goods and maintenance of social ties now at times being overtaken by the desire for profit as
noted in the trade networks of both the Vitiaz Straits (Harding 1967:139) and Santa Cruz
(Davenport 1964:62). In contrast, Powdermaker (1933:202), writing of Lesu, and Hogbin
(1964a:50), writing of the middlemen in Longgu, describe them as deriving no financial
profit from their position. They enter into a transaction because it provides them with an
excuse for engaging in social intercourse with peoples whom they would otherwise see only
rarely.

    Arrival of a trade group is an occasion of heightened social activity. The Siassi, for
example, are renowned as performers, with added reputation as storytellers and retailers of
gossip (Harding 1967:183). They bring songs and dances, sometimes by invitation, both to
perform and trade. These are owned, and rights by others to perform them must be paid for.
Particularly for people from small communities, such occasions also offer an opportunity for
obtaining marriageable partners.

406 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Brief ethnographic descriptions follow of some of the better-known trade patterns that
have emerged from these beginnings.

13.2.1 Manam

Wedgwood (1934:392–3) describes a trade pattern on the island of Manam off the north coast
of New Guinea. Soil is poor and the main crops, taro and bananas, cannot be stored for any
length of time, so people are generally faced with food shortage towards the end of the dry
season. At this time the men make expeditions to the mainland to exchange baskets of
canarium nuts and bundles of native-grown tobacco for sago. Every man in Manam has in two
or three villages of the mainland some one man who is his trading partner (tawa) through
whom all exchanges of goods or valuables are made.

13.2.2 Western Motu

On a much larger scale, the great hiri expeditions of the Western Motu were undertaken
annually by coastal-dwelling fishermen and potters of the Port Moresby area to unrelated
people living at the head of the Papuan Gulf in order to exchange pottery for sago and for
new hulls for their lakatoi (F. R. Barton in Seligman 1910:96ff). As summarised by Bellwood
(1979:102):

__blockquote__
     Every year, towards the end of the south-east trade-wind season in September or
     October, the Motu would fit out several lakatoi – giant canoes up to 20 metres long by
     16 broad with covered superstructures and several parallel hulls, capable of carrying in
     some cases over 1600 pots or 30 tons of sago – and head along the coast to the
     northwest to carry out exchange along the normal partnership pattern. They would then
     return with the sago on the north-west monsoon after about three months.

13.2.3 The Kula Ring

The Kula Ring, described by Malinowski (1922), is a more complex form of exchange,
largely ceremonial. It is a circulating system based on group voyaging between neighbouring
islands when trade partners engage in exchange, both of utilitarian goods and also non-
utilitarian armshells and necklaces which travel in fixed directions around a chain of islands
including the Trobriands, Muyuw, Misima, Tubetube and Dobu, integrating the whole
system. Some of the islands are ecologically poor and have become highly specialised – the
Amphlett Islands, for instance, are poorly supplied with food, and can obtain this by trading
the pots which they make from clay brought from Fergusson Island. As Malinowski describes
it, “The main principle underlying the regulations of actual exchange is that the Kula consists
in the bestowing of a ceremonial gift, which has to be repaid by an equivalent counter-gift
after a lapse of time” (1922:93). Bellwood (1979:102) sees the cycle as “a highly elaborate
ritual, closely bound up with magic and considerations of personal status, which at base
circulates needed goods to needy localities, but in more general terms serves a fundamental
social function of high complexity”.

                            Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 407


13.2.4 Vitiaz Strait

Another example of a highly developed trade system is that described by Harding (1967)
which stretches from the western end of New Britain through the islands of the Vitiaz Strait,
to the long coastline between Madang and Morobe. As summarised by Bellwood (1979:103)
the trade networks involved in this system are very complex and transcend any form of local
identity. Hundreds of communities are involved, exchanging inland root crops for coastal
fish, coconuts and pottery. Three groups of sea-borne middlemen, based on Bilbil Island in
Austrolabe Bay, the Siassi Islands and the Tami Islands, articulate the flow of commodities
with three overlapping trading spheres. It was possible, for instance, for obsidian from the
base of the Willaumez Peninsula in New Britain to move step by step and increasing in value
all the time, right through the system. Harding (1967:42) notes that “as obsidian moved
farther from its source, the size of the pieces traded progressively decreased and the relative
value increased.” As well as obsidian, Harding (p.55) lists live pigs, dogs’ teeth, bows and
arrows, net bags, pottery and taro amongst present-day mainland exports, while from the
islands of the Straits boars’ tusks, live dogs, mats, shell discs, beads, betel nut, red ochre and
sago move in return to the mainland. Communities typically specialise; thus Siassi and Tami
Islanders make the best canoes, Bilbil, Sio and Gitua clay cooking pots.

    Exchanges are made predominantly in terms of equivalence, rather than involving
currency. But items vary in quality and size and are more desired in some communities than
others, creating opportunities for profit. Harding provides the following series of exchanges
to illustrate how the Siassi can turn a basic product into a valuable pig (p.139):
     6 –12 coconuts > 3 pots > 1 block obsidian > 10 pots > 1 pig.

13.2.5 Reef-Santa Cruz

Davenport (1964:62–64) describes a complex trade system from the Reefs-Santa Cruz group
which, with the inclusion of the nearby Polynesian-speaking island of Taumako (Pileni,) in
earlier times operated as a single, self-contained social and economic system. Demand is
based less on environmental differences and more on the fact that there is a high degree of
specialisation of skills and technical abilities within the group. Raw materials such as kinds of
shell and stone, and partially processed materials such as cordage, turtle shell and feathers,
move from one district or island to another where they are manufactured into products and re-
exported. When timber is available, Taumakoans build large sailing outriggers (puke)
constructed for trade, load them with sago flour and small paddling canoes, sell both cargo
and large canoes to villages of the northeastern Reef Islands, and paddle home with their
exchanges in small canoes. The Reef Islanders can then use the puke canoes to trade with the
larger southern islands.

    Davenport also describes (p.63) the elaborate system whereby feather currency is
manufactured by specialists on only one island, Nidu (Santa Cruz), making use of red
feathers acquired from Utupia and Vanikoro. This feather currency then has to be fed into
wider circulation where it is needed in brideprice. The Reef Islands give up some of their
women to Santa Cruz in exchange for brideprice paid in feather currency, and Taumako
people give up some of theirs to the Reefs in the same manner. Davenport describes women
in this system as “the most valuable commodity of all.”

408 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


13.3. Reconstructing trade-related verbs

POc *poli is a well-attested reconstruction for ‘buy’ with antecedents in PAn and PMP. While
Blust (ACD) accepts that ‘buy’ is the attested gloss in the great majority of reflexes of PAn
*beli, he adds a cautionary note. He writes:

__blockquote__
     Buying, however, is an activity which involves the acquisition of objects through a
     common medium of exchange – i.e. some form of money. There is no known evidence
     of any kind that speakers of PMP (circa 3,000 BC) were familiar with a money
     economy; moreover, various reflexes of *beli both in WMP and in CMP languages
     indicate that this item in particular referred to the ‘brideprice’. Since brideprice is a set
     of economic arrangements between the families or descent groups involved in a
     marriage, the gloss ‘to buy’ for this form is best seen as an imposition upon an earlier
     economic order based on exchange by a later one based on purchase.

<
PAn *beli ‘buy’ (ACD)
PMP *beli (N) ‘value, price; marriage prestations, brideprice’; (V) ‘purchase’ (Dempwolff 1938: ‘buy’)
POc *poli (V) ‘to barter, purchase by exchange’
POc *poli (N) ‘price, brideprice; value’
  NNG: Gedaged            poali            (VT) ‘to barter, trade, exchange’
  NNG: Wogeo              oalage           ‘ritual exchange between villages’ (Anderson 2003)
  NNG: Bilbil             poli             ‘to barter’
  NNG: Bariai             ol               ‘to buy’
  NNG: Mangseng           ol               ‘to buy’
  NNG: Hote               vuli             ‘to buy’
  NNG: Kove               oli              ‘to buy’
  NNG: Kove               oli-ŋa           ‘third, full marriage payment’
  NNG: Yabem              (ŋa)oli          (N) ‘payment, reward, price, compensation’
  PT:  Wedau              unei             ‘to buy, barter’ (unelei ‘to sell, barter’)
  PT:  Motu               hoi-a            (VT) ‘to buy, sell, exchange’
  PT:  Sinagauro          voi              (VT) ‘to buy’
  MM: Tigak               pul              ‘to buy’
  MM: Tabar               vo-vori          ‘to buy’
  MM: Halia (Haku)        hol              ‘to buy’
  MM: Teop                von              ‘to buy, reward’
  MM: Maringe             foli             (VI, VT) ‘buy’
  SES: Bugotu             voli             (VT) ‘to buy, sell, pay; price’
  SES: Gela               voli             ‘barter, buy and sell’
  SES: Longgu             voli-a           (VT) ‘to buy, pay for s.t.’
  SES: Lau                foli             ‘to buy, hire, pay wages’
  SES: Kwaio              foli-a           ‘buy’
  SES: Arosi              hori             ‘buy, sell, pay’
  SES: Sa’a               holi(te)         (N) ‘price, payment’ (-te not understood)
  SES: Owa                wori             (VT) ‘buy s.t., pay for s.t.’
  NCV: Mota               wol              ‘to barter, buy or sell by exchange’
  NCV: Raga               voli             ‘buy, barter’
  NCV: Tamambo            voli             (VT) ‘buy s.t.; pay bride price’
  Fij: Wayan              voli-            (VT) ‘buy or purchase s.t., obtain by trade’
  Fij: Wayan              voli             (VSt) ‘be bought, obtained by trade’
  Fij: Bauan              voli-a           ‘to buy, purchase’
  Fij: Bauan              |i voli|         ‘price, cost’
cf. also:
  Mic: Carolinian         (lī)weli         ‘to change or take the place of s.o.; to exchange one thing for another; trade’
>

                             Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 409


A number of languages retain both single and reduplicated forms. It is possible that in some
instances the reduplicated form carries the sense of repeated exchanges, but the pattern is not
consistent. Longgu and Sa’a use the reduplicated form specifically for ‘brideprice’ while
Tamambo identifies ‘brideprice’ with the single form.

<
POc *poli-poli ‘trade, barter’
 PT:     Motu               hoi-hoi             ‘barter’
 SES: Gela                  voli-voli           ‘barter, buy and sell’
 SES: Lau                   foli-foli           ‘buy, hire, pay wages; to measure’
 SES: Longgu                voli-voli           ‘bride price’
 SES: Sa’a                  holi-holite         ‘bride price’ (Ivens 1927:71)
 SES: Arosi                 hori-hori           ‘buy, sell, pay’
 NCV: Tamambo               voli-voli           (VI) ‘trade, barter’
 Fij:    Bauan              (vei)voli, vovoli   ‘trade, barter’ (vei- RECIPROCAL)
>

   The name ‘Kula’ as in ‘Kula Ring’ evidently is derived from the following:

<
PWOc *kul(a,e) ‘exchange, buy’
 NNG: Kaulong           kul            (VT) ‘buy, purchase, hire, make compensation, pay a fine, bribe with money’
 PT:  Gumasi            kula           ‘exchange of shell wealth in Milne Bay Province’ (for †kuna)
 PT:  Dawawa            kune           ‘exchange’
 PT:  Tawala            une            ‘trading circle, trade items’
 PT:  Bwaidoga          ʔune           ‘trade’
 MM:  Ramoaaina         kul            (VT) ‘buy, pay’
 MM:  Madak             kun            ‘exchange’
 MM:  Patpatar          kul            (VT) ‘buy’
 MM:  Tolai             kul            ‘pay, buy’
 MM:  Tolai             ku-kul         (VI) ‘deal, buy, engage in trade or commerce’
cf. also:
 NNG: Poeng             koli(rea)      (VT) ‘buy’
 NNG: Kove              koli           ‘pay a debt’
 NNG: Kove              koli-ŋa        (N) ‘repayment’
>

410 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   The ACD lists PCEMP *matay as a noun meaning ‘money, payment, medium of
commercial exchange’ with a single non-Oc reflex. Glosses of Oceanic terms may be either
noun meaning ‘price’ or ‘payment’, as in SE Solomonic languages and Hawaiian, or verb
meaning ‘exchange, buy’ as in Tolai and Kosraean. It is noteworthy that in both Gela and
Arosi the reflex of POc *mate when referring to ‘price/payment’ is inalienably possessed,
implying that price/payment is an inherent attribute of the item.

<
PCEMP *matay ‘money, payment, medium of commercial exchange’ (ACD)
  CMP: Buru         mata-n       ‘money’
POc *mate (N) ‘price’; (V) ‘transact’
  MM: Tolai         mate         (VT) ‘to change, exchange, buy’
  SES: Gela         mate-        ‘the price of a thing’ (mate-na ‘its price’)
  SES: ’Are’are     |(pata) mae| ‘very fine shell money, having great value, used to make necklaces and for buying pigs’ (pata ‘money’)
  SES: Arosi        mae(-na)     ‘payment for work done or land bought’
  Mic: Kosraean     misɛ         ‘buy on credit’
  Pn:  Hawaiian     make         ‘price, barter, exchange’
>

13.4. Forms of wealth

Tradeable wealth in Oceanic societies exists in the form of items such as domestic pigs,
manufactured items used both as currency, and as valuables ranging from canoes to armbands,
and in Polynesia, tapa and fine mats. Surplus foodstuffs will be a valuable source of exchange.
Wealth exists as well in intangibles, in labour, and in skills, particularly knowledge of magic
and medicine.

13.4.1 Pigs

Domestic pigs (POc *boRok, vol.4:238) are the supremely valued object in most Melanesian
societies. Pigs buy wives, they satisfy important social obligations and needs, and they are the
sine qua non of any important festive occasion or ritual event as well as being valuable trade
items. They are personal possessions. Young men may beg for one or two piglets from the
litter of a relative’s sow, or capture a wild piglet, and wives will put much time and attention
into rearing them. A man’s wealth is represented by the number of pigs he can contribute to
celebratory feasts and other ritual events.

13.4.2 Currency

Bellwood (1979:104) writes:

__blockquote__
     Throughout Melanesia generally, and also in western Micronesia, goods and services
     could be exchanged for various kinds of money. These currencies were normally
     specially manufactured and always had some kind of scarcity value, in the sense that
     they could not be mass-produced indiscriminately. They were not used simply for
     trade, but also enabled a man to pay bride price, to recompense injury or murder and to
     pay other unilateral payments, and also to give loans with interest in order to
     accumulate the wealth necessary to become a Big Man. Where services were given in
     terms of labour, these would be repaid in kind.

                            Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 411


    The most widespread currency in Oceanic communities consists of strings of shell discs,
usually small shells ground flat, pierced with a central hole and then threaded on fathom-long
strings of native cord. They may be collected into various denominations. In Baluan in the
Admiralty Islands seaŋ is the name given to shell money of the best quality, while ulit refers
to that of lower quality (Schokkin 2015). In Lesu the currency is the tsera, one unit of which
consist of an arm length of tiny flat shell discs strung together. There are two kinds, red and
white, the red twice the value of the white (Powdermaker 1933:200). In Kwaio the medium
of exchange is bata, tiny beads fabricated from cone shells and strung on fibre into
conventional lengths and denominations (Keesing 1982:20). In Longgu, they are fastened
into sets of 12, 10, 8, 6 and 4, each set individually named (Hogbin 1964a:19). In Äiwoo on
the Reef Islands maŋahau is the name given to a coil of shell money (Koch 1971:156).
Names across communities vary along various parameters, according to variety, colour and
quality of shell, specified denominations, and so on.

    A POc reconstruction, *saRa ‘shell money made from small shells’, is proposed. Final -ŋ
of Baluan seaŋ is puzzling. It does not reflect a final POc consonant, as these are lost in
Baluan.

<
POc *saRa ‘shell money made from small shells’
 Adm: Baluan     sea(ŋ)     ‘best quality shell money’
 NNG: Mangseng   sara       ‘shell money’
 MM: Nakanai     sara       ‘small cut shells (Nassa sp.), used as money by the Tolai and primarily for decoration by Nakanai’
 MM: Notsi       cera       ‘shell money’
 MM: Siar        sar        ‘shell money’
>

   Terms used in the measurement of shell money are reconstructed in §16.7.

13.4.3 Teeth

Also valued as currency are teeth of dogs, porpoises and flying foxes (POc *[l,n]ipon ‘tooth,
tusk’, POc *bati ‘canine tooth’) (vol.4:266). Denominations are typically measured in
numbers of teeth. Arosi, for instance, has a unit of money, abe, consisting of four porpoise
teeth or two dog teeth, and larger denominations like toa ni iʔa, made up of 400 porpoise
teeth (Fox 1978). Dog teeth may be incorporated into ornaments like headbands or chest
ornaments.

   Co-existing shell and teeth currencies are not true currencies insofar as they typically have
separate roles. In Buka and north Bougainville (Blackwood 1935:446), shell currency called
beroan is given in payment for certain things including compensation for theft, part payment
for pigs, for being taught certain kinds of magic, thrown into the coffin as a sign of grief, and
so on, while currency known as paio, made of either porpoise or flying fox teeth, “is reserved
for use in important transactions”. In Longgu where the local currency consists of fathom-
long strings of shell discs, the canine teeth of dogs and the teeth of porpoises, Hogbin
(1964a:48) warns that they are not interchangeable. A fathom of discs or ten dogs’ teeth or 50
porpoise teeth may all be assumed to have the same market value, but any one cannot be
equated with either of the others. Each traditional transaction requires its own kind of objects
– discs alone, dog teeth alone, or, as a bride price, some of all three in fixed proportion. In
Sa’a, however, “forty dog teeth was reckoned as a unit and was equivalent to one hundred
porpoise teeth, or one shell money of four strings” (Ivens 1927:405).

412 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


13.4.4 Valuables

Other valuables not generally classified as currency but included in the most important
classes of payments made within a community – brideprice, indemnification, payments to
sorcerers – include body ornaments like combs (POc *saRu), arm and leg bands (POc *bara
‘plaited cane armlet’), shell breast plates (POc *japi ‘bivalve, possibly gold-lipped pearlshell;
ornament made from this’), necklaces and ornaments for ear and nose (POc *(sabi-)sabi
‘shell disc uused as earring’) (Hogbin 1939:48).1 Santa Cruz is noted for its belts of red
feathers called teau in Natügu (Koch 1971:156), while in Sio in the Vitiaz Strait and along the
north coast of New Guinea pairs of curved boars' tusks known as saŋiri are sought-after
(Harding 1967:47). In Polynesia where the giving of gifts is highly ritualised, tapa and fine
mats are a major form of wealth (Tcherkézoff 2017).

<
PPn *taqoŋa ‘valuable, alienable property’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Tongan          tōʔoŋa         ‘custom, habit, conduct, behaviour, characteristic; rite, ceremony’
  Pn: Tongan          tōʔoŋa(pō)     ‘special gift from a lover’
  Pn: Niuean          tōŋa           ‘a Samoan fine mat’
  Pn: Samoan          tōŋa           ‘fine mat, the most significant and valuable object in Samoan culture’ (Milner); ‘native property consisting of fine mats and siapo [tapa]’ (Pratt); ‘collective term for fine mats and tapa when presented as offering’ (Tcherkezoff 2016)
  Pn: Rennellese      |hai toʔoŋa|   ‘artefact, as mat or tapa, as offered to gods’
  Pn: Mangarevan      toŋa           ‘cloak of barkcloth’
  Pn: Rarotongan      taoŋa          ‘property, possessions’
  Pn: Tahitian        taoʔa          ‘object, goods, property, riches’
  Pn: Maori           taoŋa          ‘property, anything highly prized’ (flax and feather cloaks are historically the oldest kinds of taoŋa); ‘traditionally anything, tangible or intangible, which represents a kin group’s genealogical identity’ (Tcherkezoff 2016)
  cf. also:
  PT: Dobu            taʔona         (N) ‘payment for personal injury or stolen goods’; (V) ‘to make such payment’ (borrowed from Pn)
>

[1] The reconstructions given here are presented with their reflexes in vol.1:103–106.

                             Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 413

<
PPn *koloa ‘valuable possessions’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Niuean           koloa                 ‘valuable possessions, goods’
  Pn:    Tongan           koloa                 ‘goods, wealth, possessions’
  Pn:    Rennellese       kogoa                 ‘tapa cloth’
  Pn:    Samoan           ʔoloa                 ‘property, goods, wealth’
  Pn:    Tikopia          koroa                 ‘goods, property, valued object, treasure’
  Pn:    Hawaiian         ʔoloa                 ‘fine white tapa’
>

13.4.5 Knowledge

In Lesu (Powdermaker 1933:204–6), where there is no profit in trading in pigs, the possession
of magic is the most important source of wealth. Both magic and some aspects of medical
knowledge, particularly as it relates to childbirth, are private possessions in the hands of a few,
and are performed only for payment. See Chapter 8 for examples from Mekeo (Stephen
1987:43), Kove (Chowning 1989:224) and Longgu (Hogbin 1964a:58).


13.5. Wealth movement within a community

In Oceanic communities, a man’s reputation is enhanced not by accumulating possessions but
by giving them away. Throughout Oceania the major channel for the distribution of wealth is
through the giving of feasts (§14.1.2.1). Other occasions involving the exchange of goods and
services include (i) brideprice transactions, (ii) reimbursement for services, (iii) payment as
compensation or fines, and (iv) as sacrifice to the gods. Any individual who needs to make a
contribution will be met with the assistance of a wide circle of kinfolk and affines. All such
assistance will carry with it the obligation to reciprocate in time, as the opportunity occurs.

13.5.1 Feasts and distribution of goods

Every event of importance in a man’s life such as the death of his parents, or the marriage of
his children or the offering of a sacrifice to the ancestors, is celebrated by a feast. Feasts are
also held to give thanks for services rendered. In particular they are an opportunity for
individuals to display and distribute wealth through the giving of pigs to be slaughtered and
eaten, and by providing quantities of foodstuffs. The more feasts a man gives and the more
lavish he is in the provision of food, the greater is his prestige, and the greater his chances of
becoming a big man (Hogbin 1939:61–62). If he is already a big man or is an hereditary chief,
he will be careful to uphold his reputation by his actions, and one of his responsibilities will
include deciding on the number and timing of feasts. A similar role is undertaken by the
Polynesian ariki. Goldman (1970:363) describes the situation in Tikopia where, in spite of
limits imposed by population pressure on one small island, the same pattern ensues.

__blockquote__
     In Tikopia, the chief has the ability to control the ritual circulation of goods. Tikopia
     has no spare land. Population numbers must be kept at a sustainable level. They can
     produce enough to feed themselves, but no surplus to export. The chief must have
     wealth. He is the initiator of the grand cycle and is responsible for keeping in motion
     the distribution and redistribution of food. Circulation is certainly the most
     conspicuous and pressing obligation of ariki.

414 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


   Three categories of lexical item are associated with feasting: terms for ‘feast’; terms for
distributing goods, perhaps especially food items; and terms for counting goods in order to
ascertain their exchange value. The last category is described in some detail in §14.1.2.1.

   The generic name for a feast was probably a nominalisation of the verb POc *kani[-]
‘eat’ (vol.4:224–230). Forms in some languages reflect the reduplicated form *kani-kani, in
others *kani-an with the nominaliser *-an.

__formgroup__
  Adm: Titan        kani-an       ‘a feast’
  NNG: Kove         hani-ŋa       ‘a feast’
  NNG: Mangap       kan-ŋana      ‘eating, meal time, a feast’
  NNG: Takia        an-aŋ         ‘a feast’
  PT:  Gumawana     kaika         ‘food, meal, eating, a feast’
  MM: Tinputz       kæn           ‘a feast’
  NCV: Mota         ɣana-ɣana     ‘a feast, meal’
  NCV: Kiai         ani-ani       ‘a feast’
  NCV: Paamese      ani-ene       ‘food; meal; staple part of a meal (as against the meat and vegetables), feast’

    The forms above also mean ‘food’ and ‘meal’ in some languages, and Clark (2009) lists
cognates which do not even include ‘feast’ in their glosses. It is often difficult to find a
generic term for ‘a feast’ in a dictionary of an Oceanic language, but easy to find terms for
different kinds of feast, i.e. feasts are generally named for their specific function. In Gedaged,
for example, a feast, wei, is given to repay workers on a big undertaking while soabul is a
feast primarily to gain prestige for the giver. Numerous terms have been collected for
‘mortuary feast’, ostensibly a feast held some months after a person’s death, to honour the
dead person and thank those who rendered burial services, but no reconstructions have been
possible except at a low level. In Papuan Tip communities, mortuary feasts have developed
into major occasions for the exchange and distribution of wealth (Seligman 1910:276,
Malinowski 1922:170, Battaglia 1991:86, Fortune 1963:193–200). However, it has not
proven possible to reconstruct terms for these specialised feasts.

    Three verbs meaning to ‘distribute’ are reconstructed here:

POc *wase ‘distribute, as food at a feast’, *wase- (VT) ‘distribute, divide, give’; *wase-wase
‘divide into multiple parts’
POc *soli, *soli(t,ŋ)-i- ‘distribute, pass to another’
POc *tara(s), taras-i- ‘distribute, divide up, share’

   Distributing food among large numbers of people at feasts continues in many Oceanic
speaking cultures, and was apparently the activity denoted by POc *wase, reflexes of which
are well distributed across Oceania. Blust (ACD) glosses *wase ‘distribute, as food at a feast’,
but its uses evidently extended on the one hand to dividing something up and counting the
portions, and on the other to giving (freely and without expectation of return). The ‘count’
sense is reflected in the Admiralties, North New Guinea, Meso-Melanesian and Micronesian,
but there are indications that the wider senses have persisted in some languages (Gedaged,
Sinaugoro). The ‘give’ sense has led to the use of the reflex of *wase as the default term for
‘give’ in a number of Oceanic languages of SW New Britain and the SE Solomons. In
Central Pacific languages, it is the ‘divide up’ sense that has mainly survived. Thus the
reflexes of *wase attest to several semantic shifts.[2]

                                 Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 415


    The forms under ‘cf. also’ below reflect a putative POc *waso rather than the
overwhelmingly attested *wase.

<
PEMP *wa(n)se ‘divide’ (ACD)[3]
POc *wase ‘distribute (food at a feast), divide up, count out’
  Adm: Seimat             wexe                ‘count’
  Adm: Wuvulu             wake-i              ‘count’
  NNG: Bariai             wade                ‘distribute; count out’
  NNG: Sio                wae                 ‘divide and distribute’
  NNG: Tami               (ta)wat             ‘distribute’
  NNG: Dami               -wese-              ‘count; read’
  NNG: Arove              wai                 ‘give’
  NNG: Atui               yas                 ‘give’
  NNG: Sengseng           vai                 ‘give’
  NNG: Gedaged            -wae                ‘give away, distribute, bestow, deal out, apportion’
  NNG: Takia              -wae                ‘deal out, distribute, apportion out (work, food), share’
  NNG: Numbami            -wesa               ‘distribute, divide out, dish out (food)’
  NNG: Yabem              -wà                 ‘separate, sever, divide’
  NNG: Manam              -ware               ‘count’
  NNG: Bam                -war                ‘count’
  NNG: Kairiru            -was                ‘distribute’
  NNG: Ali                -wes                ‘count’
  NNG: Sissano            -wɛs                ‘distribute; deal out’
  NNG: Sera               bek-bek             ‘distribute’
  PT:   Sinaugoro         vare-vare           (VI) ‘give gifts’
  PT:   Sinaugoro         vare-vare-vini      (VT) ‘give gifts to’
  PT:   Roro              -wate               ‘distribute’
  MM: Vitu                vaðe-ni             ‘distribute’
  MM: Nakanai             vara(rapu)          ‘give gift with no need of return’
  MM: Tabar               ase                 ‘count’
  MM: Lamasong            us                  ‘count’
  MM: Patpatar            wa-was              ‘count’
  MM: Label               uas                 ‘count’
  MM: Sursurunga          wəsə-i              ‘count; read’
  MM: Sursurunga          |wəs talmi|           ‘count, add’ (lit. ‘count gather’)
  MM: Tangga              wes                 ‘count’
  MM: Nehan               aha                 ‘count’
  MM: Halia               ase                 ‘number, count’
  MM:    Taiof            as-as           ‘count’
  MM:    Teop             ahe             ‘count; set store by; read’
  MM:    Marovo           ase             ‘count’
  MM:    Kilokaka         aʔ-ahe          ‘count’
  MM:    Cheke Holo       -ahe            ‘count’
  SES:   Gela             vahe            ‘give, give to’
  SES:   Longgu           wate-           (VT) ‘give, send, offer’
  SES:   Lau              kʷate           ‘give, give up, hand over, present’
  SES:   Kwaio            kʷate, kʷate-   ‘contribute, give’
  SES:   ’Are’are         wate            ‘herald at a feast the assigned food portions to the different villages; make an oration at a feast’
  SES: Sa’a               [waʔe]wate      ‘distribute food at a feast after making an oration’
  SES: Arosi              wate            ‘give’
  NCV: Tamambo            ase             (VT) ‘share s.t., divide out s.t.’
PMic *waSe (VI) ‘count’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
PMic *waSe-ki (VT) ‘count’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
  Mic: Kiribati           ware            ‘calculate, enumerate, spell’
  Mic: Kiribati           ware-ka         (VT) ‘count or read (s.t.)’
  Mic: Kosraean           oɛ-oɛ           (VI) ‘count’
  Mic: Kosraean           oe-k            (VT) ‘count’
  Mic: Marshallese        wat-wat         (VI) ‘count up; estimate by counting’
  Mic: Marshallese        wate-k          (VT) ‘count up’
  Mic: Woleaian           wate-wate       (VT) ‘count, reckon, enumerate’
  Mic: Woleaian           weta-xi        (VT) ‘count, reckon’
  Mic: Ponapean           wada-wad        (VI) ‘count; read’
  Mic: Ponapean           wadɛ-k          (VT) ‘count; read’
  Mic: Ponapean           wad             (VI) ‘multiply (in mathematics)’
  Mic: Ponapean           wadi-ki         (VT) ‘multiply it’
  Mic: Pulo Anna          wete-wetɛ       ‘count’
PCP *wase ‘divide; separate’ (Geraghty 1983: PEOc ‘divide’)
  Fij:  Bauan             wase-           ‘divide, separate’
  Fij:  Wayan             wase-           (VT) ‘divide, separate into parts or sections’
  Fij:  Wayan             wase            (VSt) ‘divided into parts’
PPn *wahe ‘divide, separate’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Tongan            vahe            ‘divide, divide out, allot, distribute; division’
  Pn:   Tongan            vahe-a          ‘divide’
  Pn:   Samoan            vae             ‘divide, separate; cut, sever’
  Pn:   E Futunan         vae             ‘divide, separate; division’
  Pn:   Anutan            vae             ‘divide a group of objects into subsets’
  Pn:   Pukapukan         va-vae          ‘separate, divide into parts’
  Pn:   Maori             wae             ‘divide, division, separate’
cf. also:
  NNG: Kove               waðo            ‘count’
  NNG: Wogeo              -wayo           ‘count’
  NNG: Kaiep              -wiau           ‘count’
>

[2] Some of these may be more apparent than real, as data sources are often limited in their glossing.

[3] The ACD offers just one datum in support of the PEMP reconstruction: Numfor (SHWNG) wās ‘divide
    into two parts, as when a path runs through a garden’.

416 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


                              Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 417


    POc *soli, *soli(t,ŋ)-i- appears to have profiled the assignment of a portion to one person,
whereas *wase profiled distribution among a number of people. Again, it has given rise to
reflexes meaning simply ‘give’, this time in Central Pacific languages.

<
POc *soli, *soli(t,ŋ)-i- ‘distribute, pass to another’
  Adm: Seimat                 solit-i             (VT) ‘change places with, exchange; replace’
  SES: Gela                   holi                ‘pass from one to another, as a sickness’
  SES: Gela                   holiŋ-i             (VT) ‘infect’
  SES: Lau                    toli                ‘distribute, set out portions at a feast’
  SES: Kwaio                  toliŋ-i-            ‘distribute to, apportion’
  SES: Sa’a                   toliŋ-i-            (VT) ‘assign a portion of food to a person at a feast’
  SES: Arosi                  toriŋ-i-            (VT) ‘assign a portion’
  SES: ’Are’are               torin-i-            ‘assign one's portion of food on a feast; give, grant, permit’
  SES: To’aba’ita             toli                (VI) 'share out s.t., distribute shares of s.t.'
  SES: To’aba’ita             toliŋ-i-            (VT) 'share out, distribute s.t.'
  SES: Owa                    toriŋ-i-            (VT) ‘buy s.t.’
PCP *soli[-] ‘give’
  Fij:   Bauan                soli-a              ‘give’
  Fij:   Bauan                vei-soli            ‘exchange’ (vei RECIP)
  Fij:   Wayan                soli                ‘be given, awarded, granted’
  Fij:   Wayan                soli-soli           ‘give, keep giving things, be generous’
  Pn:    Anutan               tori                ‘give’
  Pn:    Tuvalu               holi                ‘give freely’
  Pn:    E Futunan            soli                ‘give, present, award’
  Pn:    Emae                 sori-a              ‘give, sell, send’
  Pn:    Ifira-Mele           sori-a              ‘sell’
  Pn:    Tikopia              sori                ‘give, hand over’
  Pn:    W Uvean              soli                ‘give, lend, borrow’
>

   A third reconstruction, POc *tara(s), taras-i-, apparently had the meaning ‘distribute,
divide up, share’ without specific reference to food. Again, a ‘distribute’ verb has become a
‘give’ verb, here in southern New Ireland.

<
POc *tara(s), *taras-i- ‘distribute, divide up, share’
 Adm: Titan          talas-i            (VT) ‘share, divide up’
 Adm: Titan          tala-tal           (VI) ‘divide up, share’
 NNG: Takia          -tar(pale)         ‘break into smaller pieces, divide, distribute, break, break off’
 NNG: Takia          -tar(pas-)         ‘divide things, separate out into groups’
 MM: Notsi           tals(en)           ‘distribute’
 MM: Tangga          til(ni)            ‘distribute’
 MM: Sursurunga      tar                (VI) ‘give’
 MM: Sursurunga      tar-i              (VT) ‘give’
 MM: Patpatar        tar                ‘give’
 MM: Ramoaina        tar                (VI) ‘give’
 MM: Ramoaina        tar-i              (VT) ‘give’
 MM: Siar            tar                (VI) ‘give’
 MM: Siar            tar-i              (VT) ‘give’
>

418 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


13.5.2 Brideprice

All adults will own some private property, both individually and as a member of a kinship
group. Above all, they will need it if they are to marry. Brideprice is a set of economic
arrangements between the families or descent groups involved in a marriage. Marriage is
ratified by payments, either in the form of wealth given by the man’s kin to the woman’s, or
in the form of roughly equal exchanges of wealth between the two sides (Chowning
1977:56). In Melanesia brideprice usually includes a range of goods, strings of shell money
as well as pigs, bowls and other valuables. In Polynesia, fine tapa and mats predominate. The
bigger the amount, the greater the prestige. POc *poli, reconstructed above, may have in its
earlier manifestation referred to brideprice, or payment of brideprice. The handing over of
valuables is always done in public, and typically occurs in stages, each stage separately
named (Powdermaker 1933:210, Ivens 1927:71–74, Turner 1884:93).

13.5.3 Payment for services

Relatives give one another assistance in all major undertakings such as house-building,
preparing a new garden and ritual celebrations. Payment for labour is most often obtained by
stressing bonds of kinship, affinity or residence with an expectation of reciprocity. It is a debt
to be repaid when the opportunity arises (Blackwood 1935:450, Hogbin 1939:57–58). A
village headman will pay for labour given by men in building a men’s house or by women in
providing food by staging a feast. On a personal level, if a person requires the help of a
specialist in medical matters or to influence an outcome through magic, the specialist will be
paid, usually in some form of currency. In Kove, for example, sorcerers were often hired,
both to cause harm to a person and at other times to effect a cure (Chowning 1989:224).
Malinowski describes the services of the magician as the most important of services rendered
in the Trobriands. As in Kove, the sorcerer is paid by the man who asks him to kill or who
desires to be healed. Substantial payments are also given for magic of rain and fair weather
(Malinowski 1948:181).

    When a debt is assessed in countable terms, as for example, with pigs contributed for a
feast or as part of brideprice, a record of the debt may be kept by way of a system of knots on
a rope. Harding writes that in Siassi “the formal presentations of the [men’s house] feast are
balanced, recorded (by means of knotted cords), and are a matter of public record”
(1967:182). In Bwaidoga,“for bananas and coconuts, for the days that must elapse till a friend
returns, knots are tied in a piece of string” (Jenness & Ballantyne 1920:61). The POc term for
‘tie a knot’ (also a noun ‘knot’) evidently could also be used metaphorically for ‘debt’.

<
POc *buku ‘debt’ (from POc *buku ‘tie a knot, fasten’: vol.1:85)
 NNG: Sio                buku               ‘debt’
 PT:   Bwaidoga          -buki              ‘be in debt’
PNCV *buku ‘debt’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota               pug                ‘a debt, fault; to owe a debt’
 NCV: Raga               bugu-na            ‘debt which has to be paid with pigs or mats’
 NCV: Nguna              na-puku            ‘debt, obligation of reciprocity’
cf. also:
 NCV: Tamambo            vuhu               (VT) ‘give wedding present’
>

                             Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 419


    SE Solomonic reflexes of POc *ponot and the SE Solomonic reflexes of PEOc *sui both
interpret the payment of a debt as an act of closure. With that meaning it may be applied
equally to payment for services and payment as indemnification for compensation. The PPn
reflexes of *sui, however, carry a different interpretation, casting payment of a debt primarily
as an act of substitution.

<
PMP *pened ‘stopped up, plugged’ (ACD)
POc *ponot ‘to close up; be full, complete’
  NNG: Sio                pono                ‘cover up; hide; block off; mend a net’
  NNG: Sio                pono-ti             (VT) ‘block up, as one’s breath’
PEOc *pono ‘to settle a debt; complete, close up’
  SES: Bugotu             pono                ‘close’
  SES: Gela               pono                ‘blocked up’
  SES: Lengo              pono                ‘blocked up’
  SES: Longgu             vono                ‘a dam’
  SES: To’aba’ita         fono-a              ‘compensation paid for a death; completion’ (Hogbin 1939:92)
  SES: To’aba’ita         fono                (VI) ‘be closed, shut; be complete’
  SES: Lau                fono                ‘to pay in full, settle a debt; complete, fulfil’
  NCV: Mota               wono                ‘to pay a debt; to close, fill up’ (Codrington 1891:327)
>

<
PEOc *sui ‘pay, redeem a debt’
  SES: Gela           hui               ‘to make a money payment to recover land or property’
  SES: Gela           hui-hui           ‘to redeem, pay for a service’
  SES: Gela           hui-pagu          ‘redeem a debt’ (pagu ‘a debt’)
  SES: Bugotu         hui               (VT) ‘to take down, cease, finish, redeem’
  SES: Lau            sui               ‘to be finished’
  SES: Kwaio          sui               ‘finished’
PPn *sui ‘exchange, change, replace’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:  Niuean         hu-hui            (VT) ‘to change, alter, amend’
  Pn:  Tongan         hu-huʔi           (VT) ‘to ransom, redeem’ (unexplained -ʔ-)
  Pn:  E Futunan      sui               ‘replace, substitute’
  Pn:  Rennellese     sui               ‘change, replace, substitute for’
  Pn:  Pukapukan      yu-yui            ‘change, substitute for’
  Pn:  Samoan         sui               ‘change, as clothes’
  Pn:  Tikopia        sī                ‘replace, substitute, in special sense, a sacrificial victim killed as equalisation for a death’
  Pn:  Takuu          sui               ‘replace, change, pay, go after in revenge’
cf. also:
  Pn:  Tongan         totoŋi-huhuʔi     ‘pay compensation for’
>

420 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


13.5.4 Restitution

Payment may also be given to compensate for harm done to someone by another, and as a
fine if a person has offended community mores. In cases of accidental killing in To’aba’ita,
for example, the person actually responsible has always to pay some compensation to the
relatives although a sorcerer may be held to be ultimately responsible (Hogbin 1939:96).
Ivens writes (1927:241) that the common offering made in Sa’a to appease the family ghosts
for an offence or by way of propitiation was a porpoise tooth or a dog’s tooth placed in the
relic case. Breaking of a chief’s tabu, however, required a heavy fine payable in shell money
(p.255). Reconstruction beyond Proto SE Solomonic is not well supported.

<
PEOc (?) *soso ‘compensate, propitiate’
  SES: Longgu           toto               ‘pay compensation’
  SES: ’Are’are         haʔa-totoa         ‘propitiate’
  SES: ’Are’are         toto-rana          ‘part of the bride price given back to the husband after the wife has been taken back to her people; restitution’
  SES: Sa’a             toto               ‘propitiate a ghost, pay a fine’
  SES: Sa’a             |toto akalo|       ‘sacrifice to a god to remove defilement’
  SES: Sa’a             |toto rae|         ‘payment by a widow who wished to remarry - appease her dead husband’
  SES: Kwaio            toto               ‘compensate, pay a fine’
  SES: Lau              toto               ‘pay a fine’
  SES: Arosi            toto               ‘to pay a fine, give money to be reconciled’
  SES: Owa              toto-mara          ‘pay compensation to’
  Fij: Bauan            soso               ‘to give in exchange, replace; hence atone, expiate’
  Fij: Bauan            soso-ya            (VT)
>

13.5.5 Sacrifice to the ancestors

Across the Oceanic world sacrifice to the ancestors typically involves an offering of foodstuffs
in return for anticipated goodwill (§8.2.4). No other return is envisaged. In the southeast
Solomons, where sacrifice has become highly ritualised, pigs are bred specifically to be
sacrificed as burnt offerings (Keesing 1982:80, Ivens 1927:241ff ).

   In Polynesia Williamson writes that “special ceremonial occasions such as births, marriages
and deaths, were accompanied by offerings to the gods. After fishing, it was frequently the
custom to offer a share of the catch to the gods, and other important activities such as house-
building, the launching of large canoes, and warfare were likewise occasions for the making of
sacrifices ” (1937:121).

                              Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 421


   A single reconstruction with limited distribution, POc *ulak, *ulak-i- ‘make an offering to
a ghost’ is included in Chapter 8.


13.6. Giving and receiving

A number of the verbs reconstructed in this chapter thus far have sense that includes
transferring possession of something from one person to another in some culturally defined or
restricted situation. In the terminology of vol.5:422-423 they are ‘caused movement’ verbs. An
English caused movement verb that is used in a broad range of situations is give: an agent
transfers a theme to a recipient. Oceanic languages have verbs with a similar meaning.

   Indeed, it is fairly common to find verbs in Oceanic languages that function as caused
movement verbs and have ‘give’ among the glosses of their reflexes; see POc *lapi ‘take, get,
give’/PNCV *lavi ‘carry, take’ and POc *la(q)-i- ‘take, get, bring’/PNCV *la-i ‘take,
give’ (vol.5:426–427), POc *kwau, *kwa(p,b)-i- (?) ‘get, take’ (vol.5:428) and POc *taRu(q)
‘put down, lay down’ (vol.5:449. In Hoava (MM), vale ‘give, put’, reflecting POc *pala-i-
‘give’, has both functions:

__igt__
Koni buma        sa        kuma pula vale-a   goe              sa     dae        buma.
FUT    GREEN     ART:SG    water if  give-3SG 2SG              ART:SG dye        green
‘The water will be green if you put in the green dye.’

   Across languages the archetypal change of possession verb is the one that means ‘give’. In
POc this was evidently *pani-, which took the recipient as its object, as the verbs below with
an encliticised or suffixed object marker show.4 The fact that it took the recipient as object
resulted in use first as the final verb in a serial verb construction, where it marked the
recipient or beneficiary, then in its grammaticisation as a benefactive marker or preposition in
various languages, as in Manam:

__igt__
natu i-ruʔu-i-an-a
child 3SG-wash-3SG-BEN-1SG
‘He washed the child for me.’ (Lichtenberk 1983b:69)

__formgroup__
 Adm:      Wuvulu       i-na-ware-fan-au           ‘She told me’; [3SG-RLS-talk-give-1SG]
 NNG:      Kove         i-pa-ɣau                   ‘he gives me (s.t.)’
 NNG:      Gitua        van-gau                    ‘give me (s.t.)’
 NNG:      Bing         panu-au                    ‘give me (s.t.)’
 NNG:      Takia        i-pana-g                   ‘he gives me (s.t.)’
 NNG:      Manam        i-aŋ-ʔita                  ‘he gave it to us’

The reconstruction itself is straightforward. It has no known non-Oceanic cognates and
almost peters out at the southeastern boundary of Western Oceanic.

[4] Sources of examples are, for Wuvulu, Hafford (1999:78) and, for Manam, Lichtenberk (1983:33).

422 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross

<
POc *pani- ‘give’ (ACD) (OBJECT is the recipient)
 Adm: Wuvulu              fani                ‘give’
 Adm: Seimat              hani                ‘give’
 NNG: Kove                -pani               ‘give him’
 NNG: Gitua               van                 ‘give’
 NNG: Mindiri             pani                ‘give’
 NNG: Dami                pani                ‘give’
 NNG: Gedaged             pani                ‘give (him); hand over, bestow, grant, confer, impart, accord, yield’
 NNG: Takia               -pan-               ‘give’
 NNG: Medebur             -ana                ‘give’
 NNG: Manam               -ana                ‘give’
 NNG: Manam               -ani                ‘give (him)’
 NNG: Manam               -(a)n-              (benefactive marker)
 NNG: Wogeo               vani                ‘give’
 PT:    Motu              heni-               ‘give to, hand to’
 MM: Lihir                hen                 ‘give’
 MM: Tangga               fen                 ‘give’
 MM: Taiof                fan                 ‘give’
 MM: Ghanongga            vani                ‘give’
 MM: Lungga               vani-               ‘give’
 MM: Kia                  vani                ‘give’
 NCV: Lewo                (wari)vani          ‘carry to; give to’
cf. also:
  MM: Roviana              poni               ‘give’
  MM: Hoava                poni               ‘give’
>

    The cognate sets below have skewed distributions: they are reflected only in parts of
Oceania. There are at least two reasons for this. One is the semantic widening of reflexes of
POc *wase, *soli, and *tara(s), all meaning ‘distribute’ to mean ‘give’ (§13.5.1). Another is
inclusion of ‘give’ among the meanings of the caused movement verbs mentioned above,
especially in Vanuatu.

    The PMP term for ‘give’ was *beRay. The expected POc reflex would be †*boRe or
†*poRe, but instead only *peRe is reconstructable and that only with a few reflexes, restricted
in their distribution. It must therefore be regarded as a dubious reconstruction.

<
PAn *beRay ‘give’ (ACD)
PMP *beRay ‘give, present gifts to; gift’ (ACD)
PEMP *boRe ‘give’ (ACD)
POc (?) *peRe ‘give’ (for †*poRe)
  PT:    Iamalele          -vele-ni           ‘give’
  PT:    Iduna             -vele-             ‘give’
  PT:    Tawala            wele               ‘give, donate, hand over’
  MM: Bali                 viri               ‘give’
cf. also:
  MM: Meramera             bili               ‘give’
>

                                 Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 423


   POc *pala, *pala-i- ‘give’ does not have many known reflexes, spread across just two
subgroups, but their geographic distribution clearly warrants a POc reconstruction.

<
POc *pala, *pala-i- ‘give’
 NNG: Poeng                pal-pale                   ‘distribute’
 MM: Vitu                  vala                       ‘give’
 MM: Haku                  hala                       ‘give’
 MM: Hoava                 vale                       ‘give’
 MM: Marovo                vala-ni-                   ‘give’
 MM: Ghove                 fala(o)                    ‘give’
 SES: To’aba’ita           fale-                      ‘give’
 SES: Lau                  fale                       ‘give’
>

    The converse of English give is receive: an agent accepts transfer of a theme from a giver,
i.e. the agent is recipient. Curiously, we are unable to reconstruct a POc term glossed
‘receive’. However, English get is used both where the subject is a recipient with little
agentivity (Tom got a medal) and where the subject is clearly an agent (Tom got a sandwich
from the plate). It is possible that no POc verb for ‘receive’ offers itself because POc verbs of
transfer of possession like POc *lapi ‘take, get, give’ (vol.5:426) and POc *la(q)-i- ‘take, get,
bring’ (vol.5:427) are as wide in function as English get and also serve as ‘receive’.

    Another English verb where the agent illicitly transfers possession of something to her-/
himself from another person is steal. Take and get are relatively unrestricted culturally,
whereas steal is restricted to a transfer of possession that is proscribed by a law, a rule or a
convention. The POc verb *panako is reconstructed with this meaning. At some pre-POc
stage its forerunner was morphologically complex, and this accounts for the fact that, rarely
among root forms, it has three syllables (vol.5:29–30). It has a variant, POc *painako, the
etiology of which is not clear. It is reflected in Mussau, in Papuan Tip languages, and in
Meso-Melanesian languages other than those around the Willaumez Peninsula. There are a
number of reflexes below which, without a detailed knowledge of each language’s
phonological history, could be assigned to either variant.

<
PAn *Cakaw ‘steal’ (ACD)
PMP *takaw, *panakaw ‘steal’ (ACD)[5]
POc *panako ‘steal’
  Adm: Loniu           pa-hena          ‘steal’ (< *pa-penako [ACD])
  Adm: Titan           pāna             (VI) ‘steal’
  Adm: Titan           pānawe           (VT) ‘steal’
  Adm: Papitalai       pena             ‘steal; thief’
  Adm: Lou             panak            ‘steal’
  NNG: Kove            -panaho          ‘steal’
  NNG: Malalamai       -wanoɣo          ‘steal’
  NNG: Sio             panawe           (VT) ‘steal s.t. from s.o.’
  NNG: Sio             panɔwe           (VI) ‘steal’
  NNG: Tami            pi-pinau(adin)   ‘thief’
  NNG: Tami            minau            ‘steal’ (m- unexplained)
  NNG: Arop-Lokep      -pinau           ‘steal’
  NNG: Malasanga       -puno            ‘steal’
  NNG: Ronji           pana-i           ‘steal’
  NNG: Mindiri         panek            ‘steal’
  NNG: Wab             panuo-ŋ          ‘steal’
  NNG: Gedaged         panau            ‘steal’
  NNG: Manam           -anako           ‘steal’
  NNG: Wogei           -vanako          ‘steal’
  NNG: Kairiru         -vanaq           ‘steal’
  NNG: Dangal          pina             ‘steal’
  NNG: Kapin           panaɣ            ‘steal’
  MM:  Bali            vanaɣo           ‘steal’
  MM:  Bola            panaɣo           ‘steal’
PSS *vanaɣo ‘steal’
  SES: W. Guadalcanal  vanaɣo           ‘steal’
  SES: Bauro           hanaɣo           ‘steal’
  SES: Kahua           hanaɣo           ‘steal’
PNCV *vanako ‘steal’
  NCV: Tamambo         vanaho           ‘steal’ (archaic)
  NCV: Uripiv          vena             ‘steal’
  NCV: Uripiv          venao            ‘theft’
  NCV: Big Nambas      ð̼nah-i           (VT) ‘steal’
  NCV: Port Sandwich   vönaxö           ‘steal’
  NCV: Ninde           venaʔ            ‘steal’
  NCV: Neve’ei         ve-venaʔ         (VI) ‘steal’
  NCV: Neve’ei         venokh           (VT) ‘steal’
  NCV: Paamese         henaa            (VI) ‘steal’
  NCV: Lewo            vinau            ‘steal’
  NCV: Namakir         banak            ‘steal’
  NCV: Nguna           vanako           ‘steal’
  NCV: Rotuman         hanaʔo           ‘steal’
  SV:  Lenakel         ə-vnak           ‘steal’’
  Pn:  Maori           fānako           ‘steal, theft, thief, thievish, thieving’
>

[5] This is segmented as *pa-nako in the ACD, but the explanation offered in the introduction to vol.5 (pp29–30)
    is to be preferred as it avoids reconstructing two roots, *takaw and *nakaw, and is more powerful in that it
    explains other Oceanic verbs in *pan- as well as *panako.

424 Meredith Osmond and Malcolm Ross


<
POc *painako, *penako ‘steal’
 Adm: Mussau           ainao           ‘steal’
 PT:  Motu             henao-a         ‘steal’
 PT:  Gabadi           vainao          ‘steal’
 PT:  Roro             veinao          ‘steal’
 PT:  Muyuw            veinau          ‘steal’
 PT:  Gumawana         vainawa-na      (VT) ‘steal’
 PT:  Gumawana         vainao          (VI) ‘steal’
 PT:  Ubir             bainau          ‘steal’
 MM:  E Kara           fenau           ‘steal’
 MM:  Nalik            vinau           ‘steal’
 MM:  Nehan            wenaua          ‘steal’
 MM:  Uruava           vainao          ‘steal’
>

                           Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of possession 425



13.7. Conclusion

This chapter has the rather clumsy title of ‘Trade, exchange, distribution and transfer of
possession’, but a common thread is that almost all its verbs profile a change of possession of
some kind (§§13.3, 13.5.1, 13.5.3–4, 13.6).

    Something of what is known about trade prior to European contact is summarised in
§13.2. Trade routes cannot be projected back in any detail to Lapita times, but the
archaeology shows that trade has always been an important aspect of Oceanic speakers’ ways
of life and provides insight into what has been traded.

    Verbs relating specifically to trade are reconstructed in §13.3. Trade and exchange entails
the movement of wealth, and forms of wealth are described in §13.4, along with the relevant
reconstructions. Specific contexts of wealth movement are discussed in §13.5, a topic that
again involves verbs denoting change of possession. Finally, change-of-possession verbs with
more general meanings, especially ‘give’, are reconstructed in §13.6.



14 Counting: numerals and numeral classifiers

14.1 Introduction and background1

The reconstruction of POc numeral terms other than ‘one’ is relatively straightforward, as POc
inherited a reconstructable PMP decimal system with single-word terms up to 100. Two related
matters contribute to the length of this chapter, however. One is the evident existence of numeral
classifiers in POc, intimately involved in the reconstruction of numerals. The other is a search for
the reasons why POc numerals and classifiers constituted such an extensive system.

   The history of numeral terms since the break-up of POc, especially in Western Oceanic and
SOc languages, has been complex, resulting in the loss of some (and in a few languages, all)
POc numerals. This history is sketched in Chapter 15.

   Recently, traditional numeral systems in many Oceanic languages have been modified or
have disappeared because of their speakers’ contact with a European language. The numeral
system, writes Comrie (2005), is more endangered than the language itself. The data presented
here were collected either before this modernisation or from older members of the speech
community who still remembered them.

   Section 14.1.1 introduces numeral classifiers, as they play a role in the reconstruction of
numerals. Section 14.1.2 discusses the uses of numerals in early Oceanic communities. The
remaining sections are devoted to reconstruction: §14.2 to verbs of counting, §14.3 and §14.4
and their subsections to cardinal numerals, §14.5 to non-cardinal numerals, and §14.6 to
classifiers.

   Both numeral and classifier terms were inherited by POc. Classifiers have been lost or
fossilised in many Oceanic languages, but are very much alive in others.

14.1.1 Numeral classifiers and their semantic classes

Grammarians divide English common nouns into two categories. One consists of nouns like
banana, chair or mouse, which can form a plural and be counted: three bananas, two chairs,
six mice. These are ‘count’ nouns. The other category contains ‘mass’ nouns, like hay,
firewood or water, so called because they denote an undifferentiated mass of something. On
its own a mass noun cannot be counted. Phrases like two hays, three firewoods or six waters
are odd,[2] and such nouns are counted using another noun that measures relevant quantities:
two bundles of hay, three loads of firewood, six glasses of water. A count noun can also be
counted in this way, e.g., two hands of bananas, but bananas retains its plural form in this
construction.

[1] My thanks go to the late John Lynch for providing the evidence noted in §14.4.2.3.

428 Malcolm Ross


    Nouns like bundle, load, glass or hand in this construction are conventionally labelled
‘mensural classifiers’, as each denotes a certain measure of the thing(s) denoted by the noun
that follows of.

    Oceanic languages treat common nouns differently. Generally, no common noun has a
distinct plural form, and in certain Oceanic languages, the structure used to say things like
two bundles of hay and three loads of firewood is used to count all nouns. Thus for three dogs
one says something corresponding to ‘three animals of dog’, and for three men ‘three humans
of man’. This introduces a new complication, as ‘animals’ and ‘humans’ are not mensural, but
sortal: they categorise into ‘sorts’ (Lyons 1977:463). Indeed, Oceanic classifiers fall into a
number of semantic classes, indicated by the bolded words in what follows and exemplified
mostly from Woleaian (Mic).

    The Woleaian classifier construction is shown in (1) with sortal classifiers. The English
classifiers above are nouns, but the Woleaian classifiers are bound forms to which the
numeral is prefixed. Oceanic sortal classifiers reflect semantic classes that occur worldwide
in languages with numeral classifiers (see Aikhenvald 2000:98; Senft 1995:9).

1)      Woleaian (Mic)
        a. ʐʉwe-mar             yaʐemar
           2-CLF:animate        person
           ‘2 people’ (lit. ‘2 animates of person’) (Sohn 1975:59)
        b. fā-faʂ                  wa
           4-CLF:long.object canoe
           ‘four canoes’ (lit. ‘4 long objects of canoe’) (Sohn 1975:206)
        c. ʐʉwe-faʉ                 faʉ
           2-CLF:round.object stone
           ‘two stones’ (lit. ‘2 round objects of stone’) (Sohn 1975:62)

    Sometimes a sortal classifier has the same form as the noun it classifies, as in (1c), as
classifiers are often derived from nouns. Pe (1965) called such classifiers ‘repeaters’, and
Benton (1968) introduced the term into Oceanic studies in his study of Chuukese classifiers.
Often the ‘repeater’ denotes a larger category than the classified noun. Here the classifier -faʉ
denotes a round object, whereas the noun faʉ denotes one or more stones.

    Sortal classifiers can also be used like pronouns: in a conversation in which (1b) has
appeared, further reference to the four canoes can be made with fā-faʂ, where English uses
they or perhaps the four.

    Bril (2014:181) provides a nice Nêlêmwa (NCal) example of meaning contrast between
two sortal classifiers used with the same noun. . In (2a) a living ʃãlaga ‘crab’ is classified as
ā- ‘animate’, but in (2b) as pʷa- ‘default inanimate’, the dead crab sold at market.

[2]  The reader may object that a context where ‘six waters’ is not odd can easily be found, e.g., in a
     restaurant. This is a usage addressed by, e.g., Lyons (1977:464), Wiese & Maling (2005), but is not
     relevant here.

                                                      Numerals, classifiers and counting 429


2)      Nêlêmwa (NCal)
        a. ā-ɣīk                ʃãlaga
           CLF:animate-one      crab
           ‘one crab’ (living) (Bril 2014:181)
        b. pʷa-ɣīk                        ʃãlaga
           CLF:default.inanimate-one crab
           ‘one crab’ (dead, sold at market) (Bril 2014:181)

Note that the numeral is suffixed to the classifier in Nêlêmwa, whereas in Woleaian it is
prefixed.

   Every Oceanic language that has numeral classifiers has a default sortal classifier that is
used with inanimate nouns that do not belong to an obvious classifier category or to save the
speaker selecting a classifier. In Woleaian this is -uw:

3)      Woleaian (Mic)
        se-uw      texax
        one-CLF cup
        ‘one cup’ (Sohn 1975:61)

     The classifiers in (4) are mensural.

4)      Woleaian (Mic)
        a. wari-gumʷ          ʂar
           8-CLF:mouthful water.
           ‘8 mouthfuls of water’ (Sohn 1975:202)
        b. se-ʂimʷ        xaroxar
           1-CLF:bundle sennit.
           ‘one bundle of sennit’ (Sohn 1975:60)

A numeral + mensural.classifier combination can also be used without a following noun.
Thus wari-gumʷ means ‘8 mouthfuls (of liquid)’, since -gumʷ always quantifies liquid.

   A multiplicative classifier itself specifies a numerical quantity. English equivalents are
pair, dozen and score.

5)      Woleaian (Mic)
        se-ix           fʷuk
        one-CLF:10 book
        ‘ten books’ (lit. ‘one ten of book’) (Sohn 1975:202)

A multiplicative classifier’s sole function is to be multiplied by the preceding numeral. Thus
Woleaian se-ix is 1 × 10; ʐʉe-ix is 2 × 10 (= 20); seri-ix is 3 × 10 (= 30); and so on.

   Many Oceanic languages have a classifier type that is both mensural and multiplicative.
Hence in (6) -yaf specifies both that classified objects are round and that the bundle contains
ten of them (Sohn & Tawerilmang, 1976:170). This is called an enumerative classifier here.

6)      Woleaian (Mic)
        se-yaf                      rʉ
        one-CLF:bundle.10.round coconut
        ‘a bundle of 10 (round) coconuts’ (Sohn 1975:170)

430 Malcolm Ross


Modern Woleaian does not preserve many enumerative classifiers (Sohn 1976:284–285).
Languages with more include closely related Chuukese (Benton 1968; Goodenough & Sugita
1980):

7)      Chuukese (Mic)
        wɨnɨ-ttīt                      mǣy
        3-CLF:string.10.breadfruit breadfruit
        ‘3 strings of 10 breadfruit’ (Goodenough & Sugita 1980:354)

     Woleaian also has unit-of-time classifiers, which form adverbial phrases, as in:

8)      Woleaian (Mic)
        se-ʐan            ʐan
        one-CLF:day       day
        ‘one day’ (Sohn 1975:61)

    Finally, Woleaian has unit-of-measurement classifiers, discussed in §16.1.1.

    If an Oceanic language uses numeral classifiers, it will have at least mensural classifiers.
Enumerative classifiers are also widespread, sortal classifiers somewhat less so, facts
discussed in §14.1.2.4. The number of multiplicative classifiers is constrained by the fact that
semantically they are a component of the numeral system. Unit-of-time and unit-of-
measurement classifiers are rarer because their meanings are more constrained.

    Scattered Oceanic languages in Micronesia, the Admiralties and New Caledonia also have
a frequentative classifier which forms an adverbial phrase with the same function as reflexes
of the POc frequentative prefix *pa[ka]- (§14.5.2).

9)      Ponapean (Mic)
        pān sili-pak
        time 3-CLF:TIME
        ‘three times’ (Rehg 1981:128)

   The structure of POc phrases using numeral classifiers is taken up in §14.3, their forms in
§14.6.


14.1.2 The decimal system, classifiers and cultural context

The reconstructable forms of the POc decimal system are shown in Table 14.1, with
crossreferences to the sections that justify the reconstruction. Under A, 2 to 6 are simple
(single-morpheme) numerals. Under B and C are the complex numerals for 10s and 100s. No
power above a hundred, however, is reconstructable with certainty to POc (§14.4.6).

                                                      Numerals, classifiers and counting 431

: Table 14.1     Reconstructable POc lexical numerals

                A                                B                                                  C
    *sa-, *ta-sa,
  1 *tai, *ta-kai §14.4.1 and        10 *sa=[ŋa] puluq                                   100 *sa=[ŋa] Ratus
    and *sa-kai   subsections




                                                                                                               §14.4.5.1 and subsections and
                                                             §14.4.5.1 and subsections
  2 *rua             §14.4.2.1       20 *rua ŋa puluq                                    200 *rua ŋa Ratus
  3 *tolu            §14.4.2.2       30 *tolu ŋa puluq                                   300 *tolu ŋa Ratus
  4 *pat[i]          §14.4.2.3       40 *pati ŋa puluq                                   400 *pati ŋa Ratus
  5 *lima            §14.4.2.4       50 *lima ŋa puluq                                   500 *lima ŋa Ratus
  6 *onom            §14.4.3.1       60 *ono(m) ŋa puluq                                 600 *ono(m) ŋa Ratus
  7 *pitu            §14.4.3.2       70 *pitu ŋa puluq                                   700 *pitu ŋa Ratus
  8 *walu            §14.4.3.3       80 *walu ŋa puluq                                   800 *walu ŋa Ratus
  9 *siwa            §14.4.3.4       90 *siwa ŋa puluq                                   900 *siwa ŋa Ratus

    The decimal systems of some Micronesian and Polynesian languages famously have
multiplicative classifiers for very high powers of ten (Harrison & Jackson 1984; Bender &
Beller 2006a). Kiribati te-ea, Ponapean rar, Woleaian se-piy, Rennellese nimo and Nukuoro
se-lō all mean ‘a million’. The first morpheme of the Kiribati, Woleaian and Nukuoro terms is
‘one’, the second morpheme a multiplicative classifier (§14.1.1). Like several other
Micronesian languages, Woleaian uses classifiers to count up to 100,000,000 (Harrison &
Jackson 1984).

10)   Woleaian (Mic)
      sa-ŋeʐai               fʷuk
      one-CLF:100,000,000 book
      ‘a hundred million books’ (lit. ‘one hundred.million of book’)

    This raises a few questions. Were POc speakers able to count using powers of ten higher
than a hundred, or did this ability develop later? And did they use multiplicative classifiers for
this purpose? The answer to both questions is almost certainly, ‘Yes,’ causing one to ask in
what circumstances these were used.

    When a numeral system is eroded by contact, the highest simple numerals are usually
replaced first. Outside Micronesia and Polynesia, we still find lexical items for 1,000 and
higher powers of 10 in scattered languages whose number systems were recorded before
their invasion by a Pacific pidgin or a colonial language. In Lou and Nyindrou (both Adm)
the highest simple numeral is 10,000. Motu (PT) counts daha ‘1000’, ɣerebu ‘10,000’,
domaɣa ‘100,000’. New Ireland and NW Solomonic languages typically have a term for
‘1000’, Roviana (MM) also for ‘10,000’. Bugotu (SES) boasts toɣa ‘1,000’, mola
‘10,000’, feferi ‘100,000’, vuðera ‘1,000,000’ and vaðeɣila ‘10,000,000’. Mellow (2014)
and Healey (2013) respectively record Owa (SES) and Maskelynes (NCV) numerals up to
a million. The presence of these numerals suggests rather strongly that early Oceanic
speakers did count as far as perhaps ten million. Yet where simple numerals for powers of
ten above 100 can be reconstructed, the reconstructions are almost all limited to a local
group of languages (Eastern Admiralty, south New Ireland, Buka/N Bougainville,
Choiseul, New Georgia, Santa Isabel, Northern Vanuatu).

432 Malcolm Ross


    The evidence is thus contradictory. POc forms for powers above 100 cannot be
reconstructed, but the likelihood that such numerals were used seems considerable. How is
this contradiction to be resolved? If, as suggested below, knowledge of these numerals was
restricted to high-status older men and their use was limited to certain special occasions
(§14.1.2.1), then there was a real possibility that they were forgotten across the generations
and later recreated (§14.4.6). This would account for the seeming contradiction.

14.1.2.1 Ceremonial exchange and wealth redistribution

    What then were these numerals used for? Apparently to count up the quantities of various
gifts, mainly of food, at customary feasts. On ethnographic evidence feasts took two main
forms: (i) wealth distribution for the purpose of maintaining or gaining status and (ii)
ceremonial exchanges of various kinds. In wealth distributions the feast-giver might be a
hereditary chief or, in communities without chieftainship, someone intent on becoming a ‘big
man’. These exchanges have atrophied in many Oceanic societies since European contact, but
not before they had been described by various linguists and ethnographers. Crowley
(2006a:61) mentions the function of Avava (NCV) numerals.

__blockquote__
      Higher numerals were traditionally used for counting yams associated with the highly
      elaborate grade-taking ceremonies for which Malakula is well known in the
      ethnographic literature, and all of the neighbouring languages appear to have had
      similarly elaborate counting systems. Preparations for these ceremonies often took
      years, and it was necessary to keep track of who had provided large numbers of yams
      over this period.

Hogbin (1964a:65-66) describes how a Longgu (SES) man holds a status-gaining feast.

__blockquote__
      By about three o'clock all the food stood in front of Atana's house. He and his
      immediate kinsmen had contributed the 250 pounds of dried fish, the 3000 yam cakes,
      11 bowls of yam pudding, and 8 pigs.
      Soon the Longgu villagers, together with some of the residents of the surrounding
      settlements, began drifting into the hamlet. Nearly everybody brought along some
      dried fish and a few yam cakes, and several of the leaders sent a pig and a bowl of
      pudding as well. On the final count the various heaps contained 300 pounds of fish,
      nearly 5000 yam cakes, 19 bowls of pudding, and 13 pigs.

A parallel situation from northern Malaita is described by Hogbin (1939).

   In northern Vanuatu, a man climbed the scale of ranks in a similar way. François
(2013:235) writes:

__blockquote__
      The way for a man to climb the political scale of *suᵐbʷe involved the public display
      of considerable wealth. This would take the form, typically, of a number of pigs ….
      Besides, the candidate had to bring offerings of kava, along with massive quantities of
      shellmoney …. This shellmoney consisted of small cone shells (Conus sp.) that had
      been patiently filed into circular discs, then pierced and threaded onto a very long
      string of beads . . . The quantity of such money required for some higher ranks could
      measure up to 10 fathoms in length, and involved considerable work on part of the
      candidate’s female relatives.
                                                           Numerals, classifiers and counting 433


   An oft-quoted account of chiefly wealth distribution comes from Elbert’s grammar of the
Polynesian language Rennellese (1988:186):

__blockquote__
       Much of a chief's life before 1938 (aside from fighting) consisted of fishing and raising
       fine gardens, and presenting the fruit of the land and of the sea, carefully counted, first to
       the gods with impressive rituals, and then to relatives and allies. A chief’s prestige was
       gauged by the size of the offerings he was able to amass; this was an indication of the
       resources he commanded, his industry, and his personality. The emphasis on carefully
       counted quantity extended to competitive giving. In [a later section] is a text of a
       discussion of such a competition in 1937 or 1938, in which 10,000 coconuts and 7,600
       banana bunches were collected, offered to the gods, and distributed.

    People with counting skills were required at such ceremonies in Polynesia, whether in
Rennell, in Hawai’i or in Tonga (Bender & Beller 2007b:228). Counting similarly occurred at
Tolai feasts in New Britain, and Paraide (2008) alludes to today’s near-disappearance of
traditional counting.

    Carrier (1981:471–474) describes ceremonial exchange on Ponam Island (Admiralties).
Every important social event included exchange, usually between in-laws. A man made a
gift to an in-law, who later presented a return gift. Descendants of siblings of the donor’s
ancestors also contributed (and later the return gift would be distributed among them). The
closer the relationship to the donor, the larger the contribution. At an appointed time the
gifts amassed by each group of relatives were brought to the donor’s house and laid out on
the ground in a formal display that represented the closeness of each group’s relationship
to the donor. The donor or his representative then counted the gifts, announcing what was
in each pile and in whose name it was given, then the goods were carried to the recipient’s
house and placed in a single pile. Formal speeches ensued, then the recipient arranged the
gifts to reflect the groups of relatives to whom he would distribute the gifts. He then also
counted the gifts, and the ceremony ended.

    The ethnographic literature refers to the counting of feast gifts in other Oceanic
communities. Panoff (1970:364), writing about the Mengen (NNG) of New Britain,
mentions the counting of taro tubers ceremonially brought from the gardens for a feast and
of fish formally cooked in earth ovens on festive occasions. Garde (2015:126) alludes to
the counting of food items at feasts in Sa-speaking communities in Pentecost (NCV).
Bender and Beller (2007a), summarising research into numeral use in Polynesian
societies, comment that “A concern with collecting and redistributing resources was
particularly strong in islands with powerful chiefs or kings, such as Tonga or Tahiti…”.
Alkire (1970) describes the counting of coconuts associated with a funerary exchange on
Woleai Atoll.[3]

    The distribution of these customs across Oceanic subgroups suggests that they date
back to the Lapita culture and that POc speakers counted gifts (mostly food), an effect of
which was to maintain the inherited decimal counting system up to high powers of ten.

[3] Other ethnographic accounts focus on exchange relations and do not mention counting, but at least
    where exchanges took place at feasts, counting was probably involved. Such accounts include Aswani &
    Sheppard (2003) on Roviana (MM), Goodenough (1951:142) on Chuuk (Mic), and Kaeppler (1978) on
    the Fiji–Tonga–Samoa exchange network.

434 Malcolm Ross


    Did the ability to count huge food gifts facilitate counting and calculation in other
areas? The answers here are mixed. Only Carrier (1981) examines this in any detail, and
she finds that skills in mental arithmetic, associated, for example, with card games, are
well developed among Ponam speakers. She notes that “Elderly unschooled people keep
score mentally as accurately as young people do with pencil and paper” (1981:469). Smith
(1986), on the other hand, provides an overview of counting practices in Papua New
Guinea and concludes that the POc decimal counting system was not a necessary part of
gift-giving and exchange. In societies that were most influenced by their Papuan speaking
neighbours, number systems atrophied. The Adzera of the upper Markham Valley of
mainland New Guinea (NNG) maintained traditional feasting practices, but formal
presentations of gift objects and the comparison of one quantity with another were
evidently what continued to matter. Smith writes, “Bunches of bananas in Adzera, for
example, were not counted prior to distribution, but mounted on a structure reaching the
top of a coconut tree.” His case is supported by the fact that the Adzera numeral system
consists only of the numerals 1 and 2. Similarly, Duau (PT) speakers, with a base-5-20
system, reckon the amount to be repaid by pile size rather than by counting (Thune
1978:74).

14.1.2.2 Trade

   It is sometimes assumed that trade must have fostered the use of a decimal numeral
system, but the evidence for this is ambiguous. Smith (1986) points out that traditional
trade among Oceanic speakers was an extension of ceremonial exchange. He writes,

__blockquote__
      …ever since Malinowski's pioneering work on the kula expeditions of Milne Bay it has
      been recognised that trade in Melanesia also involves some of these ceremonial features.
      A great deal of the energy expended in kula shell exchanges, for example, appears to
      outside observers to have little justification in terms of economic benefit. Thus it might
      be argued that such overseas expeditions should be regarded not so much as trading
      ventures as complex social rituals.

He notes, though, that applying this thinking to the trade network of the Vitiaz Strait is
controversial. Harding (1970) thinks that the ceremonial aspects of trade have been over-
emphasised, and that the traders of the Strait, at least, were primarily interested in
commerce, acting as middlemen between the Bilbil network centred near present-day
Madang and networks that ran along the north and south coasts of New Britain. The Siassi
‘engaged in social rituals of exchange as a means of acquiring valued need serving
goods’ (1970:108). Smith writes,

__blockquote__
      They acted as middlemen , exchanging goods at favourable rates by manipulating
      exchange ratios in the different Vitiaz Strait ports. A pig, for example, could be
      exchanged on Umboi for 5-10 packets of sago, which in turn were exchanged at Sio
      or Gitua for 50-100 pots. These pots could then be transported to New Britain, where
      they yielded 5-10 pigs (Harding 1970: 139) . Thus goods of little value in one
      community were transported to others where they were in short supply, or had high
      prestige , usually for ceremonial purposes , and thereby appeared to yield a
      considerable profit. …


                                                        Numerals, classifiers and counting 435


Even in the situation described by Harding (1967, 1970), the need for a counting system as
sophisticated as the POc decimal system would have been minimal. Gift exchange always
entailed exchanging an amount of a particular commodity for an equivalent amount of the
same commodity. The Siassi traders exchanged a set amount of a one commodity for an
‘equivalent’ amount of another. This did not entail sophisticated calculation skills. Indeed,
numeral systems on either side of the Vitiaz Strait are base-5-20 or -5-10-20 systems that
have more in common with digit tally systems than with the extensive POc system
(§15.4).

14.1.2.3 Other uses of counting?

Another pointer to the restricted application of decimal counting is that various ethnographers
have observed that Oceanic speakers do not count people or their ages or time in any form.

   Carrier (1981:417) writes of Ponam speakers:

__blockquote__
     One of the most striking things about Ponams is that they do not count people.
     Despite obvious skill with numbers, no one has any idea how many people live on
     the island, how many households there are or how many children are attending the
     primary school. Even more surprising, many parents of large families do not know
     how many children they have without stopping to think about it. And almost no one
     knows that there are 14 clans on the island, although everyone knows their names
     and can calculate the number in a few moments. Ponams simply are not interested
     in counting people; apparently these quantifications tell them nothing interesting
     about social relations. But other sorts of quantifications do, most importantly those
     used in exchange.

   Thune’s (1978:74) account of numeration among the Duau (PT) of Normanby Island
overlaps strikingly with Carrier’s, except that the Duau appear not to use counting even in
gift exchanges.

__blockquote__
      … mothers of children only a few years old do not know (nor do they care about) the
      ages of their children. It is not so much that one couldn’t develop means for keeping
      track of age using the Loboda numerical terminology, or for that matter the introduced
      English terminology, as there is no interest in doing so. . . .
      Loboda people of course are quite able to refer to the age of people: they have terms
      for infant (memeyo), child (gwama), adolescent boys and girls (tubuhau,
      gomwagwehine), and so forth. But in using these terms to speak of the age of people,
      they think of a stage or fraction of a person's life rather than of an abstract number of
      countable years.

    Alkire (1970:37) comments on Woleaian (Mic) counting, which is decimal and employed
in ceremonial exchanges,

__blockquote__
      An individual does not think of his age in terms of years (a unit of measurement of
      little traditional importance on Woleai) or of seasons (a unit which is important and
      discussed below), but only comparatively, as being younger or older than some other
      person of reference. The life span of a person, however, is divided into several “ages”
      which vary according to sex.

   Elbert (1988:186) writes,

436 Malcolm Ross



__blockquote__
      Not everything was counted in Rennellese culture. No one knew or was at all interested
      in his own age. One was content with the vague terms for the life span: infancy
      (mi’ime’o’anga), adolescence (bagokaa ’anga), middle age (mi’itauiku ’anga), old
      age (tauiku), and extreme old age or senility (hu’oitouiku, neneba, tau mago ti’aki).
      Years and generations were not counted at all. Time was told by looking at the sky.

   Labrecque (2009) comments on Southeast Ambrym speakers:

__blockquote__
      If you were to ask someone how many children they have, they would have to name
      each one and count on their fingers as they think of their children by name, not
      number. Even in the same conversation, 2 minutes later, if asked to verify that they
      had 5 children, they would need to start counting all over again. This is the same for
      number of gardens, pigs, cattle, chickens.

   There are overlaps between these mutually distant accounts. They agree that Duau,
Woleaian and Renellese speakers do not count ages in years but assign people to age cohorts
(vol.5:57–70). Neither Ponam nor Duau nor SE Ambrym speakers know straight off how
many children they have. Rennellese speakers do not count years, and Chapter 11 confirms
that this is true all over Oceania.

14.1.2.4 The origin of Oceanic enumerative classifiers

Formal counting at feasts was mostly performed with a decimal system, but this was
accompanied by the use of enumerative classifiers. That is, each product was arranged or
bundled in units that contained a certain number of each product, and it was these units that
were counted, rather than the product itself.

   Elbert (1988:187) describes a wealth distribution 20 years later than the one quoted in
§14.1.2.1, by which time the young no longer fully understand the counting practices of
their elders :

__blockquote__
      In 1958 on Rennell the traditional distributions were to some extent still practiced on
      great occasions, with the Christian god replacing those of Rennell. The main event of
      the greatest holiday, New Year’s, was the food distribution. A few elderly men
      supervised what seemed to the young an impressive but overly fussy way of arranging
      the huge displays. Why should large fish, reptiles, and humans be counted differently
      than small fish? Why should yams and breadfruit be counted in pairs, banana bunches
      in fours, and bunches of taro stalks in fives?

The last two sentences refer to the use of enumerative classifiers in counting. The
Rennellese elders counted with enumerative classifiers of different quantities, the quantity
depending on the item counted.

   Fox (1931) takes the connection between Arosi numerals and feasting for granted when
he discusses the term for ten million coconuts: ‘The people say they never needed in
practice a larger numeral term, as they never prepared for a feast more than ten million
nuts, and so they did not go any further.’

   Enumerative classifiers have been recorded in many Oceanic languages (for specifics
see §14.6.3). Ivens (1930) and Hogbin (1964a), both cited by Hill & Unger (2018),
mention large numbers of foodstuffs at ceremonial exchanges. They write,

                                                          Numerals, classifiers and counting 437



__blockquote__
       A reader of their ethnographic work may wonder how they knew there were 5,000
       yam cakes or 20,000 yams, and why it was important to the communities to calculate
       exactly how many yam cakes or yams there were. There was no written numeration
       so, once counted, how did speakers remember these numbers?

Hill & Unger’s answer is that SE Solomons languages use enumerative classifiers4
(§14.1.1) to count items in tens, thereby reducing counting and memorisation (also Bender
& Beller 2007a,b). In (11) paga is an enumerative classifier meaning ‘ten animals’. The
structure is an analogue of English ‘a school of fish’, but school specifies no quantity,
whereas Lengo paga is a group of ten animals.

11)     Lengo
        sakai na paga             ni    iɣa
        one ART ten.animals ASSOCIATIVE fish
        ‘one “ten.animals” of fish’

But this cannot have been the whole answer to the ‘how’ question. There must have been
at least two other ingredients to counting large quantities. First, some enumerative
classifiers counted multiples of other enumerative classifiers (§§14.6.3–4). Second, people
kept tallies by various ethnographically recorded means. These included plucking the
leaflets from a fern (Fox 1931; Paraide 2008) or tying knots in a string (Codrington
1891:353). Codrington also describes more complex tallies.

__blockquote__
       At Saa when yams are counted two men count out each five, making ten, and as each
       ten is made they call out ‘one’, ‘two’, and so on. A man sits by, and when ‘ten’ is
       called making a hundred, he puts down a little yam for a tally.

   Bender & Beller (2006a, 2007b) argue convincingly that enumerative classifiers count
products that are both culturally salient and abundant (§14.6.3). Cultural salience here
means that the counted products are considered worthy of ceremonial exchange or as
representative of the donor’s distributions. This suggests in turn that enumerative
classifiers arose from nouns that designated the smallest collection units in which products
were laid out at these ceremonies. However, no POc enumerative classifier can be securely
reconstructed, and the evidence for this hypothesis consists of the circumstantial evidence
offered in the subsections of §14.6.3. It includes the fact that the items counted with an
enumerative classifier are the items that are presented in ceremonial exchanges and that
the classifiers themselves participated in classifier hierarchies where each classifier
denoted a multiple of a numeral associated with the counted product. The numeral was
often two, i.e. a pair.

[4] Hill & Unger use Lichtenberk’s term ‘numerically specific noun’. It is appropriate to To’aba’ita and
    Lengo, but not to languages where the ‘numerically specific’ (i.e. enumerative) item is not a noun.

438 Malcolm Ross

Map 14.1.: Distribution of classifiers by semantic type


                                                       Numerals, classifiers and counting 439


   This account of the emergence of enumerative classifiers receives support from their
geographic distribution. Map 14.1 shows the distribution of the types of classifiers (§14.1.1)
across Oceanic languages (whether they are bound or free forms is disregarded). Mensural
classifiers are omitted because they occur in all languages. Much of Polynesia is omitted
because of its huge extent. The maps are based on the numbers of classifiers recorded in what
are probably fairly complete listings in the literature, but it is likely that some classifiers have
disappeared in the recent past. What are of interest, then, are languages where larger number
of classifiers appear than elsewhere. Sortal classifiers occur in larger numbers than elsewhere
in Micronesian and in some Admiralties (Seimat, Ponam) and Papuan Tip (Kilivila, Muyuw
and Sudest) languages. Multiplicative classifiers occur in relatively larger quantities in
Micronesian languages (Harrison & Jackson 1984). Strikingly, however, enumerative
classifiers occur more widely in Map 14.1 than either sortal or multiplicative classifiers. They
occur in languages of New Ireland, Bougainville and the Solomon Islands, which largely lack
grammaticalised sortal or multiplicative classifiers, and they are more common than sortal
classifiers in Bauan Fijian, Tongan and Samoan—but less common in Micronesian and
Admiralties languages.

   This difference in distribution between sortal and enumerative classifiers reflects a
difference in history. A core set of sortal classifiers is of POc—and earlier—antiquity
(§14.6.1), but there is little evidence of POc enumerative classifiers. This does not mean
that they did not occur, but that there has been a continual process of replacement by fresh
invention as a result of the ceremonial processes described above. The map shows that
they have also been innovated in places where sortal and multiplicative classifiers do not
occur, and in Micronesian and Admiralties languages have not been innovated in
languages where sortal classifiers are plentiful. The difference in distribution reflects a
difference in the cultural contexts of sortal and enumerative classifiers. The former are in
everyday use, the latter in ceremonial use.

14.2 Reconstruction: Proto Oceanic terms for ‘count’

The only term meaning ‘to count’ that has non-Oceanic cognates is POc *i(y)ap, reflected
only in a few North New Guinea and Papuan Tip languages. A possible reason for its
disappearance is its form. PMP *ihap became POc *iap. In languages where final consonants
were lost it became †*ia or just †*ya, defying the Oceanic preference for disyllabic roots and
becoming ripe for replacement.

<
PMP *ihap ‘count’ (ACD)
POc *iap (VI) ‘count’
POc *iap-i- (VT) ‘count’
 NNG: Tami                 yau               ‘count’
 NNG: Bing                 (su)yiy-ai        ‘count’
 PT:    Maisin             (ko)yav-i         ‘count’
 PT:    Gumawana           -(katu)yaiv-i(na) ‘count’
 PT:    Dawawa             -(s)iava          ‘count’ (initial s- unexpected)
 PT:    Ubir               -iyab             ‘count; read’
 PT:    Wedau              -yava             ‘count’
 PT:    Gapapaiwa          -iava             ‘count; read’
>

440 Malcolm Ross


    The most widely attested POc verb meaning ‘count’ is POc *wase, but this was just one of
its meanings, which included at least ‘distribute (food at a feast), divide up, count out’,
carrying an association with feasting and the distribution of ceremonial gifts as well as food,
meshing with the context of decimal counting described in §14.1.2. The primary sense of
*wase was almost certainly ‘distribute’, and so the supporting cognate set and discussion of
its senses is found in §13.5.1.

    POc *topoŋ (V) ‘measure’ is reconstructed in §16.3. It has fewer ‘count’ reflexes than
the terms reconstructed here, and those reflexes may well be local extensions from the
sense ‘measure.’

    The cognate set reflecting POc *luku ‘count’ has a rather unusual distribution. It is
given here in the hope that further research will shed light on it. Reflexes have been found
only in languages of New Britain’s Gazelle Peninsula and in the Torres and Banks Islands
of north Vanuatu. The distribution may reflect later migration from New Britain to
Vanuatu (§15.9.2).

<
POc *luku ‘count’
 MM: Minigir                    lu-luku          ‘count’
 MM: Tolai                      lu-luk           ‘count’
 MM: Ramoaaina                  lu-luk           ‘count’
 MM: Bilur                      lu-luk           ‘count’
 NCV: Hiw                       yʉkʷ             ‘count’
 NCV: Koro                      luɣ              ‘count’
 NCV: Lakona                    luɣ-luɣ          ‘count’
 NCV: Toga                      luk              ‘count’
 NCV: Vera’a                    luku-n           ‘count’
>

   Three lower-order reconstructions are given below. The first two are PPn reconstructions
with similar form and meaning. However, their initial consonants show that they are separate
terms. The glosses suggest that *lau was more specifically concerned with reciting a list,
including a list of numbers.

   Although the Santa Isabel terms listed under ‘cf. also’ bear some formal similarity to
reflexes of the verb given in POLLEX as PPn *tau ‘count’, the sound correspondences
between the two sets do not permit a reconstruction.[5]

<
PPn *tau ‘count, tell’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Niuean            totou               ‘read, count’
  Pn: Samoan            fai-tau             ‘count’
  Pn: Tuvalu            tau                 ‘count, read’
  Pn: Emae              tāu-a               ‘count, read’
  Pn: Nukuoro           dau                 ‘count, read’
  Pn: Rennellese        tau                 ‘count, enumerate’
  Pn: Takuu             tau                 ‘count, enumerate’
  Pn: Tikopia           tau                 ‘count, reckon, measure’
  Pn: W Futunan         tau-a               ‘count, add, read’
  Pn: W Uvean           tau, tau-a          ‘count, number, read’
  Pn: Pukapukan         ta-tau              ‘count’
  Pn: Tahitian          tau                 ‘count, number’
  Pn: Tongarevan        ta-tau              ‘read, count’
  Pn: Tuamotuan         ta-tau              ‘describe, relate, recount’
  Pn: Marquesan         ta-tau              ‘count, recite’
  Pn: Maori             ta-tau              ‘count’
cf. also:
  MM: Zabana            taho                ‘count’
  MM: Laghu             taho                ‘count’
  MM: Kokota            ta-taho             ‘count’
>

[5] Medial -h- of the Santa Isabel forms would reflect POc *-s-. If the Niuean reflex were cognate with them,
    it too would retain -h-, but it doesn’t.

                                                        Numerals, classifiers and counting 441


<
PPn *lau ‘recite, count, list’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Tongan         lau          ‘mention; think of; consider; count, reckon, estimate, assess; read, recite’
  Pn: Niuafo’ou      lau          ‘count’
  Pn: Samoan         lau          ‘read; call out, give out song verse by verse’
  Pn: Anutan         rau          ‘count’
  Pn: Tuvalu         lau          ‘count, recite’
  Pn: E Futunan      lau          ‘read, recite; count’
  Pn: E Uvean        lau          ‘count, calculate’
  Pn: Tikopia        rau          ‘enumerate, count, go through items on a list’
  Pn: Pukapukan      waka-lau     ‘count’
>

14.3 The structure of POc phrases containing an attributive numeral

14.3.1 The *NUMERAL ŋa CLASSIFIER and *sa-CLASSIFIER structures

Table 14.1 shows that POc numerals for tens and hundreds, e.g. *sa=[ŋa] puluq ‘10’, *rua
ŋa puluq ‘20’, *tolu ŋa puluq ‘30’, had a structure in which the morphemes *puluq ‘10’
and *Ratus ‘100’ appear to be multiplicative classifiers (§14.1.1). The numeral is
connected to the classifier by the ligature *ŋa.6 This *ŋa seems to have originally been
absent after *sa- ‘one’, a proclitic that was immediately attached to the classifier. The
*NML ŋa CLF structure and its variant sa-CLF are of PMP antiquity, and are reflected as far
down the Oceanic tree as Polynesian. This raises the question, Did the POc structure
reflect a productive numeral classifier structure, or was it just a fossil?

   Being productive would mean that the structure was also used with other classifiers—
and it was, according to evidence from both higher and lower nodes of the Austronesian
tree. Table 14.2 shows forms for 1–3, 10–30 and 100–300 in one western and three central
Malayo-Polynesian languages (i.e. languages at higher nodes; see figure 1.2) and POc.
Certain facts are obvious. Cognates of POc *sa=[ŋa] puluq ‘10’ and *sa=[ŋa] Ratus ‘100’
are preceded by a proclitic that is cognate with POc *sa= ‘one’. In Javanese sa ‘1’ is not
followed by a ligature cognate with *ŋa, but the ligature occurs after 2 and 3. In the other
three languages the ligature has been generalised to occur with ‘one’ as well. In Javanese *ŋa
is reflected as -ŋ on simple numerals from 2 upward. In Hawu *ŋa-puluq and *ŋa-Ratus have
become ŋuru and ŋahu, in Kambera -ᵐbulu7 and ŋahu, and in Kéo mbudu and ŋasu. In Kéo
the morpheme order is reversed for numerals 2 and above.

[6] The ACD glosses PMP *ŋa ‘linker for multiples of ten’, but its function was much wider: ‘ligature
    linking a numeral to a numeral classifier’.

442 Malcolm Ross

: Table 14.2       Non-Oceanic and POc 1–3, 10–30 and 100–300

__table__
              Javanese           Hawu            Kambera        Kéo
                                                                                  POc
              (WMP)              (CMP)           (CMP)          (CMP)
          1   siji               əhi             diha           ha                *(i)sa a
          2   loro               ɗue             dua            rua               *rua
          3   təlu               təlu            tailu          tedu              *tolu
         10   sa=puluh           he-ŋuru         ha-ka-mbulu ha mbudu             *sa=[ŋa] puluq
         20   ro=ŋ puluh         ɗue ŋuru        dua ka-mbulu mbudu rua           *rua ŋa puluq
         30   təlu=ŋ puluh       təlu ŋuru       tailu ka-mbulu mbudu tedu        *tolu ŋa puluq
        100   s-atus             he-ŋahu         ha-ŋahu        ha ŋasu           *sa=[ŋa] Ratus
        200   ro=ŋ atus          ɗue ŋahu        dua ŋahu       ŋasu rua          *rua ŋa Ratus
        300   təlu=ŋ atus        təlu ŋahu       tailu ŋahu     ŋasu tedu         *tolu ŋa Ratus
a
    There were probably several POc forms meaning ‘1’ (§14.4.1).

    The critical point here is that in each language other classifiers occur in the same slot as
the multiplicative classifiers in Table 14.2. Javanese mensural classifiers occur in it:
sa=prapat ‘a quarter’, təlu=ŋ prapat ‘three-quarters’; ro-ŋ taun ‘two years’; pata-ŋ jam ‘4
hours’ (Robson 1992). Hawu sortal classifiers occur there: he=ŋiʔu wawi ‘one pig’, ɗue ŋiʔu
wawi ‘two pigs’, where ŋiʔu is the classifier for animals (Walker 1982). Kambera has sortal
classifiers based on shape. After ha- ‘one’, these do not reflect *ŋa, but after ‘2’ or greater, the
initial consonant undergoes a change that does reflect *ŋa: ha=puŋu pena ‘one pen’ vs dua
mbuŋu pena ‘two pens’; ha=wala kapambal ‘one plank’ vs ha dua mbala kapambal ‘two
planks’ (Klamer 2010).8 In Kéo the reversal of constituents with 2 and above attested in Table
14.2 also occurs with sortal classifiers: aki ha=ᵑgaʔe [man one-CLF] vs aki ⁿgaʔe dima [man
CLF 5] (ᵑgaʔe ‘human being’) (Baird 2002).

    This evidence that *NML ŋa CLF occurred in languages at higher nodes than POc only
says that POc could have retained the productive structure. The tens and hundreds in Table
14.1 could be fossils. However, evidence from Admiralties, Micronesian and Polynesian
languages tells us that POc did retain *NML ŋa CLF as a productive numeral classifier
structure. Admiralties and Micronesian languages have NML CLF order, reflecting POc
*NML ŋa CLF, but less obviously than in Table 14.2.

    Table 14.3 shows Ponam (Adm) tens, hundreds and a small sample of classifiers.9 There
are indicators that the items in the table reflect POc *NML ŋa CLF. First, -ŋuf ‘10’ and -ŋat
‘100’ reflect POc *ŋa puluq and *ŋa Ratus, although *ŋa is not reflected in columns D–G.
Ponam (Adm) numerals reflecting POc *ŋa and a sample of classifiers.

[7] The origin of intrusive ka- is not known.

[8]  =puŋu ‘oblong object’; -wala ‘thin flat object’.

[9]  Other than tens and hundreds, classifiers in Ponam and other Admiralties languages are not used with
     numerals above 4.

                                                       Numerals, classifiers and counting 443

: Table 14.3      Ponam (Adm) numerals reflecting POc *ŋa and a sample of classifiers

__table__
            A             B         C           D             E           F           G
                                            heaps of
          1–4      tens        hundreds                   bundles    branches    fish hooks
                                            coconuts
     1   si        sa-ŋuf      sa-ŋat      sa-hum        sa-bis       sa-kal     sa-kau
     2   luo-f     lu-ŋuf      lo-ŋat      lo-hum        lo-bis       lo-kal     lo-kau
     3   talo-f    tulu-ŋuf    tulu-ŋit    tulu-hum      tulu-bis     tulu-kel   tulu-kau
     4   fa-f      fa-ŋuf      fa-ŋat      fa-hum        fa-bis       fa-kal     fa-kou

    Second, the structure of tens and hundreds in columns B and C is identical to that of
classifiers in columns D–G. The Ponam situation is reflected across Admiralties subgroups.

    Micronesian classifiers are exemplified in §14.1.1 and are well described in the various
grammars of Micronesian languages. The situation resembles that of Admiralties languages.
The ligature *ŋa is preserved in PMic *-ŋawulu ‘unit of ten (in counting)’ and PChk
*-ŋa-ratu ‘thousand (numeral classifier)’ (Bender et al. 2003a; cf data in §14.4.5.1). It is
not obviously inherited in Micronesian forms with other classifiers, but *ŋa is sometimes
reflected in a prenasalisation of the following classifier: see under POc *-tau ‘animate;
person’ (§14.6.1) and POc *-pui ‘bunch, group’ (§14.6.2).

    Finally, *ŋa is alive and well in certain Polynesian languages.Table 14.4 shows classifiers
used in the Tongan reflex of the POc *NML ŋa CLF structure. Column A shows the numerals
1–4. Columns B and C show that the structure of 10–40 and 100-400 is identical to that of the
enumerative classifiers in columns D–G. Thus -fulu ‘unit of 10’ and -au ‘unit of 100’ are also
multiplicative classifiers. One apparent anomaly is ho-ŋo-fulu ‘10’, which retains the
structure of PPn *ha-ŋa-pulu ‘10’ where the other classifiers in the row have replaced *ha-
ŋa- with the PPn non-specific article *te-.

    It would be possible to build a similar table for Samoan or for Rennellese, and each
would show the same thing: that PPn *-fulu ‘unit of 10’ (§14.4.5.1) and *-rau ‘unit of
100’ (§14.6.4) were enumerative classifiers. Together, the Admiralties, Micronesian and
Polynesian data show that the POc *NML ŋa CLF structure was productive and that *-puluq
and *-Ratus were, and in some languages still are, multiplicative classifiers.

: Table 14.4   Tongan (Pn) classifiers reflecting PPn *ŋa

__table__
            A             B        C            D             E         F           G
                                                                  tens of
                                           scores of    tens of               tens of
           1–4 tens            hundreds                           scores of
                                           coconuts     scores of             fathoms
                                                                  yam
                                                        coconuts              high or deep
                                                                  piecesa
     1 taha ho-ŋo-fulu         te-au       te-kau      te-fua      te-fuhi     te-kumi
     2 ua   uo-fulu            ue-ŋe-au    ue-ŋa-kau uo-fua        uo-ŋo-fuhi uo-ŋo-kumi
                                                                   tolu-ŋo-    tolu-ŋo-
     3 tolu tolu-ŋo-fulu tolu-ŋe-au        tolu-ŋa-kau tolu-fua
                                                                   fuhi        kumi
     4 fā       fā-ŋo-fulu     fā-ŋe-au    fā-ŋa-kau fā-fua        fā-ŋo-fuhi fā-ŋo-kumi
a
    For planting.

444 Malcolm Ross


   Map 14.2. Bound classifiers in the SW Pacific
   Map 14.2
   Bound classifiers in the SW Pacific

                                                            Numerals, classifiers and counting 445


14.3.2   The CLASSIFIER + NUMERAL structure

This, however, is not the whole story. There is evidence that alongside the *NML ŋa CLF
structure POc also had a *CLF NML structure. Evidence for this comes from SHWNG
languages, Oceanic languages with this structure, and especially Polynesian.

    The SHWNG languages Buli (Maan 1951:42), Taba (Bowden 2001:242–245), Ambel
(Arnold 2018:159–161) and Magey Matbat (Remijsen 2010:287–290), all have CLF NML
order.10 None has a reflex of *NML ŋa CLF. Rongga (Arka 2008) and Waima’a (Himmelmann
2010:56), CMP languages of Wallacea and cousins to SHWNG also have a CLF NML structure.
But as shown in §14.3.1 not all CMP languages have CLF NML. Some reflect *NML ŋa CLF This
implies that the CLF NML structure was innovated somewhere in the CEMP linkage and was
inherited into POc. The origin of CLF NML seems straightforward. As most prefixed classifiers
reflect earlier nouns (§14.6), CLF NML reflects the regular noun-phrase order noun NML.

    For classifiers other than ‘unit of 10’ and ‘unit of 100’ non-Polynesian Oceanic
languages retain either CLF NML or NML [*ŋa] CLF, but not both. The classifier precedes the
numeral in some Papuan Tip11 a few Meso-Melanesian,12 and all New Caledonian
languages. This distribution is strikingly areal, as Map 14.2 shows. In the north a classifier
follows the numeral. In the south it precedes it.

    Blust (2013:284–285) briefly discusses ‘onset runs’ in numerals. These are runs of
numerals that begin with the same segment or syllable. He includes Buma (TM) tilu ‘2’,
tete ‘3’, teva ‘4’, tili ‘5’, tuo ‘6’, tibi ‘7’, tua ‘8’, tudi ‘9’ and Mwotlap (NCV) voyo ‘2’,
vetel ‘3’, vevɛt ‘4’. He comments that they result from prefixation of unknown
morphemes. In these two cases it seems likely that they reflect prefixation of a no longer
productive classifier: *tau- ‘human being’ in Buma, and the default classifier *pua- in
Mwotlap (§14.6.1). Fossilised prefixes on simple numerals are rife in the southern
prefixing area, stretching from New Ireland in the north to the southernmost languages of
Vanuatu (Map 14.2).

14.3.3 A conclusion

On this evidence it is difficult to avoid the untidy conclusion that POc retained both the
*NML [ŋa] CLF structure and the *CLF NML structure, and that various languages either (i)
generalised CLF NML, but usually retained NML ŋa CLF in counting tens and hundreds; or
(ii) generalised NML ŋa CLF; or (iii) lost numeral classifiers altogether.

    Some Polynesian languages are striking in that they retain both structures. In this
respect they form a relic area which supports the claim that POc also had both structures.
Clark (1999) reconstructs both structures for PPn, and an inspection of Tongan, Samoan
and Rennellese data confirms this.13 It evidently continued the POc situation. Unlike
Admiralties and Micronesian, where all counting is done with a classifier, PPn classifiers
were only used to count certain nouns associated with what Elbert (1988:192) terms
“planting, fishing, and ostentatious display”. If a classifier was used with a numeral to
express a number less than 10, then CLF NML order was used. For example, PPn *toka-
‘human’ (Clark 1999:198) was used to count people up to 9, e.g. *toka-rua ‘two (people)’.
For quantities of 10 and above, either structure might be used, depending on what one was
counting. Exactly how this division of labour worked in PPn is unclear, as languages of the
two first-order Polynesian groups, Tongic and Nuclear Polynesian, do not always agree. But
one thing is clear: when PPn used the NML CLF structure, the classifier was always
enumerative (§14.1.1), denoting a multiple of the thing counted.

[10] Buli and Taba belong to the South Halmahera subgroup, Ambel and Magey Matbat to Raja Ampat. The
     SHWNG languages of Cenderawasih Bay have lost numeral classifiers.

[11] Sudest, Nimoa, Kilivila group, Central Papuan group.

[12] Nakanai, Buka/N Bougainville group.

[13] Data sources are Churchward (1953:171–189) for Tongan, Mosel & Hovdhaugen (1992:246–250) for
     Samoan, and Elbert (1988:186–200) for Rennellese.

446 Malcolm Ross


14.4 Reconstructing cardinal numerals: serial, attributive, and predicative

Cardinal numerals (‘one’, ‘two’, ‘three’ etc) are reconstructed in §14.4.1–14.4.4. They are
used in two ways. In serial counting, the speaker says the numbers one after the other in
sequence. When a numeral is used for quantification it is either attributive or predicative.
An attributive numeral forms part of a noun phrase (e.g. two houses, twelve pigs). A
predicative numeral is a predicate, as in We are two in the sense ‘There are two of us’.

    It seems probable that POc serial counting was done with plain root forms, as in
Mussau and in Micronesian languages. In their quantifying function POc simple decimal
numerals above ‘one’ seem to have functioned both attributively and predicatively. From
the perspective of POc grammar, this is uncontroversial. POc had very few adjectives
(Ross 1998a), and most properties were encoded as verbs, simply appearing unaffixed
when attributive. However, it seems that POc attributive numerals either formed a class of
their own or were a quantifier subclass, as they took the prefix *ka- when they occurred
attributively, as in (12), and perhaps occurred before the noun they quantified.

12)   a. Mussau (Adm)
         ko-tolu olimo namū
         ATTRIB-3 canoe big
         ‘three big canoes’ (Brownie & Brownie 2007:51)
      b. Ughele (MM, New Georgia group)
         ka      made vineki meke ka         rua koreo
         ATTRIB 4       girls and ATTRIB 2 men
         ‘four girls and two men’ (Frostad 2012:59)
      c. Kwamera (SV, Tanna)
         nimʷa kəru
         house 2          ‘two houses’ (Lindstrom & Lynch 1994:16)

In the cognate set below, most reflexes of *ka- are fossilised, i.e. they occur as part of the
cardinal numeral regardless of its function. There are many languages where *ka- is
reflected as the first element only of ‘one’. These instances are excluded here, as they
appear to reflect a distinct but homophonous morpheme participating in some of the many
forms for ‘one’ either alone or as their first syllable (§14.4.1).

<
POc *ka- [ATTRIBUTIVE]
 Adm: Mussau       |ɣa-, ka-, ko-| [ATTRIB] (ɣa-: 2, 4-9; ka- 1, 10; ko- 3) (Brownie & Brownie 2007:48–51)
 MM: Tangga        ka-           [SERIAL] (all) (Maurer 1966:74)
 MM: Vaghua        ka-           [FOSSIL] (1–9)
 MM: Varisi        ka-           [FOSSIL] (1–9)
 MM: Simbo         ka-           [FOSSIL] (1–3, 8)
 MM: Kubokota      ka-           [ATTRIB] (4–9) (Chambers 2009:84)
 MM: Roviana       ka-           [FOSSIL] (2)
 MM: Ughele        ka-           [ATTRIB] (all; also SERIAL with 1-2) (Frostad 2012:58)
 MM: Marovo        ka-           [FOSSIL] (2)
 MM: Vangunu       ka-           [FOSSIL] (2)
 MM: Mbareke       ka-           [FOSSIL] (2, 4–9)
 NCV: Tamambo      a-            [FOSSIL] (1–9; W dialect ɣa-)
 SV: Utaha         ka-           [FOSSIL] (2-3)
 SV: Lenakel       |ka-, ke-, kə-| [FOSSIL] (2-9)
 SV: Kwamera       |ka-, ku-, kə-| [FOSSIL] (2–5)
>

                                                        Numerals, classifiers and counting 447


   Blust’s (2013:284–285) discussion of ‘onset runs’ was mentioned in §14.3.2. One of the
runs Blust cites is Neve’ei (NCV) iru ‘2’, itl ‘3’, ifah ‘4’, ilim ‘5’. The i- prefix is a realis 3SG
subject marker. In neighbouring Neverver the paradigm is (Barbour 2012:157):

13)        REALIS IRREALIS
      2    i-ru     ib-ru
      3    i-tl     ibi-tl
      4    i-vas    iʙ-was
      5    i-lim    ib-lim

The fact that there is a realis/irrealis contrast shows (a) that these numerals are (stative)
verbs; and (b) that syntactically they are the predicates of relative clauses rather than
attributives. The phrase in (14) is more literally translated as ‘small bows of theirs that are
two’:

14)   nivis-bratn lele titi-dr i-ru
      bow-real small P:3-PL 3REALIS:SG-two
      ‘two small bows of theirs’ (Barbour 2012:157)

In a number of Oceanic languages predicative numerals with realis prefixes have been
reanalysed as attributives, with fossilised i- , e- or (in SW Santo) mo-.

14.4.1 One

Oceanic languages display a plethora of forms for ‘one’. This is an exception to the claim
that, across language families, numerals 1 to 5 are slow to change relative to both other
numerals and to basic lexicon (Pagel, Atkinson & Meade 2007; Pagel & Meade 2018).
Previous accounts have tended to gloss over this.

   Where a term for ‘one’ is known to be serial or attributive in function, this is shown
below. Where a form is glossed ‘a’ or ‘some’ or marked as an indefinite article, this tells us
that it is used attributively, but does not necessarily mean that there is a distinct serial
form.

448 Malcolm Ross


14.4.1.1 *sa-, *sa, *tasa, *tasi and *ta

Some nouns always took a numeral + classifier combination as an attribute, and others
took a simple numeral (§14.3). In the former case, the attribute was *sa-CLF. In the latter
case, the attributive marker *ka- (§14.4) was possibly used, but we cannot be sure that it
occurred with ‘one’. POc *(i)sa ‘one’ is also reflected as the PPn indefinite article *sa
(ACD), which, with an irregular vowel change, became Proto Nuclear Polynesian *se
(Clark 1976:50).14 Thus POc *(i)sa was attributive, hovering between a numeral and an
indefinite article.

   PNCV *sa-wa is included under *(i)sa because it seems to be a local development in
more northerly areas of Vanuatu. Added *-wa, sense unknown (perhaps POc *pua-
DEFAULT CLASSIFIER), also occurs in *tai-wa, in an overlapping area. N-C Vanuatu terms
often reflect further additions.

<
PAn *isa, *esa, *asa ‘one’ (ACD)
POc *(i)sa ‘one’ (attributive); (?) [INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
  NNG: Mangap              sa                 ‘some’
  NNG: Barim               sa                 ‘some’
  NNG: Amara               so                 ‘some’
  NNG: Lamogai             (i)sa              ‘one’; ‘some’
  PT:    Gapapaiwa         sa(go)             ‘one’; ‘another’
  PT:    Boanaki           sa(go)             ‘one’
  MM: Nakanai              (i)sa-sa           ‘one’
  SES: Owa                 ta                 ‘one’
  NCV: Rano                sa                 ‘one’
PNCV *sa-wa ‘one’
  NCV: Sa                  su                 ‘a’; ‘one’
  NCV: N Ambrym            hu                 ‘one’
  NCV: Orkon               ho(l)              ‘one’
  NCV: Daakaka             swa                ‘one’
  NCV: Lonwolwol           hu                 ‘one’
  NCV: Lendamboi           sua                ‘one’
  NCV: Unua                soɣa               ‘one’
  NCV: Maskelynes          sua                ‘one’; [SPECIFIC ARTICLE]
Proto N Malakula *sa-ɣa-l ‘one’
  NCV: Malua Bay           sxa(l)             ‘one’
  NCV: Tirax               haxa(l)            ‘a’; ‘one’
  NCV: Navwien             (i)saɣa(l)         ‘one’
Proto CW Malakula *sava[ɣ,m] ‘one’
  NCV: Neve’ei             sava(ɣ)            ‘one’
  NCV: Neverver            (i)sɣa(m)          ‘one’
  NCV: Avava               sap(m)             ‘a’; ‘one’
  NCal: Tinrin             sā                 ‘one’
  NCal: Xârâcùù          ʃā                ‘one’
  Mic: Kosraean          so(ko)            ‘other’
  Mic: Pulo Annian       de-               ‘one’
PPn *sa [INDEFINITE ARTICLE] (Clark 1976:50)
  Pn:    Tongan          ha                [INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
  Pn:    Niue            ha                [SINGULAR INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
PNPn *se [INDEFINITE ARTICLE] (Clark 1976:50)
  Pn:    E Futunan       se                [INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
  Pn:    Rennellese      he                [SINGULAR, NON-SPECIFIC ARTICLE]
  Pn:    Pukapukan       e                 [INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
  Pn:    Hawaiian        he                [INDEFINITE ARTICLE]
>

[14] Pawley (1966:53) and Clark (1999:197) treat PNPn *se ‘non-specific determiner’ as historically distinct
     from *sa ‘one’. Out of convenience Clark’s earlier hypothesis is adopted here.

                                                      Numerals, classifiers and counting 449


   It seems reasonable to associate a serial form *ta-sa with the above.

<
POc *ta-sa ‘one’ (serial) (PEOc: Pawley 1972:52; ACD)
Proto Kilivila *-ta-za ‘one’
  PT: Kilivila        -tala          ‘one’
  PT: Muyuw           -(i)tan        ‘one’
  PT: Gawa            -tara          ‘one’
  PT: Gumawana        ta-ya[mo]      ‘one’ (-mo ‘only’)
  MM: Vitu            taða           ‘some’
  MM: Meramera        tasa           ‘one’
  MM: Roviana         tasa           ‘one’ (serial)
  MM: Gao             tasa           ‘one’
  MM: Kokota          taho           ‘one’ (serial, archaic)
Proto Tongic *taha ‘one; another’
  Pn:     Tongan      taha               ‘one; someone, anyone; person; other, another’
  Pn:     Niue        taha               ‘one, any, an; singly, by itself; another’
  Pn:     Niuafo’ou   taha               ‘one’
>

Clark (1999) takes PNPn *tasi to be an idiosyncratic development from PPn *tasa, and these
forms are listed below with apparent cognates that may imply POc *ta-si.

__formgroup__
 SJ:    Yamna         tes                ‘one’
 SJ:    Sobei         tesesesi           ‘one’
 NCV: Uripiv (Atchin) (i)tes             ‘one’ (SERIAL)
 NCV: Namakir         (i)teh             ‘one’
PNPn *tasi ‘one’
 Pn: Samoan           tasi               ‘one’
 Pn: Tuvalu           tasi               ‘one’
 Pn: Rennellese       tasi, tahi         ‘one’
 Pn: Ifira-Mele       tasi               ‘one’
 Pn: E Futuna         tasi               ‘one’
 Pn: Tikopia          tasi               ‘one’
 Pn: Rapanui          tahi               ‘one’
 Pn: Hawaiian         kahi, (ʔe)kahi     ‘one’
 Pn: Mangareva        (e)tai, taʔi       ‘one’
 Pn: Marquesan        tahi               ‘one’
 Pn: Maori            tahi               ‘one’


450 Malcolm Ross


   It is very probable that the *ta of *ta-sa reflected a PAn indefinite article, the origin of
which is briefly discussed in Lynch, Ross & Crowley (2002:71). This raises the question of
how *sa and *ta differed. The one clue is that *sa was a numeral that in some languages was
reinterpreted as an indefinite article, whereas the reinterpretation of *ta seemingly moved in
the opposite direction. Another possibility is that *sa was a non-specific indefinite article, and
*ta specific indefinite (in keeping with its earlier case-marking function).

   In many of the forms listed below, the reflex of *ta is followed by one or more
apparently monosyllabic morphemes. Some suffixed forms, reflecting PPT *-mo, *-qa and
*-moqa, evidently meant ‘only’. If *ta was indeed the indefinite article, then these forms
may have specified that its meaning in this context was ‘one’. With reasonable confidence,
final -n or -na is a singular marker reflecting POc *-ña, which, suffixed to an attributive
adjective, marked a noun phrase as singular.

<
POc *ta (?) ‘one’ (INDEFINITE ARTICLE)
  NNG:  Bariai              (e)ta            ‘some, any’
  NNG:  Mbula               ta               ‘one’
  NNG:  Mbula               tata(ŋa)         ‘a few’
  NNG:  Barim               ta               ‘one’
  NNG:  Sengseng            ta               ‘one’
  NNG:  Wogeo               ta               ‘one’
  NNG:  Yabem               ta(gɛŋ)          ‘one’
  NNG:  Yabem               ta-ɛŋ, tɛŋ       ‘a, some’
PPT *ta ‘one’
Proto Sudest-Nimoa *-ta[ɣa] ‘one’
  PT:   Sudest              ra, re(ɣa)       ‘one’
  PT:   Nimoa               -ta(ga)          ‘one’
  PT:   Misima              (e)te(ga)        ‘one’
Proto North Mainland/D’Entrecasteaux *ta-mo[qa]- ‘one’
  PT:   Gumawana            ta-ya(mo)        ‘one’
  PT:   Yamalele            (ʔai)ta(moga-na) ‘one’ (ʔai < POc *kai- CLF)
  PT:   Ubir                (kai)ta(mom)     ‘one’ (kai < POc *kai- CLF)
  PT:   Doga                ta(mo-na)        ‘one’
  PT:   Minaveha            (ai)ta(mo(ata))  ‘one’ (ai < POc *kai- CLF)
  PT:   Wedau               ta(gogi)         ‘one’
  PT:   Suau (Bonalua)      ta(ya)           ‘one’
Proto Central Papuan *ta ‘one’
  PT:   Sinaugoro (Taboro)  ta               ‘one’
  PT:   Motu                ta, ta(mo-na)    ‘one’
  PT:   Roro                ha(momo)         ‘one’
  MM:   Bola                ta(ku)           ‘one’
  MM:   E Kara              ta               ‘one’
  NCV:  Bierebo             ta               ‘one’
  NCV:  Lewo                ta(ŋa)           ‘one’
Proto New Caledonia *tta ‘one’
  NCal: Voh-Koné            θā               ‘one’
  NCal: Paicî               cā-              ‘one’
  NCal: Ajië                ra               ‘one’
>

                                                        Numerals, classifiers and counting 451



14.4.1.2 Constituent monosyllables

In §14.4.1.3 below are listed other widely attested forms for ‘one’. Taken together with the
forms reconstructed above, it becomes obvious that across Oceanic ‘one’ is often either one
of the monosyllables in (15) or a disyllable made up of two of them. The monosyllables form
a pattern.

15)   *sa      *si      *sai
      *ta      *ti      *tai
      *ka      —        *kai

Of the monosyllables in (15) all but *si occur alone as ‘one’. Initial *si- and *ti- tend to
occur in the same combinations as *sa- and *ta-, suggesting that at various times and
places *si- and *sa- have been in an allomorphic or allophonic relationship, and so have
*ti- and *ta-. Final *-si occurs only in *ta-si, an apparent variant of *ta-sa, discussed
above. Final *-ka only occurs in contexts in which *-kai also occurs, so they too are
treated as one morpheme. This leaves us with the monosyllables in the lefthand column of
(16), which also shows the disyllables formed from them. Disyllables that occur only once
in the data or only in a small closely knit subgroup are excluded. Bolded forms are those
reconstructed in §14.4.1.1.

16)   *sa      …           …         *sa-kai
      *sai     *sai-sa     …         …
      *ta      *ta-sa      …         *ta-kai
      *tai     *tai-sa     …         …
      *ka      …           *ka-ti    …
      *kai     *kai-sa     …         *kai-kai

   POc disyllables tend to have at most three moras, and out of the nine possible 4-mora
forms to which *sai, *tai and *kai could give rise, only the reduplicate *kai-kai is
putatively attested.

   This still gives far more forms for ‘one’ than are expected in a single language. Can this
be explained? Several factors may contribute to this situation. One is perhaps that an
independent morpheme should have a minimum of two moras. One strategy for achieving
this with single-mora reflexes of *sa, *ta or *ka is to add a morpheme meaning ‘only’, as
noted in §14.4.1.1. When two of the monosyllables in (15) join to form a term for ‘one’ in
(16), the second was perhaps being used in the sense of ‘only’.


452 Malcolm Ross


   Some reflexes of POc *sa and *ta (§14.4.1.1) also function as indefinite articles. The
semantic distinction between attributive ‘one’ and an indefinite specific article is small. In
My sister married a handsome man, the phrase a handsome man refers to an individual
known to the speaker, just as one person does in Only one person came to my party. But it
is only a short move from here to My sister wants to marry a handsome man or I’ll meet
one boy tonight, where a and one may refer to a specific individual or to an indefinite
member of the class ‘man’/‘boy’. Possibly the semantic links from ‘one’ to a specific
article and from there to an indefinite article are enough to bring about the coining of
disyllabic forms as a means of disambiguation.

    Another explanation lies in marking the serial/attributive distinction (§14.4). The POc
proclitic *sa- ‘one’ was clearly attributive, as it was used with classifiers (§14.4.1.1). The
corresponding serial form was perhaps *ta-sa. The serial/attributive distinction can be
reconstructed with reasonable certainty for two Oceanic subgroups: Proto Southeast Solomonic *kesa ‘one
(serial)’ (< *kai-sa) vs Proto Southeast Solomonic *sa-kai ‘one (attributive)’, and PMic *tai-sa ‘one (serial)’ vs
PMic *te- ‘one (attributive)’ (Bender et al. 2003a).

    Reconstructing forms that are monosyllables or are constructed from them (see below)
is tricky in any event, as there is an increased probability that homophonous forms have
different origins. A case in point is initial *kai-. It may be the *kai- in (15); or it may
reflect the classifier for long rigid objects *kai- (§14.6.1).

14.4.1.3 Other widely attested forms for ‘one’

This subsection contains forms that are widely enough attested to imply a reconstruction.
‘Widely enough attested’ means that they have reflexes on both sides of the Near/Remote
Oceanic boundary (§1.4.4.2). The disyllables in (16) are certainly not all of POc antiquity,
and it is likely that the same morpheme sequences have been innovated independently in
various times and places. They are presented here because organising the data in this way
indicates what is there, and suggests future research.

14.4.1.3.1 *tai and *tai-

Forms reflecting *tai are so widespread that this appears to have been a standalone POc
form for ‘one’. It is perhaps an extended form of *ta (§14.4.1.1), but the function of added
*-i is not known. As mentioned above, there are various local additional syllables.

<
POc *tai ‘one’
PWAd *tai- ‘one’
  Adm: Kaniet              tē-              ‘one’
  Adm: Seimat              te-              ‘one’
  Adm: Wuvulu              ai               ‘one’ (serial)
  Adm: Wuvulu              e-               ‘one’ (attributive)
  SJ:  Kayupulau           tai              ‘one’
  SJ:  Tobati              tei              ‘one’
  NNG: Sio                 tai(tu)          ‘one’
  NNG: Kaulong             te(hen)          ‘one’
  NNG: Gedaged             tai              ‘one’
  NNG: Kairiru             tai              ‘one’; ‘some (uncountable)’
  NNG: Numbami             te               ‘a’
  NNG: Hote                te               ‘a’
  PT:  Miniafia            tai(mon)         ‘one’
  PT:  Kakabai             te(gana)         ‘one’
  PT:  Sinaugoro (Balawaia) te(bona)        ‘one’
  TM:  Engdewo             ɞte              ‘one’ (attributive)
  TM:  Engdewo             tete             ‘one’ (serial)
  TM:  Natügu              tesə             ‘one’ (serial) (< *tai-sa)
  TM:  Nebao               tua              ‘one’ (< *tai-wa ?)
  NCV: NE Ambae            te(a)            ‘one’ (serial)
  NCV: Merei               (e)se            ‘one’
  NCV: Araki               (he)se           ‘one’
  NCV: Mavea               te(a)            ‘one’
  NCV: Tamambo             (a)te(a)         ‘one’
  NCV: SE Ambrym           tei              ‘one’
  NCV: Paamese             tāi              ‘one’
  NCV: Lewo                tai              ‘a, some’ (INDEFINITE ARTICLE)
  NCV: Lewo                tā(ga)           ‘one’; ‘the same’ (attributive)
PNCV *te-wa[le] ‘one’
  NCV: Toga                tuwe             ‘one’
  NCV: Vurës (Mosina) (ni)tiwia(l)          ‘one’
  NCV: Mwotlap             (VI)tiwa(ɣ)      ‘one’
  NCV: Mota                tuwa(le)         ‘one’
  NCV: Baetora             tivʷa(le)        ‘one’
  NCV: NE Ambae            (ka)tewa(le)     ‘one’ (attributive)
  NCV: Raga                (ɣai)tuvʷa       ‘one’
  NCV: Sowa                tuwa(l)          ‘one’
  NCV: Valpei              tew              ‘one’
  NCV: Nokuku              tev              ‘one’
PMic *te- ‘one’ (attributive) (Harrison & Jackson 1984:66)
  Mic: Kosraean            se               ‘one’
  Mic: Kiribati            tēra             ‘one’ (serial) (< *tai-sa)
  Mic: Kiribati            te-              ‘one’ (attributive)
  Mic: Marshallese         ci-              ‘one’
  Mic: Chuukese            ēt               ‘one’ (serial) (< *tai-sa)
  Mic: Chuukese            e-, i-           ‘one’ (attributive)
  Mic: Puluwat             ye-              ‘one’ (attributive)
  Mic: Woleaian            yet              ‘one’ (serial) (< *tai-sa)
  Mic: Woleaian            se-              ‘one’ (attributive)
  Mic: Ponapean            ɛ̄t               ‘one’ (serial) (< *tai-sa)
  Mic: Ponapean            e-               ‘one’ (attributive)
>

                                                   Numerals, classifiers and counting 453



14.4.1.3.2 *sakai and *takai

   The morph *kai ‘one’ is fairly widely recorded with and without extensions in Western
Oceanic languages: e.g. NNG: Takia kai-k; Apalik ke; Poeng ke-na; PT: Tawala e-mosi;
Duau kai-geda; MM: Tigak kai; Babatana kə-ke; Roviana kɛ-ke (attributive); Kokota kaike
‘one’ (attributive) (cf. also *kai-sa; §14.4.1.3.3).

454 Malcolm Ross


   The two sets immediately below, *sa-kai and *ta-kai, appear to be parallel extensions
of *sa and *ta (§14.4.1.1). They are not assigned here to POc, as multiple independent
origins are possible.

*sa-kai ‘one’

<
Proto Bwaidoga *sa-qe-ana ‘one’
  PT:     Iduna           saʔey(ana), sey(ana) ‘one’ (< Proto Bwaidoga *sa-qe-ana)
  MM: Tungak              sikei            ‘one’ (SERIAL and ATTRIBUTIVE)
  MM: E Kara              saɣa             ‘one’
  TM: Asuboa              saka             ‘one’
  NCal: Xârâgurè          ʃaxā             ‘one’
Proto Southeast Solomonic *sa-kai ‘one’ (attributive)
  SES: Bugotu             sikei            ‘one’; ‘any, other’ (ATTRIBUTIVE)
  SES: Lengo              sakai            ‘one’
  SES: Tolo               cika, cikai      ‘one’
  SES: Longgu             teʔe             ‘one’ (ATTRIBUTIVE)
  SES: To’aba’ita         teʔe             ‘one’ (ATTRIBUTIVE)
  SES: Kwaio              teʔe             ‘one’ (ATTRIBUTIVE)
  SES: ’Are’are           taʔai            ‘one’
  NCV: Tape               (i)sig           ‘one’
  NCV: Nahavaq            (i)siʔ           ‘one’
  NCV: Namakir            siki(tek)        ‘one’
Proto Efate *si-kai ‘one’
  NCV: Nguna              sikai            ‘one’
  NCV: Lelepa             skei             ‘one’
  NCV: South Efate        (i)skei          ‘one’
  SV: Utaha               soɣoi            ‘one’
>

*ta-kai ‘one’; ‘other’

__formgroup__
  NNG: Dami           taka(le)            ‘one’
  NNG: Medebur        taka-na             ‘one’
  NNG: Medebur        taka(raka)          ‘other’
  NNG: Kairiru        taka(naŋ)           ‘other’
  NNG: Mumeng (Zenag) tika                ‘one’
  NNG: Piu            tika                ‘one’
  PT:   Nimoa (Rifao) -tia                ‘one’
  MM: Label           takai               ‘one’
  MM: Tolai           tikai               ‘one’
  MM: Tangga          tika, tike          ‘one’ (SERIAL; Maurer 1966:74)
  NCV: Naha’ai        (i)tɛx              ‘one’
  NCV: Avok           -ciki(nene)         ‘one’
  NCV: Nasvang        (i)cigai            ‘one’
  NCal: Ajië          rāxã̄                ‘one’
  NCal: Ôrôe          rakẽ                ‘one’


                                                  Numerals, classifiers and counting 455


14.4.1.3.3 *kaisa

*kai ‘one’ and its extensions are mentioned in §14.4.1.3.2. One of these forms, *kai-sa,
meets the ‘widely enough attested’ criterion (§14.4.1.3). Like *sakai and *takai, and for
the same reason, it is not assigned to POc.

*kai-sa ‘one’ (serial)

<
  NNG: Aria               kesa             ‘one, some’
  PT:     Are             kesa(na)         ‘one’
  MM: Tabar               kes              ‘one’
  MM: Madak               kes              ‘one’
  MM: Sursurunga          kes              ‘one’
  MM: Torau               kāsa             ‘one’
  MM: Gao                 kahe(ni)         ‘one’
  MM: Maringe             kaise(i)         ‘one’ (ATTRIBUTIVE)
  MM: Maringe             keha             ‘one’ (SERIAL)
Proto Southeast Solomonic *kesa ‘one’ (serial)
  SES: Bugotu             keha             ‘one’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Gela               keza             ‘one’
  SES: Ghari              kesa             ‘one’
  SES: Longgu             eta              ‘one’ (SERIAL)
  SES: To’aba’ita         eta              ‘one’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Arosi              eta              ‘one’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Owa                eta(ɣai)         ‘one’
  TM: Natügu              esə              ‘one’
>

14.4.2 From two to five

The inherited decimal numerals from 2 to 5 are reflected in so many Oceanic languages
that a cognate set of several pages could be mustered for each. Since reconstruction is
straightforward, only a sample from each small language group is given in the interests of
space.

14.4.2.1 Two

Below are reflexes of POc *rua ‘2’.

<
PAn *duSa ‘2’ (ACD)
PMP *duha ‘2’ (ACD)
POc *rua ‘2’ (ACD)
 Yap:  Yapese        ruw             ‘2’
 Adm:  Mussau        lua             ‘2’ (SERIAL)
 Adm:  Seimat        hũõ-hu          ‘2’
 Adm:  Aua           (e)rua(i)       ‘2’
 Adm:  Lou           rue(p)          ‘2’ (-p < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 Adm:  Ponam         luo(f)          ‘2’ (-f < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 SJ:   Kayupulau     to(ti)          ‘2’
 NNG:  Gitua         rua             ‘2’
 NNG:  Mbula         ru              ‘2’
 NNG:  Poeng         lua             ‘2’
 NNG:  Bilbil        ru              ‘2’
 NNG:  Manam         (o)ru           ‘2’
 NNG:  Bukawa        lú              ‘2’
 NNG:  Mapos Buang   lu              ‘2’
 NNG:  Numbami       luwa            ‘2’
 PT:   Sudest        -iwɔ            ‘2’
 PT:   Kilivila      -yu             ‘2’
 PT:   Dobu          (ʔe)rua         ‘2’
 PT:   Gapapaiwa     rua             ‘2’
 PT:   Motu          rua             ‘2’
 MM:   Vitu          rua             ‘2’
 MM:   Tabar         lua             ‘2’
 MM:   Sursurunga    ru              ‘2’
 MM:   Tangga        u               ‘2’
 MM:   Minigir       (i)ruə          ‘2’
 MM:   Petats        (hua)lu         ‘2’ (hua- < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 MM:   Mono-Alu      (e)lua          ‘2’
 MM:   Vaghua        (ka)rua         ‘2’ (ka- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
 MM:   Roviana       (ka)rua         ‘2’ (ka- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
 SES:  Gela          rua             ‘2; a partner’
 SES:  To’aba’ita    rua             ‘2’ (SERIAL)
 TM:   Äiwoo         (li)lu          ‘2’
 TM:   Buma          (ti)lu          ‘2’
 NCV:  Toga          (vi)ruə         ‘2’ (vi- < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 NCV:  NE Ambae      rue             ‘2’
 NCV:  Raga          rua             ‘2’
 NCV:  Araki         (mo)rua         ‘2’ (mo- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
 NCV:  Daakaka       lo              ‘2’
 NCV:  Paamese       (e)lu           ‘2’
 NCV:  Neverver      (i)ru           ‘2’ (i- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
 NCV:  Unua          (ɣe)ru          ‘2’ (ɣe- < POc *kai- CLASSIFIER)
 NCV:  Lewo          lua             ‘2’
 NCV:  Lelepa        rua             ‘2’
 SV:   Sye           (dru)ru         ‘2’
 SV:   Kwamera       (kə)ru          ‘2’ (kə- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
 SV:   Anejom        (e)rou          ‘2’
 NCal: Drehu         lue             ‘2’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa       -ru             ‘2’ (with prefixed classifier)
 Mic:  Nauruan       (a)ro, (a)ru-   ‘2’
 Mic:  Kosraean      luo             ‘2’ (incorporating default classifier)
 Mic:  Kiribati      uā              ‘2’ (SERIAL)
 Mic:  Kiribati      ua-             ‘2’ (with suffixed classifier)
 Mic:  Woleaian      ẓʉw             ‘2’ (SERIAL)
 Mic:  Woleaian      ẓʉwa-, ẓʉwe-    ‘2’(with suffixed classifier)
 Fij:  Wayan         rua             ‘2’
 Pn:   Tongan        ua              ‘2’
 Pn:   Samoan        lua             ‘2’
 Pn:   Rennellese    gua             ‘2; second; twice’
 Pn:   Hawaiian      lua             ‘2, second, secondary, twice; companion’
 Pn:   Mangarevan    lua             ‘2, second, secondary, twice; companion’
>

456 Malcolm Ross


                                                    Numerals, classifiers and counting 457



Formosan data in Li (2006) show that PAn formed numerals used with human beings by
*Ca- reduplication. There are indications that this survived into POc.

<
PAn *da-duSa ‘two, of people’ (ACD)
POc *ra-rua ‘two, of people’ (ACD)
  NNG: Takia             raru               ‘2’
  PT:   Motu             rarua              ‘2, of persons’
  SV: SW Tanna           |(kəlikəlip kə)lalu| ‘7’ (i.e. 5 + 2)
>

14.4.2.2 Three

Below are reflexes of POc *tolu ‘3’. Motu ta-toi ‘3 (of people)’ appears to reflect POc *ta-
tolu (< PAn *ta-telu; ACD) ‘3 (of people)’, but there are no other known Oceanic reflexes.

<
PAn *telu ‘3’ (ACD)
POc *tolu ‘3’ (ACD)
  Yap:  Yapese         ðali-p            ‘3’
  Adm:  Mussau         tolu              ‘3’ (SERIAL)
  Adm:  Seimat         tolu              ‘3’
  Adm:  Aua            olu(ai)           ‘3’
  Adm:  Lou            tılı(p)           ‘3’ (-p < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
  Adm:  Ponam          talo(f)           ‘3’ (-f < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
  SJ:   Kayupulau      toru              ‘3’
  NNG:  Gitua          tolu              ‘3’
  NNG:  Mbula          tɛl               ‘3’
  NNG:  Bilbil         toli              ‘3’
  NNG:  Manam          toli              ‘3’
  NNG:  Bukawa         tǿ                ‘3’
  NNG:  Mapos Buang    lɔ̄                ‘3’
  NNG:  Numbami        toli              ‘3’
  PT:   Sudest         -tɔ               ‘3’
  PT:   Kilivila       -tolu             ‘3’
  PT:   Dobu           (ʔe)toi           ‘3’
  PT:   Are            tonu              ‘3’
  PT:   Motu           toi               ‘3’
  MM:   Vitu           tolu              ‘3’
  MM:   Tungak         (a)tol            ‘3’
  MM:   Tabar          tour              ‘3’
  MM:   Sursurunga     tul               ‘3’
  MM:   Tangga         tul               ‘3’
  MM:   Minigir        (u)tulu           ‘3’
  MM:   Papapana       (tau)tonu         ‘3’ (tau- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
  MM:   Sisiqa         tulu              ‘3’
  MM:   Maringe        tilo              ‘3’
  SES:  Bugotu         tolu              ‘3’
  SES:  Birao          tolu              ‘3’
  SES:  To’aba’ita     ulu               ‘3’ (SERIAL)
  TM:   Natügu         tʉ                ‘3’
  TM:   Buma           (te)te            ‘3’
  NCV:  Toga           (və)təl           ‘3’ (və- < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
  NCV:  NE Ambae       tolu              ‘3’
  NCV:  Raga           tolu              ‘3’
  NCV:  Araki          (mo)rolu          ‘3’ (mo- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
  NCV:  Daakaka        sī                ‘3’
  NCV:  Paamese        (e)tel            ‘3’
  NCV:  Neverver       (i)tl             ‘3’ (i- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
  NCV:  Unua           (ɣe)teɾ           ‘3’ (ɣe- < POc *kai- CLASSIFIER)
  NCV:  Lewo           telu              ‘3’
  NCV:  Lelepa         tolu              ‘3’
  SV:   Sye            (dre)hel          ‘3’
  SV:   Kwamera        (ka)har           ‘3’ (ka- < POc *ka- ATTRIB)
  SV:   Anejom         (e)seɣ            ‘3’
  NCal: Nêlêmwa        -xan              ‘3’ (with prefixed classifier)
  NCal: Drehu          köni              ‘3’
  Mic:  Kosraean       tol(u)            ‘3’ (with default classifier)
  Mic:  Kiribati       tēn               ‘3’ (SERIAL)
  Mic:  Kiribati       teni-             ‘3’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic:  Pohnpeian      (e)sil            ‘3’ (SERIAL)
  Mic:  Pohnpeian      sili-             ‘3’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic:  Woleaian       yēl               ‘3’ (SERIAL)
  Mic:  Woleaian       yēri-             ‘3’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij:  Wayan          tolu              ‘3’
  Pn:   Tongan         tolu              ‘3’
  Pn:   Samoan         tolu              ‘3’
  Pn:   Rennellese     togu              ‘3’
  Pn:   Hawaiian       kolu              ‘3’
  Pn:   Mangarevan     toru              ‘3’
>

458 Malcolm Ross



14.4.2.3 Four

The numeral for ‘4’, POc *pat, reflects the loss of initial PMP *e- [ə-], reducing it to a
single syllable. There were very few monosyllabic roots in POc, and this probably
explains the emergence of the disyllabic doublet PEMP/POc *pati. John Lynch (pers.
comm., 8 October 2020) found languages of northwest Malakula where reflexes of both
co-occur in revealing contexts. The numerals 2–4 and 7–9 in Tape are as follows:

                                                      Numerals, classifiers and counting 459

__tablenh__
                           i-ru ‘2’          ci-ru      ‘7’
                           i-təl ‘3’         ci-təl     ‘8’
                           i-ves ‘4’         ce-vet     ‘9’

When the base-5 system emerged (see ch. 15), Lynch suggests, two forms coexisted: a reflex
of *pati and a reflex of *pat, conjoined to the ancestor of ce- to form ‘9’, and thus avoiding
monosyllabicity. Hence Tape -ves reflects *pati and -vet reflects *pat. When the base-5
system was created, i- had not yet been prefixed. It was presumably a 3sg pronominal,
reflecting a stage when numerals were verbs (§14.4). Lynch also draws attention to Big
Nambas -ð̼a ‘4’ and -sa-ð̼et ‘9’, with a history similar to that of Tape -ves and -vet.

    Among the reflexes of *pat below, Mussau, Numbami, Dobu, Vitu and Drehu each
regularly add a vowel after a final POc consonant, rendering the reflex disyllabic. Ponam,
Tungak, Tabar, Äiwoo, Buma, Sye, Lenakel, Kwamera and Nêlêmwa all add one or more
syllables of varying origin. The history of the remaining reflexes of *pat remains a matter
of conjecture.

<
PAn *Sepat ‘4’ (ACD)
PMP *epat ‘4’ (ACD)
PEMP *pat ‘4’ (ACD)
POc *pat ‘4’ (Lynch 1977b)
  Adm: Mussau          ata               ‘4’ (serial)
  Adm: Wuvulu          fa                ‘4’
  Adm: Ponam           fa(f)             ‘4’ (-f < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
  NNG: Bukawa          há(lè)            ‘4’
  NNG: Numbami         wata              ‘4’
  PT:  Nimoa           -pat              ‘4’
  PT:  Dobu            ata               ‘4’
  MM: Vitu             vata              ‘4’
  MM: Tungak           (a)puat           ‘4’
  MM: Tabar            (vo)vet           ‘4’
  MM: Sursurunga       hat               ‘4’
  TM: Äiwoo            (u)væ             ‘4’
  TM: Buma             (te)va            ‘4’
  SV: Sye              (dr)vat           ‘4’
  SV: Lenakel          (ku)vər           ‘4’ (ku- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
  SV: Kwamera          (ke)fa            ‘4’ (ke- < POc *ka-- ATTRIBUTIVE)
  NCal: Nêlêmwa        -vāk              ‘4’ (with prefixed classifier)
  NCal: Drehu          eke               ‘4’
  Mic: Nauruan         a-                ‘4’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Pohnpeian       pā-               ‘4’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij: Wayan           vā                ‘4’
  Pn:  Tongan          fā                ‘4’
  Pn:  Samoan          fā                ‘4’
  Pn:  Rennellese      hā                ‘4’
  Pn:  Hawaiian        hā                ‘4’
  Pn:  Mangarevan      ʔa                ‘4’
>

460 Malcolm Ross


   A number of the reflexes of *pati below reflect the unsurprising fact that at various times
and places reflexes of *pati have displaced those of *pat.

<
PCEMP *pati ‘4’ (ACD)
POc *pati ‘4’ (ACD; PEOc: Pawley 1972)
 NNG: Bilbil            pali                 ‘4’
 NNG: Manam             wati                 ‘4’
 PT:    Sudest          -varɨ                ‘4’
 PT:    Kilivila        -vasi                ‘4’
 PT:    Duau            -hasi                ‘4’
 PT:    Buhutu          fati                 ‘4’
 PT:    Sinaugoro       vasi-vasi            ‘4’
 MM: Tangga             fet                  ‘4’
 MM: Minigir            (i)vati              ‘4’
 MM: Taiof              fac                  ‘4’
 MM: Banoni             (to)vaci             ‘4’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
 MM: Mono-Alu           (e)hati              ‘4’
 MM: Vaghua             (ka)vac              ‘4’ (ka- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
 MM: Sisiqa             vati                 ‘4’
 MM: Maringe            fati                 ‘4’
 SES: Bugotu            vati                 ‘4’
 SES: Birao             vati                 ‘4’
 SES: To’aba’ita        fai                  ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 NCV: Toga              (və)vɛt              ‘4’ (və- < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 NCV: Mwotlap           (vı)vɛt              ‘4’ (vı- < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 NCV: NE Ambae          vesi                 ‘4’
 NCV: Raga              vasi                 ‘4’
 NCV: Merei             vat, vati            ‘4’
 NCV: Daakaka           vyer                 ‘4’
 NCV: Paamese           (e)hat               ‘4’
 NCV: Uripiv            (i)vij               ‘4’
 NCV: Neverver          (i)vas               ‘4’ (i- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
 NCV: Unua              (ɣe)vec              ‘4’ (ɣe- < POc *kai- CLASSIFIER)
 NCV: Lewo              vari                 ‘4’
 NCV: Lelepa            pati                 ‘4’
 SV: SW Tanna           (ku)as               ‘4’ (ku- < POc *ka- ATTRIBUTIVE)
 Fij:   Wayan           vati-                [PAUCAL PREFIX] (e.g. vati-keta ‘a few of us’)
>

   POc *paŋi ‘4’ appears to be a variant of POc *pati above, of unknown etiology. Motu has
a reduplicated form ha-hani ‘4, of persons’, formed by analogy with ra-rua ‘2, of persons’
and ta-tolu ‘3, of persons’ above.

                                                               Numerals, classifiers and counting 461

<
POc *paŋi ‘4’
 NNG: Gitua               paŋe                  ‘4’
 NNG: Mbula               paŋ                   ‘4’
 NNG: Apalik              peŋ                   ‘4’
 PT:  Motu                hani                  ‘4’
 PT:  Gabadi              vani                  ‘4’
 Mic: Kosraean            æŋ                    ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Kosraean            æ-                    ‘4’ (with suffixed classifier)
 Mic: Kiribati            aŋ                    ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Kiribati            a-                    ‘4’ (with suffixed classifier)
 Mic: Mokilese            (ɔ)pɔŋ                ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Pohnpeian           (ɛ)pɛŋ                ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Woleaian            faŋi                  ‘4’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Woleaian            fā-                   ‘4’ (with suffixed classifier)
>

14.4.2.4 Five

Terms for ‘5’ in Oceanic languages are usually derived from terms for ‘hand, arm’. The
most frequently reflected POc term is *lima, which meant ‘5; hand, arm’ (vol.5:160–161).
The colexification of the two concepts had survived from PAn and reflects much earlier
digit-tallying (probably pre-PAn) than the early Oceanic practice described in §15.2.
Reflexes of *lima are listed below.

   The reflexes listed under *lima are all regular, including those that reflect *l- as n- or
zero. The notes in parentheses after the items below show that in some languages the two
forms have diverged phonologically.15 But some instances of divergence are of another
kind. POc also had a variant *nima ‘5; hand, arm’ (vol.5:160) Its reflexes are listed
separately below. It seems, though, that in scattered languages *lima remained as ‘5’,
whilst the *nima variant became ‘hand, arm’. See Mussau, Sudest, Tangga and Äiwoo
below. The intriguing feature of the divergences is that it is the term ‘hand, arm’ that has
changed, not the term for ‘5’, presumably due to homophony avoidance.

<
PAn *lima ‘five, hand’ (ACD)
POc *lima ‘five’ (ACD)
 Adm: Mussau          lima             ‘5’ (serial; cf nima ‘hand, arm’)
 Adm: Ponam           lime(f)          ‘5’ (-f < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
 SJ:   Sobei          dim              ‘5’ (cf ima ‘hand, arm’)
 NNG: Bariai          lima             ‘5’
 NNG: Mbula           lama(ta)         ‘5’
 NNG: Aria            (e)lme           ‘5’(cf lim-la [hand-3SG] ‘her/his hand’)
 NNG: Poeng           lima             ‘5’
 NNG: Manam           lima             ‘5’ (cf luma- ‘hand, arm’)
 NNG: Bukawa          lím(dàŋ)         ‘5’ (dàŋ ‘1’)
 PT:  Sudest          -lima            ‘5’ (cf nima- ‘hand, arm’)
 PT:  Kilivila        -lima            ‘5’ (cf yama- ‘hand, arm’)
 PT:  Dobu            nima             ‘5’ (cf nima- ‘hand, arm’)
 PT:  Are             |nima (masiana)| ‘5’ (cf nima- ‘hand, arm’)
 PT:  Sinaugoro       ima              ‘5’ (cf ɣima- ‘hand, arm’)
 PT:  Motu            ima              ‘5’ (cf ima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Vitu            lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Tungak          (palpa)lima      ‘5’
 MM:  Tabar           (napari)riem     ‘5’ (cf rima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Sursurunga      lim              ‘5’
 MM:  Tangga          lim              ‘5’ (cf nima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Minigir         (i)limə          ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Petats          (to)lim          ‘5’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER; cf walima- ‘hand’)
 MM:  Banoni          (ɣi)nima         ‘5’ (numa- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Mono-Alu        līma             ‘5’ (ime- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Sisiqa          ləma             ‘5’
 MM:  Roviana         lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 MM:  Maringe         (fa)lima         ‘5’ (serial; fa- < POc *fa- ORDINAL)
 SES: Bugotu          lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 SES: Birao           lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 SES: To’aba’ita      lima             ‘5’ (serial)
 TM:  Äiwoo           (vi)li           ‘5’ (cf ñimæ ‘her/his hand’)
 TM:  Buma            (ti)li           ‘5’
 NCV: Toga            (təvɛ)limə       ‘5’
 NCV: Mwotlap         (tɪvɪ)lɪm        ‘5’
 NCV: NE Ambae        lime             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 NCV: Raga            lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 NCV: Merei           lima             ‘5’
 NCV: Araki           lin̼a             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 NCV: Daakaka         lim              ‘5’
 NCV: Paamese         (e)lim           ‘5’
 NCV: Uripiv          (e)lim           ‘5’
 NCV: Neverver        (i)lim           ‘5’ (i- REALIS 3SG SUBJECT)
 NCV: Unua            (ɣe)rima         ‘5’ (ɣe- < POc *kai- CLASSIFIER)
 NCV: Lewo            lima             ‘5’ (cf lima- ‘hand, arm’)
 NCV: Lelepa          lima             ‘5’
 SV:  Sye             (suk)rim         ‘5’
 SV:  Kwamera         (kə)ri-rum       ‘5’ (kə- < POc *ka- ATTRIB; cf rɨŋi- ‘hand, arm’)
 NCal: Nêlêmwa        -nem             ‘5’ (with prefixed classifier)
 NCal: Cèmuhî         ním              ‘5’
 Mic: Nauruan         (ai)yime(o)      ‘5’
 Mic: Kiribati        nīma             ‘5’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Kosraean        lʌm              ‘5’ (SERIAL)
 Mic: Pohnpeian       lim              ‘5’ (SERIAL; cf lime- ‘hand, arm’)
 Mic: Pohnpeian       lima-            ‘5’ (with suffixed classifier)
 Mic: Woleaian        rim              ‘5’ (SERIAL; cf rima- ‘hand, arm’)
 Mic: Woleaian        rima-            ‘5’ (with suffixed classifier)
 Fij: Bauan           lima             ‘5’ (cf liŋa- ‘hand, arm’)
 Fij: Wayan           lima             ‘5’ (SERIAL; cf -lima ‘hand, arm’)
 Pn:  Samoan          lima             ‘5; hand, arm’
 Pn:  Rennellese      gima             ‘5; hand, arm’
 Pn:  Hawaiian        lima             ‘5; hand, arm’
 Pn:  Mangarevan      rima             ‘5; hand, arm’
>

[15] Where there is no note, this usually means that *lima in the sense of ‘hand, arm’ has been replaced by some
     other term.

462 Malcolm Ross


                                                   Numerals, classifiers and counting 463


   The reflexes of *nima below all reflect both senses: ‘5’ and ‘hand, arm’. The North New
Guinea items all reflect *nima as ‘hand’ in the context of a digit-tally system (chapter 15),
and thus reflect more recent adoptions of *nima as ‘5’. For this reason, POc *nima is not
reconstructed with the sense ‘5’.

<
POc *nima- ‘hand, arm’ (vol.5:160)
 NNG: Gitua             |nima(da sirip)|     ‘5’ (nima- ‘hand’; -da ‘our’)
 NNG: Bilbil            nima(-nta)           ‘5’ (nima- ‘hand’; -nta ‘our’)
 NNG: Mapos Buang       nəma(d-vaʁi)         ‘5’ (vaʁi ‘a side’)
 NNG: Numbami           |nima (teula)|       ‘5’ (teula ‘one side’)
 SV: Anejom             nicma(n)             ‘5’ (cf nicma- ‘hand, arm’)
 Pn:  Tongan            nima                 ‘5; hand’
>

   Motu la-ima ‘5 (of people)’ reflects POc *la-lima (< PAn *la-lima) ‘5 (of people)’, but
there are no other known Oceanic reflexes.

14.4.3 From six to nine

Since numerous languages in NW Melanesia and Vanuatu have systems that include
base-5, i.e. they count ‘5 + 1’ for ‘6’ etc (§15.7), there are fewer reflexes of inherited
decimal 6–9 than of 2–5.

   Misima (PT) provides an unexplained phenomenon visible in the cognate sets below. It
uses its reflexes of the POc forms *onom ‘6’, *pitu ‘7’ and *siwa ‘9’ for the ‘wrong’
numbers: Misima e-won ‘7’, e-pit ‘8’, e-siwa ‘6’. The origin of e-wata ‘9’ is unclear: it
may reflect ‘4’, from an old 5 + 4 term.

14.4.3.1 Six

<
PAn *enem ‘6’ (ACD)
POc *onom ‘6’ (ACD)
  Adm: Mussau          [o]nomo          ‘6’ (serial)
  Adm: Baluan          (ŋ)ono-          ‘6’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Adm: Ponam           ono-f            ‘6’ (-f < POc *pua- DEFAULT CLASSIFIER)
  PT:   Sudest         -wɔna            ‘6’ (with prefixed classifier)
  MM: Nakanai          (i)uolo          ‘6’
  MM: Notsi (archaic)  wən              ‘6’
  MM: Sursurunga       won              ‘6’
  MM: Tangga           on               ‘6’
  MM: Label            uono             ‘6’
  MM: Petats           (to)nom          ‘6’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
  MM: Mono-Alu         onomo            ‘6’
  MM: Sisiqa           onomo            ‘6’
  MM: Roviana          onomo            ‘6’
  MM: Maringe          (fa)mno          ‘6’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Bugotu          ono              ‘6’
  SES: Birao           ono              ‘6’
  SES: To’aba’ita      ono              ‘6’
  SES: Owa             ono              ‘6’
  TM: Buma             (tu)o            ‘6’
  NCV: Raga            ono              ‘6’
  NCV: NE Ambae        ono              ‘6’
  NCV: Nokuku          on               ‘6’
  NCV: Nese            (ɣ)on            ‘6’
  Mic: Kosraean        on               ‘6’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Kosraean        on-              ‘6’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Kiribati        ono-             ‘6’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Pohnpeian       (o)un            ‘6’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Pohnpeian       wɛnɛ-            ‘6’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Woleaian        wor              ‘6’
  Mic: Woleaian        woro-, wore-     ‘6’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij: Wayan           ono              ‘6’
  Pn:  Tongan          ono              ‘6’
  Pn:  Samoan          ono              ‘6’
  Pn:  Rennellese      ono              ‘6’
  Pn:  Mangarevan      ono              ‘6’
>

464 Malcolm Ross


14.4.3.2 Seven

One ‘irregularity’ occurs in the cognate set reflecting POc *pitu ‘7’. Buma (TM) and a
number of N Vanuatu languages reflect *bitu rather than *pitu (Clark 2009:59, 83).

<
PAn *pitu ‘7’ (ACD)
POc *pitu ‘7’ (ACD)
  Adm: Mussau         itu          ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  PT:  Sudest         -pirɨ        ‘7’ (with prefixed classifier)
  PT:  Misima         (e)pit       ‘8’ (sic)
  PT:  Motu           hitu         ‘7’
  MM: Nakanai         -vitu        ‘7’
  MM: Notsi (archaic) it           ‘7’
  MM: Sursurunga      hit          ‘7’
  MM: Tangga          fis          ‘7’
  MM: Petats          (to)hit      ‘7’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
  MM: Mono-Alu        hitu         ‘7’
  MM: Sisiqa          vɛttu        ‘7’
  MM: Nduke           vitu         ‘7’
  MM: Maringe         fitu         ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Bugotu         vitu         ‘7’
  SES: Birao          vitu         ‘7’
  SES: To’aba’ita     fiu          ‘7’
  SES: Owa            piu          ‘7’
  TM: Buma            (ti)bi       ‘7’
  NCV: Raga           ᵐbitu        ‘7’
  NCV: NE Ambae       bitu         ‘7’
  NCV: Nokuku         pit          ‘7’
  NCV: Nese           (ɣo)dit      ‘7’
  Mic: Kosraean       it           ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Kosraean       it-          ‘7’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Kiribati       iti          ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Kiribati       itu-, iti-   ‘7’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      isi          ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      isu-         ‘7’(with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Woleaian       fis          ‘7’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Woleaian       fisu-        ‘7’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij: Wayan          vitu         ‘7’
  Pn:  Tongan         fitu         ‘7’
  Pn:  Samoan         fitu         ‘7’
  Pn:  Rennellese     hitu         ‘7’
  Pn:  Mangarevan     ʔitu         ‘7’
>

                                           Numerals, classifiers and counting 465


14.4.3.3 Eight

<
PAn *walu ‘8’ (ACD)
POc *walu ‘8’
  Adm: Mussau         ualu          ‘8’ (SERIAL)
  PT:   Sudest        -wa           ‘8’ (with prefixed classifier)
  MM: Nakanai         (i)valu       ‘8’
  MM: Notsi (archaic) wan           ‘8’
  MM: Sursurunga      wal           ‘8’
  MM: Tangga          wal           ‘8’
  MM: Label           wal           ‘8’
  MM: Petats          (to)al        ‘8’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
  MM: Mono-Alu        alu           ‘8’
  MM: Ririo           zɔl           ‘8’ (z- is accreted before an initial vowel)
  MM: Ughele          alu           ‘8’
  SES: Bugotu         alu           ‘8’
  SES: Birao          alu           ‘8’
  SES: To’aba’ita     kʷalu         ‘8’
  SES: Owa            waru          ‘8’
  TM: Buma            (tu)wa        ‘8’
  NCV: Raga           vʷelu         ‘8’
  NCV: NE Ambae       welu          ‘8’
  NCV: Nokuku         ɒlo           ‘8’
  NCV: Nese           (ɣ)oal        ‘8’
  Mic: Kosraean       ɒl            ‘8’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Kosraean       ɒl-           ‘8’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Kiribati       wani          ‘8’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Kiribati       wanu-         ‘8’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      (ɛ)wɛl        ‘8’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      walu-         ‘8’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Woleaian       war           ‘8’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Woleaian       wari-         ‘8’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij: Wayan          walu          ‘8’
  Pn:  Tongan         valu          ‘8’
  Pn:  Samoan         valu          ‘8’
  Pn:  Rennellese     bagu          ‘8’
  Pn:  Mangarevan     waru          ‘8’
>

466 Malcolm Ross


14.4.3.4 Nine

By regular sound change PAn *Siwa would have become PMP *(h)iwa, but, for reasons
discussed by Blust (1995a, 2013:728), *Siwa instead became PMP *siwa the form that
was inherited by POc.

<
PAn *Siwa ‘9’ (ACD)
POc *siwa ‘9’
  Adm: Mussau         sio              ‘9’ (SERIAL)
  PT:   Sudest        -siwɔ            ‘9’ (with prefixed classifier)
  MM: Bulu            rio              ‘9’
  MM: Notsi (archaic) ciu              ‘9’
  MM: Sursurunga      siu              ‘9’
  MM: Tangga          siw              ‘9’
  MM: Petats          (to)sia          ‘9’ (to- < POc *tau- HUMAN CLASSIFIER)
  MM: Banoni          visa             ‘9’ (metathesis)
  MM: Mono-Alu        ulia             ‘9’
  MM: Sisiqa          zia              ‘9’
  MM: Roviana         sia              ‘9’
  MM: Maringe         heva             ‘9’ (SERIAL)
  SES: Bugotu         hia              ‘9’
  SES: Birao          siu              ‘9’
  SES: To’aba’ita     sikʷa            ‘9’
  SES: Owa            siwa             ‘9’
  TM: Nebao           (wa)hia          ‘9’
  NCV: Raga           sivo             ‘9’
  NCV: NE Ambae       siwo             ‘9’
  NCV: Nokuku         ciwa             ‘9’
  NCV: Nese           (ɣɛ)sve          ‘9’
  Mic: Kosraean       yʌ               ‘9’
  Mic: Kiribati       rua-, ruai-      ‘9’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      (a)tu            ‘9’ (SERIAL)
  Mic: Pohnpeian      tuwa-            ‘9’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Mic: Woleaian       tiw              ‘9’
  Mic: Woleaian       tiwo-            ‘9’ (with suffixed classifier)
  Fij: Wayan          ðiwa             ‘9’
  Pn:  Tongan         hiva             ‘9’
  Pn:  Samoan         iva              ‘9’
  Pn:  Rennellese     iba              ‘9’
  Pn:  Hawaiian       iwa              ‘9’
  Pn:  Mangarevan     iva              ‘9’
>

                                                                  Numerals, classifiers and counting 467


14.4.3.5 Subtractive numerals 6–9

A few languages with a decimal system form the numerals 7–9 subtractively, i.e. 10–3,
10–2, 10–1. These languages are Yapese, all Eastern Admiralties languages, and Engdewo
(TM). A sample is shown in Table 14.5. Final -p in Lou, final -f in Ponam and final -h[u]
in Levei are the default classifier. Just one known language, Levei-Drehet, a pair of E
Admiralties dialects, also has a subtractive numeral for 6.

: Table 14.5         Languages in which 6-9 are formed subtractively

__table__
         Proto Oceanic Yapese             Lou (Adm)        Ponam (Adm) Levei (Adm)       Engdewo (TM)
    1    (see §14.4.1)   rēb              si-p             si              ōri           ɞte
    2    *rua            [l aɣa]ruw
                          ʔ
                                          ruɪ-p            luo-f           luo           la-lī
    3    *tolu           ðalip            tɪlɪ-p           talo-f          tolo-h        la-tǖ
    4    *pat[i]         ʔaniŋəɣ          talot            fa-f            hā-hu         lɒ-pʷɔ̄
    5    *lima           lāl              mutan            lime-f          līme          la-mɞp[u]
    6    *onom           nəl   ʔ
                                          ŋinio-p          wono-f          ja-hā-hu      la-mɞtimou
    7    (minus 3)       mē-ðalip         ŋane-seli-p      aha-talo-f      ja-dolo-h     tu-m(u)-tǖ
    8    (minus 2)       mē-ruk           ŋane-rue-p       aha-luo-f       ja-lue        tu-m(u)-lī
    9    (minus 1)       mē-rēb           ŋane-si-p        aha-se          ja-ʔeri       tu-m(u)-ɞte
    10 *sa-ŋapuluq       raɣāɣ            saŋaul           saŋu-f          rono          nɔpmu
    Source:              Jensen 1977 Stutzman 1994 Carrier 1981            Smythe 1975 Vaa 2013


14.4.4 Teens

In Oceanic languages that have terms for the teens, i.e. ‘11’, ‘12’, ‘13’ and so on, these
usually consist of the term for ‘10’, followed by the term for the digit, regardless of
whether either or both are mono- or polymorphemic. In some languages an ‘and’
conjunction intervenes, in others not. No reconstruction of these forms is attempted.

468 Malcolm Ross


14.4.5 Tens and hundreds

The structure of POc terms for tens and hundreds is discussed in §14.3.1 as part of an
examination of the structures in which numeral classifiers were used. Whereas the POc
numerals from 1 to 9 each consisted of a single morpheme, the tens and hundreds shown
in Table 14.1 were each made up of three morphemes with the structures *X-[ŋa-]puluq
‘X times 10’ and *X-[ŋa-]Ratus ‘X times 100’. It emerges that POc -puluq ‘unit of 10’ and
-Ratus ‘unit of 100’ were multiplicative classifiers within the *NML *ŋa CLF structure
inherited from PMP. The structure was clearly at least somewhat productive in POc as it
continued on into PPn, where apparently new members had been added to the set of
classifiers, e.g. PEOc *-rau ‘unit of 100’ (§14.6.4).

14.4.5.1 Reconstructing forms for tens and hundreds

   The data reveal that in POc *sa= and *ŋa= were separate morphemes, but were being
merged with the following classifier in some dialects by the time POc broke up, so that
*-puluq was replaced as ‘unit of 10’ by a reflex of either *-ŋapuluq or *saŋapuluq, or
occasionally *sapuluq.

   Evidence that POc *-ŋa- was a separate morpheme is seen in §14.3.1, where its Tongan
reflexes occur only sporadically with the numerals 2 and 3. Archaic Samoan (Mosel &
Hovdhaugen 1992:117) provides similar evidence: -ŋa- is missing after se- ‘one’ and lua-
‘2’ but present from tolu- ‘3’ onward:

17)                        ‘one’   ‘2’                   ‘3’
       tens:               se-fulu lua-fulu              tolu-ŋa-fulu
       scores of coconuts: se-aea lua-aea                tolu-ŋa-aea

   The vast majority of Oceanic decimal systems reflect *sa-ŋa-puluq and *sa-ŋa-Ratus,
but a small scattering of Western Oceanic languages reflects POc *sa-puluq ‘10’ and *sa-
Ratus ‘100’, witnessing to the POc separability of *ŋa and to the possibility that the
ancestral forms of ‘10’ and ‘100’ lacked *ŋa. The two sets below include all known
reflexes.

<
PAn *sa-puluq ‘10’ (ACD)
POc *sa-puluq ‘unit of 10’
  NNG: Bukawa            sàhúʔ                  ‘10’
  MM: Bola               ravulu                 ‘10’
  MM: Nakanai            |savulu (sa)|          ‘10’ (sa ‘one’)
  MM: Meramera           |savulu (tasa)|        ‘10’ (tasa ‘one’)
  MM: Taiof              |(a) safunu|           ‘10’ (a SINGULAR ARTICLE)
  MM: Torau              saunu                  ‘10’
cf. also:
  MM: Uruava             avūru                  ‘10’
  MM: Mono-Alu           lahulu                 ‘10’
  MM: Teop               |(peha) sāvun|         ‘10’ (peha ‘one’)
  Pn: Samoan             se-fulu                ‘10’
  Pn: Sikaiana           se-hui                 ‘10’
>

                                                                Numerals, classifiers and counting 469


Examples listed under ‘cf. also’ above are ‘false positives’: numerals that look as if they
might reflect *sa-puluq but which on closer examination either probably or certainly don’t.
Uruava avūru and Mono-Alu lahulu could reflect either *sapuluq or *saŋapuluq.16 Teop
sāvun seems to reflect *sapuluq rather than *saŋapuluq, as Teop does not regularly lose *ŋ
(but this does not explain long -ā-)

<
PMP *sa-Ratus ‘100’ (ACD)
POc *[sa]Ratus ‘100’
 MM: Nakanai           |salatu (sasa)|         ‘100’ (_sasa_ ‘one’)
cf. also:
Proto Northwest Solomonic *ratus ‘100’
  MM: Solos            natus                 ‘100’
  MM: Taiof            natus                 ‘100’
  MM: Banoni           raus                  ‘100’ (methathesis of †rasu)
  MM: Mono-Alu         lātu                  ‘100’
>

   Except for Bukawa, which is vigesimal from 20 upward, the languages that reflect *sa-
puluq treat it as ‘unit of 10’, i.e. they have generalised it to all decades, as Table 14.6 shows.

   Evidence that POc *sapuluq ‘10’ occurred alongside *saŋapuluq also includes the fact
that some WMP languages reflect a contrast between cognates of *sa-puluq ‘10’ and *rua-ŋa-
puluq ‘20’: Javanese sa=puluh but ro=ŋ puluh; Manggarai cə=pulu but sua m=pulu. A
tempting inference is that *sa-puluq and *sa-Ratus were the original POc forms and that
*sa-ŋa-puluq and *sa-ŋa-Ratus reflect an extension of the pattern of higher decades and
centades to ‘10’. This may be so, but we do not know when this extension occurred: before
POc or in POc?

   At any rate, a large majority of Oceanic reflexes reflect the longer forms. The sets
below are each just a sample of their reflexes. Certain groupings—North New Guinea,
Papuan Tip and Micronesian—are ill-represented, and an area from Epi Island (NCV)
southward embracing Efate, S Vanuatu and New Caledonia is not represented at all,
because these languages have adopted a tally system and replaced *sa[ŋa]pulu by another
lexical item (§15.8.2).

: Table 14.6 Tens with the structures sapuluq + NUMERAL and NUMERAL + sapuluq

__table__
                ‘10’                   ‘20’             ‘30’                ‘40’          ‘50’
      MM: Willaumez
      Bola      ravulu                 ravulu rua       ravulu tolu         ravulu va     ravulu lima
      Nakanai   savulu sasa            savulu lua       savulu tolu         savulu vā     savulu lima
      Meramera savulu tasa             savulu lua       savulu tolu         savulu hiva   savulu lima
      MM: NWS
      Taiof     a safunu               fuan safunu fopis safunu   fac safunu   ŋim safunu
      Torau     saunu                  e-rua saunu [e-pisa]-saunu e-wati saunu nima saunu

[16] Uruava has lost both *s and *ŋ, while Mono-Alu reflects *s as l and has lost *ŋ.

470 Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *|sa ŋa puluq| ‘10’ (ACD)
POc *|sa ŋa puluq| ‘10’
PAdm *saŋafulV ‘10’
  Adm: Mussau           saŋaulu        ‘10’
  Adm: Nauna            saŋahul        ‘10’
  Adm: Lou              saŋaul         ‘10’
  Adm: Loniu            (ma)soŋon      ‘10’
  Adm: Ponam            saŋuf          ‘10’
  NNG: Amara            soŋoul         ‘10’
  NNG: Kove             saŋaulu        ‘10’
  NNG: Maeng            |taŋauna (ta)|   ‘10’ (_ta_ ‘one’)
  SJ:   Sobei           snafut         ‘10’
  PT:   Tubetube        sanaulu        ‘10’
  PT:   Motu            ahui           ‘10’ (combination form)
  MM: Bali              zaŋavuluku     ‘10’
  MM: Tigak             saŋaulu(ŋ)     ‘10’
  MM: Notsi             səŋəul         ‘10’
  MM: Barok             saŋaun         ‘10’
  MM: Label             saŋahulu       ‘10’
  MM: Nehan             haŋaulu        ‘10’
  SES: Gela             haŋavulu       ‘10’
  SES: Lengo            ðaŋavulu       ‘10’
  SES: Longgu           taŋavulu       ‘10’
  SES: Lau              taŋafulu       ‘10’
  SES: Sa’a             taŋahulu       ‘10’
  SES: Arosi            taŋahuru       ‘10’
  TM: Buma              saŋaulu        ‘10’
  NCV: Mota             saŋavul        ‘10’
  NCV: NE Ambae         haŋavulu       ‘10’
  NCV: Raga             haŋvulu        ‘10’
  NCV: Abma             (te)saŋʷul     ‘10’
  NCV: Merei            saŋavul        ‘10’
  NCV: Daakaka          sʊŋavi         ‘10’
  NCV: Malua Bay        səŋavəl        ‘10’
  NCV: Unua             saŋavör        ‘10’
  Mic: Kosraean         soŋuhul        ‘10’
  Fij:  Wayan           saŋavulu       ‘10’
  Pn:   Tongan          hoŋofulu       ‘10’
  Pn:   Rennellese      aŋahugu        ‘10’
  Pn:   Rapanui         aŋahuru        ‘10’
>

<
PMP *|sa ŋa Ratus| ‘100’ (ACD)
POc *|sa ŋa Ratus| ‘100’
PAdm *saŋatV ‘100’
  Adm: Lou               soŋot             ‘100’
 Adm: Baluan             soŋot             ‘100’
 Adm: Ponam              sa-ŋat            ‘100’
 Adm: Sori               saŋaʔ             ‘100’
 Adm: Bipi               saŋakx            ‘100’
 PT:  Nimoa (Sabari)     -saŋat            ‘100’
 PT:  Kilivila           lakatu(tala)      ‘100’ (for †lagayatu; tala ‘one’)
 PT:  Muyuw              lakatu(tan)       ‘100’ (for †lagayatu; tan ‘one’)
 SES: Gela               haŋalatu          ‘100’
 SES: Lengo              ðeŋetu            ‘100’ (for †ðaŋalatu)
 SES: Longgu             taŋalau           ‘100’[17]
 SES: Sa’a               taŋalau           ‘100’[17]
 SES: Owa                taŋarau           ‘100’[17]
PChk *te-ŋa-ratʉ ‘1000’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Satawalese         saŋaras           ‘1000’
 Mic: Saipan Carolinian  saŋaras           ‘1000’
 Mic: Woleaian           seŋeẓas           ‘1000’
 Mic: Sonsorol           ðaŋaɭaði          ‘1000’
 Mic: Ulithian           seŋarase          ‘1000’
>

                                                            Numerals, classifiers and counting 471


    The Chuukic (Mic) reflexes of *sa-ŋa-Ratus above are perhaps borrowed from an
unknown source, as they mean ‘1000’ rather than ‘100’, and *R is more frequently lost than
reflected as PMic *r. However, the change in power may be a result of the practice of
counting tens of certain objects, e.g. piles of ten coconuts (see discussion under §14.6.3
below).

14.4.5.2 Early Oceanic developments affecting tens and hundreds

Table 14.6 shows that languages that reflect *sa-puluq treat it as ‘unit of 10’, i.e. *sa- has
lost its identity as a morpheme and has combined with *-puluq, generalising it to all
decades. The crucial evidence for this comes from languages that have applied the CLF
NML construction to tens and hundreds, giving numerals like Nakanai savulu lua.

   A similar process affecting *ŋa puluq and other instances of *ŋa CLF is illustrated for
Ponam in Table 14.3 and represents the situation throughout E Admiralty and
Micronesian. Here fusion occurred first, so that the reflexes of *-ŋapuluq and *-ŋaRatus
were treated as unitary classifiers, and the structure NML *ŋa CLF was thus reinterpreted as
NML CLF. It was into this structure that other classifiers were then recruited. This process
seems to have occurred in a good many early Oceanic dialects, with critical evidence from
languages that then reversed NML CLF to CLF NML. Most such languages are N-C Vanuatu
languages of the islands Ambae, south Pentecost, Santo, Ambrym and Malakula. Thus in
Araki (south Santo) we find saŋavulu ‘10’ but ŋavul rua ‘20’, ŋavul rolu ‘30’ and so on.

[17] Owens & Lean (2018:157) quote Codrington’s (1885:249–250) assumption that -lau/-rau in the Malaita-
     Makira languages (here Longgu, Sa’a and Owa) is cognate with Fijian and Polynesian reflexes of PCP
     *rau ‘100’, and cite Harrison & Jackson (1984:69) in support of it. The sound correspondences among
     these languages (not accessible to Codrington) show this to be wrong, as Harrison & Jackson recognise.
     The Malaita-Makira forms are regular reflexes of POc *Ratus ‘100’. POc *R is reflected as Longgu/Sa’a
     l. If the Longgu/Sa’a form were cognate with PCP *rau, the final syllable would be †-rau, not attested
     -lau.

472 Malcolm Ross


    Some early dialects took this process a step further and treated their reflex of
*saŋapuluq as the ‘unit of ten’ morpheme. Examples are given in Table 14.7. Those in the
upper part of the table, which have the structure NML + saŋapuluq , are found in scattered
locations. Those in the lower part have the structure saŋapuluq + NML. They are also
scattered, but particularly well represented in N-C Vanuatu, found in the Torres and Banks
Islands, Maewo, north Pentecost and further south in southeast Malakula and Ambrym.[18]

    Although the evidence above indicates that *sapuluq, *ŋapuluq and *saŋapuluq were
each reinterpreted in various languages as a morpheme for ‘unit of 10’, there is nonetheless
evidence that the PPn reflex *-fulu retained its function and that in this respect Polynesian is
again a relic area. The Polynesian data are shown in Table 14.8.19 Ten itself and tens from 30
upward have the rua ŋapuluq template, but the term for 20 was PPn *rua-fulu, with the rua
puluq template. Why the term for 20 is the odd one out is not clear, but Clark (1999)
comments that PPn *rua-fulu ‘20’ and Samoan se-fulu ‘10’ indicate that PPn *fulu was
analysable as ‘unit of 10’, again pointing to POc *puluq ‘unit of 10’.

: Table 14.7     Tens with the structure numeral + saŋapuluq or saŋapuluq + numeral

__table__
                     ‘10’     ‘20’            ‘30’            ‘40’             ‘50’
PT       Dobu       sanau    rua sanau       ʔeto sanau      ata sanau        …
MM       Tiang      səŋɨulu i-wal ə səŋɨulu u-tɨl ə səŋɨulu tal-at ə səŋɨulu pət-limə ə səŋɨulu
SES      Lengo      ðaŋavulu ruka ðaŋavulu tolo ðaŋavulu vati ðaŋavulu        lima ðaŋavulu
SES      Arosi      taŋahuru rua taŋahuru oru taŋahuru       hai taŋahuru     rima taŋahuru
Fij      Bauan      [tini]   rua saŋavulu tolu saŋavulu      vā saŋavulu      lima saŋavulu
NNG      Lusi       saŋaulu saŋaulu rua      saŋaulu tolu    saŋaulu paŋe     saŋaulu lima
MM       Vitu       ðaŋavulu ðaŋavuluka rua ðaŋavuluka tolu ðaŋavuluka        ðaŋavuluka lima
MM       Notsi      səŋəul səŋəul a-lue      səŋəul a-tul    səŋəul a-īt      səŋəul a-lima
SES      Kahua      taŋafuru taŋafuru ne-rua taŋafuru ne-oru taŋafuru ne-fei taŋafuru ne-rima
NCV      Hiw        taŋʷuy taŋʷuy ʟɵ         taŋʷuy tɵü      taŋʷuy vɔt       taŋʷuy təvə-üimə
NCV      Mota       saŋavul saŋavul rua      saŋavul tol     saŋavul vat      saŋavul tove-lima
NCV      Baetora    saŋavulu saŋavulu rua saŋavulu tolu      saŋavulu vati    saŋavulu teve-lma
NCV      Raga       haŋvulu haŋvulu ɣai-rua haŋvulu ɣai-tolu haŋvulu ɣai-vasi haŋvulu ɣai-lima
NCV      Port Vato  sɔŋavi sɔŋavi va luə     sɔŋavi va sie   sɔŋavi va vier   sɔŋavi va lim
NCV      Maskelynes səŋavür səŋavür vaxa-ɾu səŋavür vaxa-to səŋavür vaxa-vat səŋavür vaxa-ɾim

: Table 14.8 10–30 in PPn and some Polynesian languages

__table__
                                10                         20                         30
     PPn (Clark 1999)           *ha-ŋa-fulu                *rua-fulu                  *tolu-ŋafulu
     Tongan                     ho-ŋofulu                  uo-fulu                    tolu-ŋofulu
     Niuean                     ho-ŋofulu                  ua-fulu                    tolu-ŋofulu
     Samoan                     se-fulu                    lua-fulu                   tolu-ŋafulu
     Niuafo’ou                  ho-ŋofulu                  lua-fulu, lua-ŋofulu       tolu-ŋofulu

[18] There are a number of languages with this template in SW Malakula where *saŋapulu is reflected with
   initial l-. This is an irregular reflex of currently unknown origin, and these languages are disregarded
   here.

[19] But Niuafo’ou numerals are likely to have been influenced by Tongan.

                                                     Numerals, classifiers and counting 473


   The evidence above thus indicates that reflexes of *puluq, *sapuluq, *ŋapuluq and
*saŋapuluq all served as early Oceanic morphemes meaning ‘unit of 10’. The fact that there
are far more reflexes of *ŋapuluq than of *puluq or *sapuluq can be attributed to the fact that
*ŋapuluq played a much larger role in the number system, in 20 to 90, and that it was
probably segmented out from the numerals for 30 to 90 at different times and places.

   By the time of its break-up, i.e. the point at which innovations no longer affected all its
dialects, POc was spoken over an area that included at least the Bismarck Archipelago and
probably Buka, Bougainville and islands further to the southeast. Inevitably, there were
dialect differences—differences that led to its split into Oceanic subgroups—and each of
the four morphemes occurred in a different dialect range without impairing mutual
intelligibility. There is one intriguing feature in the distribution of reflexes of these
morphemes. N-C Vanuatu languages reflecting *saŋapuluq ‘unit of ten’ almost correspond
areally with those reflecting *ŋapuluq, i.e. N-C Vanuatu numeral systems in this respect
form a patchwork.

14.4.6 Thousands and above

The reconstructed PMP term for a thousand is *Ribu (ACD). On this basis a POc term
†*Ri(p,b)u might be expected, but the only candidate reflexes are Tolai (MM) arip (also
borrowed into various New Ireland languages) and Kiribati (Mic) te-rebu (where te- is an
article). But the regular Tolai reflex of POc †*Ri(p,b)u would be †ribu or †rivu, and the
regular Kiribati reflex †ibu or †iu. Thus neither is a directly inherited reflex of PMP *Ribu.

    Nonetheless languages in many different parts of Oceania have lexical items meaning
‘thousand’ and higher powers of ten (see §14.1.2). Most of these are local innovations with
only a limited geographic distribution. Some, at least, were originally terms for ‘some’,
‘many’ or ‘all’ that have been co-opted into the numeral system, illustrated by the
examples below.

<
POc *udolu ‘all, whole’ (PEOc: Pawley 1972)
 NNG: Bariai              do-dol         ‘whole’
 NNG: Poeng               (ka)rolu       ‘all’
 NNG: Wogeo               udol           ‘1000’ (Ross, fieldnotes); ‘200’ (Exter 2010)
 NNG: Kairiru             wurol          ‘100’
 SES: Bugotu              udolu          ‘all, whole, complete’
 SES: Gela                udolu          ‘all, whole, complete’
 NCV: Mwerlap             (mel)dol       ‘100’
 NCV: Mota                nol            ‘100’
 NCV: Maewo               odolu          ‘100’
 NCV: Raga                vudolu(a)      ‘100’
 NCV: C Maewo             (me)dolu       ‘100’
 NCV: Apma                wudelu         ‘100’
 NCV: NE Ambae            vudolue        ‘100’
 Fij:   Wayan             udolu          ‘1000’
 Fij:   Bauan             udolu          ‘1000’
 Pn:    Tongan            (kita)utolu    ‘we INCLUSIVE’ (-utolu pronominal plural suffix)
>

474 Malcolm Ross

<
POc *tari ‘some’; ‘many, all’ (Proto Northern New Hebrides/Banks: Pawley 1972)
 NNG: Ali                tar-tar           ‘all’
 NNG: Sissano            tar-tar           ‘many’
 PT:     Sinaugoro       tari              ‘some’
 MM: Patpatar            tari              ‘some’
 SES: Arosi              |(niu) tari|      ‘a million coconuts’ (cf Table 14.9)
 NCV: Toga               tɛr               ‘1000’
 NCV: Vurës              tar               ‘1000’
 NCV: Mwotlap            tɛy               ‘1000’
 NCV: Mota               tar               ‘1000’
 NCV: Mwerlap            tar               ‘1000’
 NCV: Suñwadaga          tari              ‘1000’
 NCV: NE Ambae           teri              ‘1000’
 NCV: Raga               tari              ‘1000’
 NCV: C Maewo            tari              ‘1000’
 NCV: Ske                (a)tar            ‘1000’
 NCV: Sa                 tar               ‘1000’
 NCV: Piamatsina         tar               ‘1000’
 NCV: Tangoa             taɽi              ‘1000’
 NCV: Mav̋ ea            tar[a]            ‘1000’
 NCV: Avava              (a)tar            ‘1000’
>

<
PMP *balu ‘some, some more’ (ACD)
POc *palu ‘some, a few’ (PEOc: Pawley 1972)
 NNG: Poeng              palu           ‘some’
 NNG: Uvol               hɛl            ‘some’
 NNG: Manam              alu            ‘some; others’
 SES: Gela               balu           ‘some, other’ (for †valu)
 SES: ’Are’are           haru           ‘a few, some, several’
 SES: Sa’s               halu           ‘some’
 SES: Arosi              haru           ‘some, certain’
 NCV: Mota               valu           ‘every, each’ (Pawley 1972)
 NCV: Maewo              valu           ‘1000’
 Pn:    Niuean           falu           ‘some’ (Pawley 1972)
>

14.4.7 The interrogative numeral

The interrogative numeral *pica ‘how many?’ is widely reflected in Oceanic. Typically its
reflex in a given language occurs in any slot where a numeral may occur in that language.
This means, among other things, that in a language with numeral classifiers the reflex of
*pica may also cooccur with a classifier.

<
PAn *pijax ‘how many? how much?’ (ACD)
POc *pica ‘how many? how much?’
 Adm: Mussau       (ɣa)isa     ‘how many?’
 Adm: Seimat       hil         ‘how many?’
 Adm: Wuvulu       fixa        ‘how many?’
 SJ:  Bongo        fis-fis     ‘how many?’
 NNG: Mangap       pīzi        ‘how many?’
 NNG: Maleu        pia         ‘how many?’
 NNG: Poeng        pia         ‘how many?’
 NNG: Gedaged      pi          ‘how many?’
 NNG: Manam        ira         ‘how many?, how much?’
 NNG: Numbami      wisa        ‘how many?’
 PT:  Sudest       -vie        ‘how many’
 PT:  Kilivila     -vila       ‘how many?’
 PT:  Are          biya(mo)    ‘how many’
 PT:  Saliba       hisa        ‘how many’
 PT:  Magori       vika        ‘how many’
 PT:  Sinaugoro    vira        ‘how many’
 PT:  Motu         hida        ‘how many’
 PT:  E Mekeo      pika        ‘how many’
 MM: Vitu          ðiva        ‘how many?’ (metathesis)
 MM: Nakanai       -riva       ‘how many?, how much?’ (metathesis)
 MM: Tigak         (po)isa-n   ‘how many?’
 MM: Tabar         visa        ‘how many?’
 MM: Sursurunga    is          ‘how many?’
 MM: Tolai         (ai)via     ‘how many?, how much?’
 MM: Nehan         (to)wiha    ‘how many?’
 MM: Halia         (so)his     ‘how many?’
 MM: Babatana      (ava)via    ‘how many?’
 MM: Roviana       (ka)visa    ‘how many?’
 MM: Blablanga     (n)iha      ‘how many?’
 SES: Birao        visa        ‘how many?’
 SES: To’aba’ita   fita        ‘how many?, how much?’
 SES: Arosi        siha        ‘how many?’ (metathesis)
 NCV: Mota         visa        ‘how many?’
 NCV: Araki        (mo)visa    ‘how many?’
 NCV: C Maewo      visa        ‘how many?’
 NCV: Raga         (xai)fiha   ‘how many?’
 NCV: Axamb        (ŋa)vis     ‘how many?’
 NCV: Paamese      e-his       ‘how many?’
 SV: Anejom        (e)heθ      ‘how many?’
 Mic: Kiribati     ira-        ‘how many?’
 Mic: Chuukese     fita-       ‘how many?’ (used with suffixed counting classifiers)
 Mic: Woleaian     fita-       ‘how many? a few, some’
 Fij: Wayan        viða        ‘how many?, how much?’
 Pn:  Tongan       fiha        ‘how many?, how much?’
 Pn:  Samoan       fia         ‘be how many?; be how much?’
 Pn:  Tuvaluan     fia         ‘how many?’
 Pn:  Tuvaluan     (toko)fia   ‘how many? (of humans)’
 Pn:  Rennellese   hia         ‘how many?, how much?’
 Pn:  Hawaiian     -hia        ‘how many?, how much?’
 Pn:  Maori        hia~fia     ‘how many?’
>

                                    Numerals, classifiers and counting 475


476 Malcolm Ross


14.5 Reconstructing non-cardinal numerals

As well as the cardinal functions described in §14.4, numerals perform a number of other
functions:

__block__
• ordinals specify membership in a sequence, e.g. ‘the third coconut’;
• frequentative adverbs specify how many times some event occurs, e.g. ‘twice’, ‘three
    times’;
• distributive adverbials to specify the size of groups, e.g. ‘three at a time’, ‘three by
    three’.

14.5.1 Ordinals

Typically Oceanic languages have a dedicated term for ‘first’ that means something like
‘at the front’. No term is reconstructable.

    Descriptions of various Oceanic languages tell us that they do not have dedicated
ordinal numerals, but they do have a strategy for expressing position in a sequence. The
most common strategy is to express ‘the third house’ as something like ‘the (number) three
of the houses’. ‘Houses’ is thus the possessor of the numeral. In consequence many
Oceanic languages form an ordinal by attaching a possessor suffix to the numeral, usually
a suffix reflecting POc *-ña ‘P:3SG’. POc NML-*ña is thus the schematic reconstruction for
an ordinal. That is, POc ordinals were *rua-ña ‘2nd’, *tolu-ña ‘3rd’ and so on. Typically,
if a cardinal numeral occurs with a classifier or a fossil classifier, this is retained in the
ordinal form, as the listing below shows.

<
POc *NML-ña ‘ordinal numeral form’
 Adm: Mussau           [k,ɣ]a-NML-na
 PT:   Kilivila        CLF-NML-la
 PT:   Muyuw           kʷa-NML-n
 PT:   Gumawana        ai-NML-[i]na
 PT:   Dobu            ʔe-NML-na
 PT:   Bunama          ʔe-NML-na
 MM: Nakanai           i-NML-la
 MM: Siar              NML-n
 SES: Bugotu           NML-ña
 SES: Gela             NML-na
 SES: Talise           NML-na
 SES: Lengo            NML-e
 SES: Longgu           NML-na
 SES: To’aba’ita       NML-na
 SES: Kwaio            NML-na
 SES: Arosi            NML-na
 SES: Sa’a             NML-na
 NCV: Raga             ɣai-NML-na
 NCV: Daakaka          NML-an
 NCV: Merei            NML-i-na
 NCV: Tamambo          NML-na
 NCV: Mav̋ea            a-NML-na           (applies to 2-5)
 NCV: Mav̋ea            NML-na             (applies to 3 upward)
 NCV: Neve’ei          NML-n              (applies to 2-5)
>

                                                  Numerals, classifiers and counting 477


   In some languages of Malakula the alienable possession structure is used instead. The
numeral is followed by a reflex of *na-ña, which Pearce (2015) translates as ‘of it’ (*na-
possessive classifier; *-ña p:3sg).

__formgroup__
  NCV: Tirax             |NML na-n|      ‘NML of it’
  NCV: Avava             |itV-NML nan|   ‘NML of it’       (applies to 2-5; etymology of _itV-_ is not known)
  NCV: Avava             |NML nan|       ‘NML of it’       (applies to 6 upward)
  NCV: Neve’ei           |NML-nen|   (NP)  ‘NML of it’       (applies to 6 upward)
  NCV: Unua              |NML nen|  ‘NML of it’

The corresponding structure occurs in Kove (NNG):

18)   Kove
      voŋivoŋi tolu ai-a
      morning three P:3SG-PCL
      ‘the third morning’ (Sato 2012:197)

   The possessive noun phrase strategy for expressing ordinals continues into Fijian and
Polynesian languages, in spite of the fact that Polynesian possessive morphosyntax is
different from most non-Polynesian Oceanic languages. The Bauan in (19a), for example,
means more literally ‘the (number) 3 of the children’.

19) a. Bauan Fijian
          na ke-na          ika-tolu   ni   ŋone
          ART PCL-3SG       ORDINAL-3 PREP child
          ‘the third child’ (Wilson 1982:103)
      b. Tongan (Pn)
          h-o-no          tolu ʔo e himi
         ART-PCL- 3SG three PCL ART       hymn
          ‘the third hymn’ (Wilson 1982:103)
      b. Samoan (Pn)
          le     potu-moe l-o-na              lua
          ART room-sleep ART-PCL-3SG          two
          ‘the second bedroom’ (Mosel & Hovdhaugen 1992:118)
      c. Takuu (Pn)
         te        toru    nā        aso
         ART:SG three      ART:PL    day
         ‘the third day’ (Moyle 2011:35)

478 Malcolm Ross


    Alternatively, in languages across much of Oceania an ordinal numeral is formed by
attaching the POc causative prefix *pa[ka]- to the numeral, sometimes with the 3SG
possessor suffix, sometimes not. What function the causative prefix plays here is unclear.
Often there is also a 3SG possessor suffix as in the cognate set above. Where there is none,
presumably an alienable possession structure is used.

<
POc *pa[ka]-NML-ña ‘ordinal numeral form’
 PT:    Molima        ve-NML-na
 PT:    Gapapaiwa     vi-NML-[i]na
 PT:    Tawala        wi-NML-na
 PT:    Saliba        he-NML-     (with 3SG/PL)
 PT:    Hula          va-NML-na
 PT:    Sinaugoro     vaɣa-NML-na
 MM: Bulu             vaɣa-NML
 MM: Nakanai          vaka-NML
 MM: Tungak           |va-NML (i N)|
 MM: Kara             fa-NML-āna
 MM: Notsi            |(N nan) a-NML| (nan ART; a- CAUSATIVE)
 MM: Patpatar         ha-NML
 MM: Tolai            va-NML-na
 MM: Nehan            ua-NML
 MM: Teop             vā-NML
 MM: Papapana         va-NML
 MM: Banoni           va-NML
 MM: Babatana         va-NML-a
 MM: Kokota           fa-NML
 MM: Maringe          fa-NML
 NCV: Mwotlap         ve-NML
 NCV: Araki           ha-NML
 NCV: C Maewo         vaɣa-NML-i
 NCal: Cèmuhî         fa-NML
 NCal: Tinrin         fa-NML
>

   Because the ordinal is treated as possessum, it is a nominal. In the cognate sets above this
is visible in the addition of the 3SG possessor suffix, but a number of languages treat an
ordinal as a verb (see (13) and (14) in §14.4) and add nominalising morphology. The W
Central Papuan languages Motu, Lala, Roro and Mekeo and the New Georgia languages
Kubokota, Roviana, Ughele, Hoava and Vangunu all add a nominaliser to a form with a
causative prefix (see above). The former add the instrumental nominalising prefix i- (< POc
*i-), the latter the general nominalising infix <in> (< POc *<in>). N-C Vanuatu languages had a
variety of nominalising morphemes.

__formgroup__
  PT:  Lala                i-va-NML-na        (i- INSTRUMENTAL NOM; va- CAUS; -na P:3S)
  MM: Kubokota             v<in>a-NML         (<in> NOM; va- CAUS)
  NCV: NE Ambae            kai-NML-ki         (kai- CLF (fossil); -ki NOM)
  NCV: Apma                NML-an             (-an NOM)
  NCV: Uripiv              NML-Vn             (-Vn NOM)
  NCV: Nahavaq             |naʔay-NML-yen naʔay-|  (CLF (fossil); -yen NOM)

                                                           Numerals, classifiers and counting 479


    A further POc ordinal form, *i-ka-,20 is reconstructable on the basis of both external
reflexes and the Fijian reflexes below. PMP and POc *i- were clearly nominalising affixes
(vol 1:28–29), and the Bauan example cited in (19a) indicates that it still is a nominalisation
occupying the possessum slot in the possessive structure. This reconstruction raises questions.
Why are the Oceanic reflexes confined to Remote Oceanic? Perhaps because other forms of
nominalisation, exemplified above, replaced them. The Micronesian forms have prefixes that
in the modern languages are causative. Do they reflect a reduced form of POc *paka- and
thus belong in the cognate set above? One cannot tell.

<
PAn *Si-ka-NML ‘prefix for ordinal numerals’ (ACD)
PMP *i-ka-NML ‘prefix for ordinal numerals’ (ACD)
POc *i-ka-NML ‘prefix for ordinal numerals’
  NCV: Namakir          ke-NML
  NCV: Nguna            ke-NML
  NCV: Lelepa           ke-NML
  Mic: Kiribati         |ka-NML (ni N)| (ni ‘of’)
  Mic: Mokilese         ka-NML-CLF
  Mic: Woleaian         [xa,xe]-NML-CLF-r (-r P:3SG)
  Mic: Sonsorol         xa-NML-ar (-ar P:3SG)
  Fij:   Nadrogā        ka-NML
  Fij:   Wayan          ikā-NML
  Fij:   Bauan          ika-NML
  Fij:   Boumā          iʔa-NML
  Pn:    Rarotongan     kā-NML
>

   A disturbing aspect of these reconstructions is that it is difficult to imagine that POc had
three structures for forming ordinals, namely *NML-ña, *pa[ka]-NML-ña and *i-ka-NML.
There are formal overlaps among them, but they cannot be reduced to just one or two
reconstructions without a good deal of speculative reasoning.

14.5.2 Frequentative adverbs

The reconstruction of the POc frequentative adverb form *pa[ka]-NML is straightforward,
as it has cognates in South Halmahera languages (Buli vai-NML; Taba ha-NML), strongly
implying that the form is reconstructable to PEMP. Blust (ACD) reconstructs PAn *maka-
lima ‘5 times’ etc. This appears to have been an actor voice verb ‘do 5 times’, the stem
form of which would have been PAn *paka-lima. The morphological structure thus has a
long history.

   The cognate set is patchy. There are areas, especially in Western Oceanic, where the
structure is not reported at all. In languages with numeral classifiers a classifier meaning
‘times’ has displaced the POc structure (§14.1.1). In many other languages it has been
replaced by a periphrastic structure like English three times, and ‘times’ has sometimes
become a classifier (§14.1.1). The choice of term for ‘time, occasion’ in these languages
varies from language to language, and is evidently the outcome of local innovation. In N-
C Vanuatu languages, on the other hand, retention of the POc structure is the general rule.

[20] The ACD reconstructs POc *ka- as an ordinal prefix, citing the Kiribati, Woleaian and Bauan reflexes
     above, with initial i- omitted from the Bauan reflex.

480 Malcolm Ross


<
PMP *paka-NML ‘NML times’
POc *pa[ka]-NML ‘NML times’ (frequentative adverb; e.g. *pa[ka]-lima ‘5 times)
 NNG: Bariai          pa-NML
 NNG: Mbula           |pa NML|
 NNG: Maeng           |pa NML|
 PT:    Kilivila      siva-NML
 PT:    Sinaugoro     vaɣa-NML
 MM: Bulu             vaɣa-NML
 MM: Kara             fā-NML
 MM: Patpatar         ha-NML
 MM: Tangga           [fa]fa-NML
 MM: Nehan            ua-NML
 SES: Oroha           haʔa-NML
 SES: Arosi           haʔa-NML
 SES: Owa             faɣa-e-NML
 TM: Buma             wa-NML
 NCV: Toga            vaɣa-NML
 NCV: Mwotlap         vaɣ-NML
 NCV: C Maewo         vaɣa-NML
 NCV: NE Ambae        vaka-NML
 NCV: Apma            va-NML
 NCV: Araki           ð̼aɣa-NML
 NCV: Tamambo         vaɣa-NML
 NCV: Daakaka         |vya NML|
 NCV: Paamese         hā-NML
 NCV: Nese            vaɣa-NML
 NCV: Uripiv          va-NML
 NCV: Maskelynes      vəha-NML
 NCV: Aulua           baka-NML
 NCV: Baki            va-NML
 NCV: Namakir         baka-NML
 Mic: Mokilese        |pak NML-w|
 Mic: Sonsorol        fa-NML
 Mic: Ulithian        xa-NML
 Fij:   Wayan         vaka-NML
 Fij:   Nadrogā       vā-NML
 Fij:   Bauan         vaka-NML
 Pn:    Samoan        faʔa-NML
 Pn:    Rennellese    haka-NML           ‘do NML times’
>

                                                   Numerals, classifiers and counting 481


14.5.3 Distributive numerals

POc distributive numerals (‘two by two; two at a time; two each’ etc) were formed by full
reduplication. Typically, where a prefix has become part of the corresponding cardinal
numeral, the prefix does not form part of the reduplicand (Nakanai, Bugotu, Vurës,
Tamambo, NE Ambae, Raga) but there are exceptions to this (Tungak, Uripiv). In a few
languages reduplication is now incomplete or irregular: e.g. Nakanai CV-CV…, but i-
lima-lima ‘5 by 5’.

<
PAn *NML-NML ‘NML by NML; NML at a time; NML each’ (e.g. *duSa-duSa ‘2 by 2’ etc)
POc *NML-NML ‘NML by NML; NML at a time; NML each’ (e.g. *lima-lima ‘5 by 5’ etc)
  NNG: Manam           rua-rua            ‘two at a time’
  NNG: Manam           wati-wati          ‘four each, four at a time’
  NNG: Kairiru         |tai tai|            ‘one at a time’
  NNG: Kairiru         |tuol tuol|          ‘in threes; three at a time’
  NNG: Mangap          lu-a-lu            ‘two by two’
  NNG: Mangap          tol-a-tol          ‘three by three’
  NNG: Maleu           lua-lua            ‘two by two’
  NNG: Yabem           teleàʔ-teleàʔ      ‘three by three’
  NNG: Numbami         lua-lua            ‘two at a time’
  MM: Nakanai          ila-lua            ‘two by two’ (ilua ‘2’)
  MM: Nakanai          iva-vā             ‘four by four’ (ivā ‘4’)
  MM: Tungak           poŋ-poŋua          ‘two by two’ (po-ŋua ‘2’)
  MM: Patpatar         |lim-liman na mār| ‘500 each’ (na LIGATURE; mār ‘100’)
  MM: Teop             bu-buaku           ‘two each’ (buaku ‘2’)
  SES: Bugotu          erua-rua           ‘two at a time, two apiece’
  SES: Gela            vati-vati          ‘four each’
  SES: Arosi           rua-rua            ‘two at a time, two by two’
  NCV: Mota            rua-rua            ‘two and two, by twos; double’
  NCV: Tamambo         atolu-tolu-ɣi      ‘three at a time, three each’
  NCV: NE Ambae        kai-tolu-tolu      ‘three at a time’ (kai-tolu ‘3’)
  NCV: C Maewo         tewa-tewa          ‘one by one, one apiece’
  NCV: C Maewo         rua-rua            ‘two at a time, two apiece, by twos, double’
  NCV: Raga            ɣai-ru-rua-i       ‘by twos’
  NCV: Daakaka         lo-lo              ‘in pairs’
  NCV: Paamese         he-lua-lu          ‘in pairs, two by two (he- S:3S)’
  NCV: Uripiv          er-eru-i           ‘two each’
  NCV: Maskelynes      lo-rim-rim         ‘five each’
  Fij:  Wayan          tolu-tolu          ‘in threes, as a threesome, group of threes, all three’
>

    PPn had a dedicated distributive morpheme, *taki-, prefixed to the numeral. Cognate with
this is Wayan Fijian teki-, also prefixed to numerals and quantity words but meaning ‘divided
into X parts’. This perhaps reflects the function of PCP *taki-, but there is insufficient
evidence to confirm this.

482 Malcolm Ross

<
PPn *taki- [distributive prefix] (Pawley 1970; POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan            taki-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Niuean            taki-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Samoan            taʔi-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    E Futunan         taki-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    K’marangi         dagi-            ‘each, each of’
  Pn:    Rennellese        taki             ‘be different, have or be separate, each to have or be’
  Pn:    Takuu             tiki-            ‘each’ (distributive prefix)
  Pn:    Tikopia           taki-            [distributive particle]
  Pn:    Pukapukan         taki             [distributive particle with numerals]
  Pn:    Rarotongan        taki-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Tuamotuan         taki-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Hawaiian          kaʔi-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Tahitian          taʔi-            [distributive prefix]
  Pn:    Maori             taki-            [distributive prefix]
>

14.6 Reconstructing POc numeral classifiers

Numeral classifiers and their semantic classes are described in §14.1.1. If it is assumed
that all languages have mensural classifiers, a language’s classifier structure is the one in
which a mensural classifier occurs. This definition serves well, except in certain
Polynesian languages, where there is more than one classifier structure. These languages
retain the pre-POc NML *ŋa CLF structure (§14.3ff) in limited contexts alongside the more
recent CLF-NML structure, implying that POc also did so. In the reconstructions below, a
hyphen in front of the classifier indicates that it occurred in the POc NML[*-ŋa]-CLF
structure; a hyphen after the classifier indicates that it occurred in the POc CLF NML
structure. Some classifiers evidently occurred in both constructions.

    The question to be answered in reconstructing a POc classifier is, Is there evidence of
shared inheritance or are we looking at parallel innovation, i.e. the independent but
parallel recruitment of cognate nouns into the classifier category? Two characteristics of a
cognate set can hint that it is inherited from POc.

    The stronger hint is semantic bleaching. A classifier is an outcome of
grammaticalisation, usually of a noun. Two things happen during grammaticalisation: the
morpheme increases in bondedness (e.g. becomes an affix) and it undergoes semantic
bleaching, i.e. its sense becomes increasingly general. If the same semantic bleaching
occurs in two Oceanic subgroups or in one Oceanic and one non-Oceanic subgroup, then
this is evidence that the bleaching was already present in POc. The POc classifier *-pua/
*pua- ‘default inanimate; round object’, derived from *puaq ‘fruit’, represents extreme
bleaching (§14.6.1).

    The second characteristic is that if some members of the cognate set occur as
functionless fossilised prefixes to lower simple numerals (Map 14.2), then that cognate set
is likely to be old, and probably of POc antiquity. Reflexes of *pua- now form inseparable
prefixes in a number of languages.

                                                           Numerals, classifiers and counting 483


    Reconstructions sometimes require data from a non-Oceanic language, and the latter
are included in some of the cognate sets below.[21] A datum from one of these languages is
only cited if it is glossed as a classifier in the source.

    The vast majority of classifier cognate sets in Oceanic languages display neither of the
two characteristics and are very probably more recently grammaticalised recruits. This
raises a further question. Why have numeral classifier classes blossomed in a few Oceanic
subgroups and (almost) vanished from others? Part of the answer may be contact, as
bilingualism can transfer semantic patterns from language to language, but there is very
little substantive Oceanic evidence about this, positive or negative.

14.6.1 Sortal classifiers

Sortal classifiers are not evenly distributed across Oceanic. Quite elaborate systems are
found in Admiralties, Kilivila and Sudest (PT), New Caledonia, Micronesian, Tongic (Pn)
and NPn languages. The odd sortal classifier survives in other Papuan Tip languages, in
Solos and Banoni (MM, Bougainville) and in a few Malaita-Makira (SES) languages.
Fossils are found in numerous Meso-Melanesian and N-C Vanuatu languages, indicating
that at least certain basic classifiers occurred there once upon a time. No sign of sortal
classifiers is found in North New Guinea languages.

    The cognate set supporting POc *pua ‘round object; default inanimate’ shows both
bleaching and fossilisation. The default classifier is used where no classifier with a more
specific meaning applies. This is the ultimate case of semantic bleaching in a classifier.
POc *pua was derived from the term for ‘fruit’, then bleached to denote any roundish
object, and finally bleached further to become the default inanimate classifier. Its Hawu
and Buli cognates are glossed as the classifier for a disparate collection of inanimate
objects; it is thus the default classifier in these languages. It also satisfies the fossil
criterion: almost all its reflexes in Meso-Melanesian languages and all its N-C Vanuatu
reflexes are fossils that are today part of the numeral.

    The term ‘default’ is used below for a classifier that is used where no other classifier is
appropriate or the speaker does not recall the appropriate classifier. Some sources call this
the ‘general’ classifier .

<
 CMP:  Hawu              wuə, ɓuə       ‘round objects, buildings, their beams, furniture, boats, baskets, pots, locations, weeks, years’ (_wuə_ SG, _ɓuə_ PL)
 CMP:  Kambera           wua, ᵐbua      ‘spherical objects’
 CMP:  Tetun Fehan       fuan           ‘fruit, heart, whole roundish objects’
 SH:   Buli              pu, pi-        ‘objects, 24-hour days, villages, weights, measures’ (_pu_ SG, _pi-_ PL)
 CB:   Ambai             bo-            ‘inanimate’
POc *pua ‘default inanimate; round object’ (POc *pua- ‘fruit’; vol.3:115–116) (PEOc *pua-qi, *po-qi ‘spherical classifier’; Pawley 1972:59)
 Adm:  Mussau            -va            [default] (-va with 1; zero with other numerals)
PAdm *-(ə)fu [default]
 Adm:  Wuvulu            -ua            [default] (with tens, hundreds, thousands)
 Adm:  Lou               -əp            [default]
 Adm:  Penchal           -p             [default]
 Adm:  Sivisa Titan      -o, -ø         [default]
 Adm:  Ponam             -f             [default] (fossilised)
 Adm:  Kele              -[o]h          ‘round objects’; [default]
 Adm:  Kurti             -eh            [default]
 Adm:  Lele              -o             [default]
 Adm:  Loniu             -h             [default]
 Adm:  Levei-Tulu        -ʔep           ‘tree, canoe, vehicle, stick; sprout; clump’
 Adm:  Sori              -p             [default]
 Adm:  Bipi              -h             [default]
 MM:   Tungak            po-            [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Tiang             u-             [FOSSIL]
 MM:   E Kara            pa-            [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Nalik             u-, o-         [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Tabar             vo-            [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Lamusong          o-             [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Kandas            u-             [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Petats            ho-, hue-      [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Halia             huo-           [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Taiof             fo-            [FOSSIL]
 MM:   Banoni            va-            ‘round objects’
 MM:   Maringe           fa-            [FOSSIL]
 SES:  To’aba’ita        fV-            ‘small round plant products (fruit, nuts, tubers, corms, bulbs and more)’
 SES:  Arosi             hua            ‘round objects’
 TM:   Äiwoo             u-, vi-        [FOSSIL]
 TM:   Tanibili          bu-, bo-       [FOSSIL]
 NCV:  Toga              va-            [FOSSIL]
 NCV:  Hiw               vi-            [FOSSIL]
 NCV:  Vera’a            fo̝-            [FOSSIL]
 NCV:  Lemerig           vʊ-            [FOSSIL]
 NCV:  Mwotlap           vV-            [FOSSIL]
Proto Far North New Caledonia *pʷa- ‘round object; time’
 NCal: Nyelâyu           pʷa-           ‘inanimate; time’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa           pʷa-           ‘round object’
 NCal: Kumak             pʷa-           ‘round object; day’
PMic *-ua [default numeral classifier] (Jackson 1986:209)
 Mic:  Kosraean          -u             [DEFAULT]
 Mic:  Kiribati          -ua            ‘fruit’; [DEFAULT]
 Mic:  Marshallese       -u             [DEFAULT] (fossil in cilu '3'; Harrison & Jackson 1984)
 Mic:  Mokilese          -w             [DEFAULT INANIMATE]
 Mic:  Chuukese          -ew            [DEFAULT]
 Mic:  Carolinian        -uw            [DEFAULT INANIMATE]
 Mic:  Woleaian          -uw            [DEFAULT]
 Mic:  Ulithian          -wo            [DEFAULT]
PPn *-fua ‘10 tens or scores of certain food items’ (?) (see §14.6.9)
>


[21] Data sources are: for Hawu, Walker (1982); for Kambera, Klamer (2010); for Lamaholot, Nishiyama &
     Kelen (2007); for Rongga, Arka (2008); for Buru, Grimes (1991); for Fehan Tetun, van Klinken (1999);
     for Nauete, Schapper & Hammarström (2013); for Buli, Maan (1951); for Taba, Bowden (2001); for
     Ambai, Silzer (1983).

484 Malcolm Ross


                                                        Numerals, classifiers and counting 485


    The cognate set supporting POc *kai also displays bleaching and fossilisation. All reflexes
are consistent with the reconstruction *kai except those in the Central Papuan languages
Aroma, Hula, Balawaia and Motu, which support †*kau-. The POc noun corresponding to
this classifier was *kayu ‘tree’, with reflexes in -ai and -au. The Central Papuan languages
also have noun forms in -au. An economic explanation of the classifier forms is that they
have been reshaped to line up with the noun forms. Another set of exceptions is provided by
the Micronesian reflexes, which require the reconstruction of two PMic forms: *-ai ‘long
slender object’ and *-kai ‘plant, tree, stick’. I take *-ai to reflect the POc classifier and *kai to
be a more recent formation based on PMic *kayu ‘wood, pole’.

    POc *kai- is widely reflected as a fossilised numeral prefix, suggesting that it became
the default inanimate classifier in place of *pua- in parts of Oceanic. Attributive numeral
forms in some languages take a prefix reflecting POc *ka-, but this almost certainly does
not reflect the POc classifier *kai-. There is just one instance where the attributive prefix
clearly reflects *kai-, namely NE Ambae kai-.22 All other attributives reflect *ka- (§14.4)
and this is reason enough to reconstruct attributive *ka -and classifier *kai- separately, and
to assume that the two became conflated in NE Ambae.

<
 CMP: Nauete         kai-             [FOSSIL] (on 2–9)
 SH: Buli            ai-              ‘long object, tree, wood, house’
POc *kai ‘long, rigid object; wooden object; tree’(POc *kayu ‘tree, wood’; vol.3:71–72)
 Yap: Yapese         kɛ̄              ‘tree, stemmed object, crabs, lobsters, grass-skirts, clans’ (incorporates ligature ɛ̄)
 Adm: Mussau         -ae              ‘long, tall; collective’
PAdm *-kai ‘long rigid object; tree’
 Adm: Seimat         -a               ‘tree’
 Adm: Lenkau         -ei              ‘long object’
 Adm: Lou            -e               ‘long object; tree’
 Adm: Ponam          -wi              ‘long, thin: canoe, tree trunk, stick’
 Adm: Sivisa Titan   -ei              ‘tree, canoe, village’
 Adm: Kele           -ei              ‘long object’
 Adm: Kurti          -ʔei             ‘long object’
 Adm: Ere            -ʔei             ‘long object’
 Adm: Papitalai      -ei              ‘tree’
 Adm: Loniu          -ey              ‘tree, canoe, banana bunch’
 Adm: Bohuai         -ʔiai            ‘long object’
 Adm: Mondropolon    -ei              ‘long object’
 Adm: Nyindrou       -ei              ‘tree’
PPT *kai[u]- ‘default inanimate classifier (?); long rigid object; wooden thing’
 PT:  Kilivila       ke-, kai-        ‘long rigid object; wooden thing’
 PT:  Muyuw          kay-             ‘wooden thing’
 PT:  Misima         e-               [FOSSIL]
 PT:  Gumawana       ai-              [FOSSIL]
 PT:  Bunama         ʔe-              [FOSSIL]
 PT:  Dobu           ʔe-              [FOSSIL]
 PT:  Kalokalo       kai-             [FOSSIL]
 PT:  Aroma          ɣau-             [INANIMATE] (see text above)
 PT:  Hula           au-              ‘trees, long wooden objects’ (see text above)
 PT:  Balawaia       ɣau-             ‘banana’ (see text above)
 PT:  Motu           au-              ‘long things (spears, poles)’ (Lean 1991; vol.7:48) (see text above)
 MM:  Mono-Alu       e-               [FOSSIL]
 MM:  Torau          e-               [FOSSIL]
 NCV: NE Ambae       kai-             [ATTRIBUTIVE]
 NCV: Raga           ɣai-             [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Apma           ka-              [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Paamese        e-               [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Nese           ɣo-              [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Vao            ɣe-              [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Unua           ɣe-              [FOSSIL]
 NCV: Sesake         ke-              [FOSSIL]
PMic *-ai ‘long slender object’
PMic *-kai ‘plant, tree, stick’ (PMic *kayu ‘wood, pole’; Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Kiribati       -ai              ‘long objects; hardware, furniture, chests, barrels, timber, coconut leaf stems, fingers, teeth, large fish, sharks’
 Mic: Kiribati       -kai             ‘plant, tree, stick’ (see text above)
 Mic: Sonsorol       -aw              ‘long round object like pencil’
 Mic: Sonsorol       -xae             ‘plant’ (see text above)
 Mic: Ulithian       -yaye            ‘long slender object’
 Mic: Ulithian       -xaye            ‘tree- or book-like object’ (see text above)
>

[22] NE Ambae serial numerals are unprefixed.

486 Malcolm Ross


   POc *tau- below does not satisfy the semantic bleaching criterion. The initial consonant of
the Micronesian forms reflects prenasalisation, i.e. *-ŋa-tau > *-ŋ-tau > *-PMic *-dau).

<
 CMP: Kambera         tau              ‘person’
POc *tau ‘animate; person’ (POc *tau ‘person’; vol.5:40)
 PT: Kilivila         |tau-, to-, te-|   ‘human; male human’
 PT: Muyuw            te-              ‘man’
 MM: Nakanai          tau-, taho-      ‘person’
 MM: Nehan            to-              [FOSSIL]
 MM: Petats           to-              [FOSSIL]
 MM: Halia            to-              [DEFAULT]
 MM: Teop             tao-             [FOSSIL]
 MM: Papapana         tau-             [FOSSIL]
 MM: Banoni           to-              [FOSSIL]
PMic *-dau ‘animate; person’ (< *-ŋa-tau)
 Mic: Puluwatese      -ɽay             ‘human and other animate’ (< *-n-tau)
 Mic: Satawalese      -ɽai             ‘animate’ (< *-n-tau)
 Mic: Carolinian      -ʂay             ‘animate’ (only with 1–3)
>

                                                      Numerals, classifiers and counting 487


    The reconstruction below satisfies only the distribution criterion, and it seems unlikely that
it was present in POc, the more so as it would have been in semantic competition with *tau-
above. More probably it was innovated independently in certain CMP and New Caledonian
languages from the noun PCEMP/POc *qata.

<
 CMP: Lamaholot          ata              ‘person’
 CMP: Rongga             -ata             ‘person’ (only in sa-ŋ-ata ‘one person’)
POc (?) *qata ‘person’ (POc *qata ‘person’; vol.5:45–46)
 NCal: Belep             ãde-             ‘person’
 NCal: Nêlêmwa           ā-               ‘animate’
 NCal: Kumak             ā-               ‘person’
 NCal: Caac              yara-            ‘person’
>

   POc *manu- satisfies the semantic bleaching and distribution criteria. Investigating the
POc sense of the noun *manuk, Pawley (vol.4:449–450) concludes that it denoted birds and
other flying creatures, but not land animals. The fact that ‘animate’ can be reconstructed as
the POc sense of the classifier *manu- thus points to bleaching. However, as no non-Oceanic
classifier cognate has been found, it is less certain than for *pua- and *kai- that this bleaching
had occurred in POc. Awa mano- refers only to birds, and may be a recently innovated
classifier.

   That *manu- does not satisfy the fossil criterion is not surprising. Classifiers that have
frequent use because they refer to human beings or because their referents form a large
category (like *pua- and *kai- above) are more likely candidates for fossilisation.

<
  CB: Ambai             man-            ‘animate’
POc *manu ‘animate’; ‘flying creatures and land animals’ (POc *manuk ‘birds, flying creatures’; vol.3:271–273)
  Adm: Wuvulu           -manu           [fossil] (in ʔolu-manu); ‘3 non-humans’
  Adm: Awa              -mano           ‘bird’
  Adm: Penchal          -[mə]n          ‘animate’
  Adm: Ponam            -man            ‘person, spirit’
PPT *manu- ‘animal’
  PT:  Sudest           man-            ‘birds, small creatures’
  PT:  Muyuw            mʷana-          ‘animal or bird’
  Mic: Nauruan          -men            ‘animate’
PMic *-manu ‘animate’
  Mic: Kiribati         -man
  Mic: Marshallese      -man            ‘animate’; [fossil] (in e-man ‘4’)
  Mic: Mokilese         -men            ‘animate’
  Mic: Ponapean         -men            ‘animate’
  Mic: Puluwatese       -man            ‘animate’ (with 6–9)
  Mic: Chuukese         -mən            ‘animate’
  Mic: Carolinian       -mal            ‘human or higher animal’
  Mic: Woleaian         -mar            ‘animate’
  Mic: Sonsorol         -marʉ           ‘person, small animal, fish’
  Mic: Ulithian         -male           ‘animate’
>

488 Malcolm Ross


   POc *qapa- ‘flat object; sheet of s.t.; leaf’ meets the bleaching and distribution criteria.
Semantic bleaching is inferred from the glosses of its reflexes, as there is no noun known
from which it is derived.

<
POc *qapa ‘flat object; sheet of s.t.; leaf’
PAdm *-kaba ‘flat object; leaf’
  Adm: Baluan             -kam                 ‘leaf’
  Adm: Titan              -kap                 ‘plant’
  Adm: Kele               -kap                 ‘flat natural object’
  Adm: Loniu              -kap                 ‘leaf’
  NCal: Nyelâyu           hava-                ‘flat pliable object: leaf, paper, fabric’
  NCal: Nêlêmwa           hava-                ‘large flat object’
  NCal: Kumak             hava-                ‘flat object’
>

POc *pata ‘long cylindrical object; tree trunk’ meets both criteria.

<
  CMP: Buru                fatan             ‘long, large and round object; tree trunk, wave’
POc *pata ‘long cylindrical object; tree trunk’ (POc *pata(ŋ) ‘tree trunk’; vol.3:87)
PMic *-fata ‘long cylindrical object; tree trunk’ (Harrison & Jackson 1984; a. 2003)
 Mic: Mokilese            -pas               ‘long object’
 Mic: Ponapean            -pʷɔc̣              ‘long objects inc. trees, vehicles, songs’
 Mic: Puluwatese          -fɔr               ‘long object’
 Mic: Chuukese            -fɔc̣               ‘long cylindrical object’
 Mic: Satawalese          -fɔɽ               ‘long object’
 Mic: Carolinian          -fɔʂ               ‘long object, as trees, canoes, pens’
 Mic: Woleaian            -faʂ               ‘long object’
>

   Certain other cognate sets have been rejected as they are apparently not of POc antiquity.
For example, hypothetical †*rau- ‘flat object; leaf’ (cf POc *raun ‘leaf’; vol.3:103–104) is
found only in Micronesian languages. Clark (1999) includes it among his PPn
reconstructions, but the reflexes in POLLEX online are unconvincing for this sense, making
even a Proto Remote Oceanic reconstruction insecure. A better attested classifier reconstruction for ‘flat
object; leaf’ is POc *qapa- above.

                                                     Numerals, classifiers and counting 489


14.6.2 Mensural classifiers

Of the characteristics that hint at POc antiquity, only the criterion of distribution
consistently applies to mensural classifiers. There is typically little or no semantic
bleaching, as the noun from which a mensural classifier is derived has a mensural sense
already. There is no fossilisation, as fossilisation happens to sortal classifiers that refer to
individuals, not collections.

   The best supported mensural classifier is POc *buŋ(V)- ‘bunch (of fruit). From the
glosses of its reflexes it seems that its primary use may have been for bunches of betelnuts.

<
POc *buŋV ‘bunch (of fruit, esp. betelnut?)’ (ACD: POc *buŋ(u) ‘bunch, cluster, of grain, fruit, areca nuts, etc.’)
PAdm *-buŋu ‘cluster, bundle (usually of fruit)’
  Adm: Lou                  -pu             ‘clump’
  Adm: Baluan               -pu             ‘heap, bundle, group of (e.g. fruit or people)’
  Adm: Ponam                -ʙuŋ            ‘cluster of fruit’
  Adm: Sivisa Titan         -buŋ            ‘one cluster (as of betelnuts)’
  Adm: Kele                 -buŋ            ‘small group of natural objects’
  Adm: Loniu                -puŋ            ‘fruit on a single branch: betelnuts, coconuts, Malay apples’
  NNG: Mumeng (Patep)       bun             ‘tied bundle of timbers, greens, etc.’
  PT:      Kilivila         buko-           ‘fruit cluster’
  MM: Lihir                 bun             ‘bunch (of betelnuts)’
  MM: Madak                 -buŋ-           ‘group’
  MM: Barok                 buŋ             ‘group’
  MM: Halia (Hanahan)       buŋ             ‘bunch; cluster, e.g. of nuts or coconuts’
  Mic: Kiribati             -uŋ             ‘bunch of pandanus fruit’
>

    POc *qiti- and *qi-‘hand of bananas’ are a pair of reconstructions with the same meaning,
the latter presumably an abbreviation of the former. They both meet only the distribution
criterion.

<
 CMP: Kéo                   xi              ‘clump of fruit on tree’
 SH: Buli                   esiŋ            ‘hand of bananas’
 SH: Taba                   isiŋ            ‘hand of bananas’
POc *qiti, *qi ‘hand of bananas’ (POc *qitiŋ ‘hand or bunch of bananas’; vol.3:117)
 Adm: Ponam                 -it             ‘ring of bananas on stalk’
 Mic: Satawalese            -is             ‘banana hand’
 Mic: Woleaian              -is             ‘banana hand’
 NNG: Mapos Buang           ɣi              ‘hand of bananas’
 PT:     Hula               ɣi-             ‘10 bananas’
>

   The reconstruction below is attributed to POc because it meets the distribution criterion.
The initial consonant of the Micronesian forms reflects prenasalisation, i.e. *-ŋa-pui > *-ŋ-
pui > PMic *-bui.

490 Malcolm Ross

<
POc *pui, *pui ‘bunch, group’ (POc *pui ‘bunch, cluster, as of fruit’; ACD)[23]
  Adm: Lou                 -wi               ‘bunch’
  PT:    Sudest [24]       ui-               ‘bunch of bananas or betelnuts’
PMic *-bui ‘group, herd’
  Mic: Chuukese            -pʷi              ‘school, herd, group’
  Mic: Mokilese            -pʷi              ‘some, several’
  Mic: Puluwatese          -pʷi              ‘group’
PPn *se[ŋa]-fui ‘set of 5 pairs (of coconuts etc)’
  Pn:    Takuu             (se)fui           ‘score (of coconuts)’
  Pn:    Sikaiana          (se)hui           ‘10 (for birds, coconuts, copra, taro, fruits)’
  Pn:    Nukuoro           (de)hui, (ŋa)hui ‘a 10 of coconuts’
>

14.6.3 Enumerative classifiers (ECs)[25]

Enumerative classifiers have somewhat different geographic distribution from sortal and
mensural classifiers. In subgroups that have an elaborate paradigm of grammaticalised
sortal and mensural classifiers, i.e. Kilivila (PT), New Caledonian, Micronesian, Tongic
(Pn) and Nuclear Polynesian languages, ECs also typically occur, but they appear to be
absent from Admiralties and N-C Vanuatu. They are also found in SE Solomonic
languages, which otherwise lack classifiers, as well as a few in North New Guinea
languages around the Vitiaz Strait and in Fijian dialects.

    With one possible exception no POc EC is reconstructable. The exception is *waRo- ‘a
string of a specified number of a product’, which reflects POc *waRoc ‘vine or
creeper’ (vol.3:74–75), a term whose reflexes often also denote string or rope. However,
the probability that reflexes of *waRoc have become ECs independently in different
languages at different times and places is strong, so it is uncertain whether it already
functioned as an EC in POc.

<
POc (?) *waRo ‘a string of a specified number of a product’ (POc *waRoc ‘generic term for vines and creepers’; vol.3:74–75)
  NNG: Gedaged         wal           ‘4 coconuts tied together’
PPT *waRo- ‘a bundle of coconuts’
  PT:  Muyuw           wa-           ‘2 pair of coconuts’
  PT:  Hula            walo-         ‘10 coconuts’ (Lean 1991)
  PT:  Balawaia        walo-         ‘10 coconuts or betelnuts’
  PT:  Motu            varo-         ‘10 coconuts’ (Lean 1991)
  SES: Longgu          alo           ‘10 fish’
  SES: Arosi           waro          ‘5 eels’
  SES: Sa'a            walo          ‘10 strings of shell money; 10 coconuts made into copra and strung together in halves’
  SES: Owa             |waro (iɣa)|     ‘10 fish on string’ (iɣa ‘fish’)
  NCal: Nêlêmwa        wã-            ‘2 pair of dead flying foxes’
>

[23] POLLEX reconstructs the PPn noun as *fuhi, reflecting putative POc †*pusi, but this is not warranted by
     reflexes of the noun that are listed in the ACD (e.g. Lau fui ‘cluster, clump’).

[24] Griffin Point dialect, Ray (1938).

[25] The term ‘enumerative classifier’ occurs of necessity very frequently in this section, so the abbreviation
     EC is used in this section only.

                                                       Numerals, classifiers and counting 491


    Most ECs are reconstructable only for a protolanguage ancestral to one of the subgroups
mentioned above. Does this mean that ECs did not occur in POc? Their complete absence is
improbable, given what can be inferred about their cultural context (§14.1.2.4). Further, there
are ECs in some CMP and SHWNG languages, e.g. Rongga liwu ‘4 coconuts’; ulu ‘10 liwu’,
i.e. ‘40 coconuts’; Ambai boa- ‘4 large fish’.

<
PCP *mata- ‘10 fish; 10 taro’ (POLLEX: ‘10 fish’)
 Fij:  Fijian             mata         ‘10 fish’
 Pn:   Samoan             mata-        ‘numeral prefix used in relation to taro’
 Pn:   Anutan             mata-        ‘10 fish’
 Pn:   E Futunan          mata-        ‘10 fish’
 Pn:   Tokelauan          mata-        ‘indicates a unity of one hundred fish’
 Pn:   Nukuoro            mada-        ‘numeral prefix denoting ten’
 Pn:   Rennellese         matā-        ‘10 small fish’
 Pn:   Takuu              mata-        ‘10 fish’; ‘unit of 10 (from 20 upward)’
 Pn:   Sikaiana           mata-        ‘10 fish’
 Pn:   Takuu              mata-        ‘numeral prefix denoting ten’
 Pn:   Pukapukan          mata-        ‘numeral prefix for taro and swamp taro tubers’
>

   Because of the absence of reconstructable ECs this section describes the distribution of
ECs by various parameters, arguing that these distributions were largely true of POc, even if
the forms cannot be reconstructed.

   Of the 383 Oceanic languages from which data were collected, ECs were recorded for 69.
The total number of ECs recorded from these 69 languages was 394. This is simply a
product of what linguists and ethnographers have recorded. It is not a sample in a
statistical sense. What follow are thus only rough generalisations.

   The absence of ECs from Admiralties languages is odd. For Ponam (Adm), where
customary public counting certainly did occur (§14.1.2.1), Carrier (1981) records
classifiers with meanings such as ‘a bundle of X’ or ‘a string of X’, but none containing a
multiplicand, e.g. 3 in ‘a bundle of 3 coconuts’ or 10 in ‘a string of 10 fish’.

   What do ECs usually count? In Micronesian languages, where a classifier accompanies
every counted item, coconuts, fish and breadfruit stand out as the items that are often
accompanied by an EC. In SE Solomonic and Polynesian languages, on the other hand,
only certain items require a classifier (Lichtenberk 2008b:264–265). Bender & Beller (2007b:226–228)
ask why certain objects were counted specifically, while others were not.
After dismissing various answers that are not supported by reality, they conclude:

__blockquote__
     Abundance cannot have been the criteria either, as many objects that are plentiful in the
     islands – such as taro, sweet potatoes, breadfruit, or mangoes – were not counted
     specifically. However, if we combine importance, or rather cultural significance
     with abundance, we obtain an intersection that precisely maps onto the group of
     specifically counted objects. While things like kava, lobster, or pigs are culturally
     salient, they are not plentiful; and breadfruit, taro, or mangoes, on the other hand, are
     abundant, but not appreciated as much as comparable products. Only coconuts, yam,
      fish, and the material for thatching houses and weaving mats are both important and
      abundant. (Bolding mine)

492 Malcolm Ross


    The observation in bold type holds for Oceanic languages generally. Coconuts and fish
are almost universally counted with ECs in Oceanic languages that have them. There are
also ECs for bananas across most of Oceania. Taro and yams are also frequently counted
with ECs, but not in Micronesia, where they are less valued or less abundant than
breadfruit.[26] Betelnut, chewed as a stimulant across Near Oceania, is counted with ECs in
Papuan Tip and in NW and SE Solomonic (it is not chewed in Remote Oceania).

    Except for betelnut, all the items named in the previous paragraph are foods and, as one
might expect, at scattered Oceanic locations other foods are counted with ECs: sago in the
Huon Gulf (NNG) and Papuan Tip, canarium nuts in North New Guinea and SE
Solomonic, crabs in SE Solomonic, Fijian and Polynesian, flying foxes in Malaita (SES)
and northern New Caledonia.[27]

    There are ECs for pigs in Papuan Tip, SE Solomonic, Fijian and Polynesian. Given the
ubiquity of pigs as wealth items in Oceania, one might expect to find ECs with them
almost everywhere. Where they are not found, perhaps pigs are counted individually, not
in groups.

    Bender & Beller (2006a) also mention thatching material. ECs are used for sago
thatching in North New Guinea languages around the Vitiaz Strait and in the Schouten
Islands and for unspecified thatching in Malaita and Tonga.

    Another item that turns up in the data is traditional money, centred on but not exclusive
to the SE Solomons. There are ECs for several kinds of shell money and for the teeth of
dogs, bats, dolphins, and certain fish, and in Fiji for whale teeth. The relationship of
traditional money to ceremonial exchanges and distributions is self-evident.

    Bender & Beller’s characterisation of items that cooccur with ECs as ‘culturally salient
and abundant’ can thus be extended to all parts of Oceania where ECs are used, and it can
be inferred that ECs occurred with such items in POc speech.

    The number of items that an EC refers to—its multiplicand—is determined by the
nature of the item and by local conventions of public display.

20)   a. Belep (NCal)
         go-nem ûjep              (go- ‘cord of 10 pieces of sugarcane’)
         CLF-5      sugarcane
         ‘5 cords of sugarcane’ (McCracken 2012:297–298)
      b. Samoan (Pn)
         ono-ŋa-oa popo           (oa- ‘pair of coconuts or young pigs’)
         6-LIG-CLF coconuts
         ‘12 coconuts’ (Mosel & Hovdhaugen 1992:248)
      c. Tuam (NNG)
         īɣ parapināŋ ēz          (parapināŋ ‘pair of fish’)
         fish CLF         one
         ‘two fish’ (Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen 2007b)

[26] ECs counting taro are missing from the data for Fiji. ECs counting yams are missing from the data for
   the Bismarcks and NW Solomons. These may be accidental omissions from the data.

[27] Gaps in these distributions may reflect gaps in the data.

                                                            Numerals, classifiers and counting 493


Thus Belep speakers evidently tie pieces of sugarcane in tens, Samoans tie coconuts in
pairs and Tuam speakers do the same with fish.

   Hill & Unger (2018:125) find that ECs with multiplicands of ten occur only in
languages that have retained a decimal system, like Lengo.

21)      Lengo (SES)
         e    ŋiða      na ɣaivolo ni          pana?           (ɣaivolo ‘10 garden rows’)
         3SG how.many ART CLF         ASSOC    lesser.yam
         ‘How many garden.rows of short yams [are in your garden]?’ (Hill & Unger
         2018:130)

Their generalisation is confirmed by the data collected for this chapter. In (21) ɣaivolo
means ‘ten garden rows’, and a coherent answer is, for example, e ono na ɣaivolo [3SG 6
ART CLF] ‘sixty garden rows’.

   There is no other correlation between numeral system and multiplicands. The converse
generalisation does not apply: languages with decimal systems often have ECs with a
multiplicand other than ten or a power of ten.

22)      Sa’a (SES)
         kʷaʔu-i      ʔusu           (kʷaʔu ‘4 dog’s teeth)
         CLF-ASSOC dog
         ‘four dogs’ teeth’ (Ivens 1918)

Indeed, ECs with a multiplicand below 10—they include 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6—occur in
languages with base-10, base-5-10, base-5-10-20 and base-5-20 systems.

    The correlation between the multiplicand and the product counted is also minimal. In
different places coconuts are counted in groups of 2, 3, 4 or 6. The coconuts will be ripe
and have been husked, and the fibres on the surface after husking readily allow 2 or 3
coconuts to be tied together. These bundles may in turn be set out in twos to give units of 4
and 6 (no unit of 5 coconuts is found). Fish usually fall into two conventional categories: a
fish large enough to form a cooking parcel by itself, and smaller fish that are strung. A
string may consist of 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 fish in Tuam, Nêlêmwa, Bariai, Chuukese and Halia
respectively. These differences are presumably based on fish-size plus convention. A
number of languages with decimal counting, however, allow strings of 10 fish. Larger,
manufactured items are typically counted in pairs. They include pandanus-leaf mats,
sleeping mattresses, and lengths of sago thatching attached to some kind of pole,
sometimes split bamboos, although the latter are sometimes counted in 3s or 4s.

    Probably the most detailed record of ECs in an Oceanic language is Fox’s (1931)
description of the hierarchies of ECs in Arosi (SES), on which Table 14.9 is based. The
second row shows the units that are counted. There are both similarities and differences
between the hierarchies used with different objects. A search through Fox (1978) reveals very
few alternative meanings for the terms in Table 14.9, and the original meanings of Arosi ECs
have apparently been lost.[28]


[28]
     Fox (1978) implies that dumai ‘multiplicand 5’ may reflect ruma ‘hand’ + i ASSOC. Ahusia ‘multiplicand
     100,000’ means ‘piled up’ (from verb ahu ‘pile up’). In terms with the multiplicand 50, aba may be the
     term for ‘half’, i.e. ‘half a hundred’.

494 Malcolm Ross

: Table 14.9 Enumerative classifiers in Arosi (SES)29

__table__
                    Arosi           W Arosi           E Arosi         Arosi             W Arosi        E Arosi
                                                                      4 fathoms of     2 large or 4 4 dolphins’
                    1 coconut       1 yam etc         2 yams etc
                                                                      shell money      small teeth teeth
              1     —               —                 waioa            tahaŋa           abe            abe
              2     waioa           waioa             —                —                —              —
              5     —               dumai             dumai            —                —              —
             10     aʔuru          (erua dumai)      (erua dumai)      ita              māru           ʔaharara
       20 or 25?    —               gagau             gagau            gagau            —              —
             50     —               susu-aba          aba-aba          susu-aba         —              —
           100      taŋarau         ʔaraŋi            ʔaraŋi           ʔaraŋi           ʔaraŋi         toʔa ni iʔa
         1,000      bʷera           wawaibeʔo         sosooba          wawaibeʔo        dohu           dohu
        10,000      rau ki haru     husia/mora        wawaibeʔo        …                ʔuma           ʔuma
        25,000      —               —                 —                —                —              iʔa-hunu
       100,000      rawa i niu      sinora            ahusia           …                …              …
     1,000,000      niu tari        rau               rau              …                …              …

    Arosi has a base-10 system, but speakers often counted in pairs. East Arosi counts yams
in pairs, whereas West Arosi counts single yams. This is why waioa ‘a pair’ occurs on
different lines under W and E Arosi: in W Arosi it denotes ‘2’, in E Arosi ‘1 pair’. It also
means that dumai denotes 5 yams in W Arosi, but 10 yams (5 pairs) in E Arosi—and this
relationship between the two dialects is maintained through to rau, a million yams in W Arosi
but 2 million in E Arosi. It does not account, though, for the fact that wawaibeʔomeans
1,000 yams in W Arosi but 20,000 in E Arosi: this is a case of the rather frequent
phenomenon whereby words for higher numerals shift places, due presumably to infrequent
usage.

    E Arosi thus retains what is apparently an old Oceanic mode of counting by pairs.
Some scholars assert that this is the relic of a binary-cum-vigesimal system, but Bender &
Beller (2007a) show that this is not true. In the cases of yams and shell money, the decimal
system is modified, skipping 10 with yams (erua dumai means 2 fives) and
accommodating multiples of 5. The counting of coconuts and teeth on the other hand, is
straightforwardly decimal except for iʔa-hunu (literally ‘fish finished’), but with units of 2
or 4.

    Somewhat striking is the counting of breadfruit. Again, W Arosi counts single fruits but
E Arosi counts pairs. The plain numerals eta ‘1’ and erua ‘2’ are used, and E Arosi
speakers know that if breadfruit are counted, the numerals refer to pairs.

    Scattered relics suggest that hierarchies of ECs like those in Arosi were more
widespread before the adoption of French or English numerals. There is evidence in other
SE Solomonic languages. From Sa’a Ivens (1918) gives for yams nao ‘100’, sinola
‘1,000’, and mola ‘10,000’; and for coconuts pʷela ‘1000’, rau ‘10,000’, and udi ‘100,000’.
From Owa Mellow (2014) lists for yams apapana ‘50 pairs of yams’ and aufi ‘100 pairs of
yams’; and for coconuts ɓaroɓaro ‘2’, ausukau ‘10’, ɣairirasi ‘100’.

[29] In the first column, ‘20 or 25’ indicates a discrepancy in the sources. Fox (1931) gives gagau as 25,
     whilst Fox (1970, 1978) gives it as 20. The unit ‘2 yams etc’ in column 4 abbreviates ‘yams, taro,
     bananas, mangoes, stone’ [sic]. However, in E Arosi mangoes are not counted in pairs but single as in W
     Arosi. In the unit in column 5 ‘large teeth’ are large dogs’ teeth; ‘small teeth’ are small dogs’ teeth, bats'
     teeth or dolphins' teeth, all used as traditional money.

                                                            Numerals, classifiers and counting 495

: Table 14.10 Halia (Hanahan) enumerative classifier hierarchies

__table__
                                                     4    piloto        —
          coconuts
                                                    12    horowele      = 3 piloto
                                                     6    pilic         —
          taro, sweet potato or betelnut            60    teil          = 10 pilic
                                                   600    kosono        = 10 teil
                                                     6    einase        —
          flying fish                              120    tanoge        = 20 einase
                                                   180    tolahun       = 30 einase

   Further west, for taro tubers in Roviana (MM) Waterhouse (1949) lists hioko ‘10 pairs’,
piŋuto ‘100 pairs’ and hiako ‘1000 pairs’.

   From Halia (MM) Tsirumits et al. (2005) give the hierarchies in Table 14.10. Coconuts
are counted in fours, each four tied together. Taro, sweet potato, betelnut and flying fish
are counted in sixes, but the two hierarchies appear to multiply differently, perhaps
because the data are fragmentary. Tsirumits et al. note that an einase may also consist of a
single tuna, which is larger than six flying fish. Presumably, an einase was a package of
fish for cooking. The term tolahun (‘30 einase’) reflects POc *tolu-ŋapuluq ‘30’, but
tolahun functions only as an EC, as both 3 and 10 have undergone lexical replacement.
Halia for ‘30’ is topisa maloto ‘3 [×] 10’.

   The Tolai (MM) counted wildfowl eggs in fours, taro in sixes, bananas in bundles of 4
hands, and fish in strings of no particular number. Coconuts were counted in pairs, with
special terms for 1, 2, 3, 6 and 60 pairs (Paraide 2008).30The Tolai (MM) counted wildfowl
eggs in fours, taro in sixes, bananas in bundles of 4 hands, and fish in strings of no particular
number. Coconuts were counted in pairs, with special terms for 1, 2, 3, 6 and 60 pairs
(Paraide 2008).[31]

   A theme that crops up several times above is that scattered Oceanic languages counted
certain objects in pairs. Pair-counting in Tongan has been thoroughly investigated by
Bender & Beller (2007b), who write (p219),

__blockquote__
      Among these objects were pieces of sugar cane thatch (au), coconuts (niu), pieces
      of yam for planting (konga ‘ufi or pulopula), whole yam (‘ufi), and fish (ika). In
      addition to these objects listed in the Churchward Grammar (1953), several
      informants suggested that one type of pandanus leaves (kie) was counted in the
      same way as yam for planting. … The counting of these objects follows specific
      patterns that all have one feature in common: Counting proceeds in pairs and
      scores…. For all objects, the smallest unit is the pair: nga’ahoa for sugar cane
      thatch, yam and fish, and taua’i for coconuts. … While the counting of sugar cane
      thatch then proceeds in tens of pairs (tetula), hundreds and thousands of pairs
        (using the regular numerals for 100 and 1000, yet omitting the lexeme for “pair”),
        coconuts, yam and fish are, from 20 onwards, counted in scores. The term for “one
        score” is glossed differently depending on the counted object: tekau for coconuts
        and occasionally yam, and kau for yam and fish. For the counting of coconuts and
        yam, a further term refers to “10-scores” (tefua for coconuts and tefuhi for yam).
        The scores (kau) of fish, however, are regularly counted in number words from one
        to hundreds; the same can alternatively be done for yam.

[30] The terms are a evutu ‘a pair’, a varivi ‘2 pairs’, a kurene ‘3 pairs’, then a taŋuani ‘2 kurene’, i.e. 12
   coconuts, a pakaruati ‘10 taŋuani’, i.e. 120 coconuts.

[31] The terms are a evutu ‘a pair’, a varivi ‘2 pairs’, a kurene ‘3 pairs’, then a taŋuani ‘2 kurene’, i.e. 12
   coconuts, a pakaruati ‘10 taŋuani’, i.e. 120 coconuts.

496 Malcolm Ross


This is reminiscent of Arosi above, even down to the detail that the Tongan listener knows
without being told that sugarcane thatch is counted in pairs, just as the Arosi listener
knows that this is true for breadfruit.

   Bender & Beller (2006b:384–385) analyse similar pairwise systems in the EPn languages
Tahitian, Mangarevan and traditional Maori. Elbert’s (1988:187) Rennellese audience of 1958
wondered why yams and breadfruit should be counted in pairs, and, as he writes later,
without an EC (§14.1.2.4). Owens & Lean (2018:143), citing Beaglehole & Beaglehole
(1938), note that coconuts are counted in pairs and that the terms used are in some cases
identical to the ordinary numerals, i.e. listeners know that coconuts are counted this way.

   Other fragments of evidence, namely unexpected numerals within decimal systems, point
to pairwise counting. Wuvulu (Adm) and some Central Papuan (PT) languages have a
decimal system with unusual numerals for 6 and 8 (Table 14.11), e.g. Motu taura-toi ‘6’ and
taura-hani ‘8’. Since toi and hani are 3 and 4 respectively, taura- seems to mean
‘double’ (it is not listed separately in Lister-Turner & Clark 1954a), and it is a reasonable
inference that it reflects an earlier enumerative classifier meaning ‘pair’.[32]

: Table 14.11 Numerals 1–9 in Wuvulu and certain Central Papuan languages

__table__
   POc          Wuvulu         Keapara (Kalo)            Motu             Lala            Gabadi
 1 *ta          e-palo         kʷapuna                   ta[mona]         ka              ka[pea]
 2 *rua         rua            ruala                     rua              lua             rua
 3 *tolu        ʔolu           toi-toi                   toi              koi             koi
 4 *vati        fa             vati-vati                 hani             vani            vani
 5 *lima        aipani         ima-ima                   ima              ima             ima
 6 *onom ʔolu-roa              taula-toi-toi             taura-toi        kala-koi        kara-koi
         ʔolo-ro-m-
 7 *pitu            taula-toi-kʷapuna hitu           kala-koi ka kara-koi kapea
         palo
 8 *walu fai-na-roa taula-vati-vati    taura-hani kala-vani       kara-vani
 9 *siwa fai-m-palo taula-vati kʷapuna taura-hani ta kala-vani ka kara-vani kapea


[32] Bender & Beller (2012) have an alternative hypothesis. Writing about digit-tallying, they say, ‘Some
     systems don’t rely on 5 as a base when they have counted one hand, but instead switch between the two
     hands showing two threes for 6, two hands showing a three and a four for 7, two fours for 8. Systems
     like these are to be found in east Africa, with verbal counting using distinct lexemes for 1 to 5 but often
     composing higher numbers as 6 = 3 + 3 or 8 = 4 + 4. … This is perhaps the basis of Oceanic 3+3 and
     4+4 .’

                                                       Numerals, classifiers and counting 497


    Owens & Lean (2018:141) note that “Roviana has a distinct word for 20 while most other
decades are multiples of ten”. They entertain the possibility that this reflects a digit-tallying
system, but think it more likely that Roviana hioko-na ‘20’ reflects a pair-counting system.
This is clearly correct, since hioko is listed as ‘10 pairs of taro tubers’ by Waterhouse (1949).
Other NW Solomonic languages of Choiseul, the New Georgia group and Santa Isabel also
have a distinct word for 20. In languages where 20 is a simple numeral derived via a tally
system, 20 is almost always derived from a noun meaning ‘man’ or ‘person’ (§15.6), but there
is no sign of this in these NW Solomonic languages, leaving us with the possibility that, like
Roviana hioko, these words mean ‘10 pairs (of something)’, i.e. a score. The terms form four
cognate sets, but no origin for the three has been found.

23)      a. *sioko-na (> Roviana hioko-na, Ughele sioko-na, Maringe hiokonə putə).
         b. *[ka]rabete > Vaghua, Varisi, Babatana karabete, Ririo karbet; Lungga and
            Ghanongga rabete puta, Simbo rabate puta, Nduke rabete
         c. *kauŋe > Hoava, Kusaghe kauŋe
         d. *varedaki > Zabana, Blablanga varadaki, Kokota varedaki.

The word puta/putə in these examples means ‘sleep’, and is used in the sense of ‘finished’,
‘complete’.

   Although the evidence in this subsection is fragmentary, it is well enough distributed to
suggest that root crops (yams and taro tubers) were already counted in pairs in POc, and this
was probably true of other products too.

   There is also a tendency to count certain objects in fours. Rongga (CMP) liwu ‘4
coconuts’, Gedaged (NNG) wal ‘4 coconuts tied together’, Halia (MM) piloto ‘4
coconuts’ (Table 14.10) and various Arosi ECs (Table 14.9) crop up in the discussion
above. This has resulted in counting systems in which a base of 4 plays an important role.

   Some speakers of Wuvulu (Adm; Hafford 2011) recall a quite complex system which
counted coconuts in pairs, fours and sixteens. One to five pairs, i.e. 2 to 10 coconuts, are
counted with the unaffixed numeral roots 1–5 roa, rua, ʔolu, fa and rea, another instance
of everyone knowing that certain items were counted in twos. However, 4–12 coconuts
could also be counted in fours: ʔobao ‘one bundle of 4’, rua-ʔo ‘2 bundles of 4’, ʔolu-ʔo ‘3
bundles of 4’, where -ʔo was a bundle of 4. At this point the base-4 system dictates a new
power of 4, and counting proceeds with the classifier -moro ‘unit of 16’, as far as fai-ma-
moro [9×16] ‘144’.

   The Wogeo (and Bam) numeral system, as reported by Exter (2010) and shown in Table 14.12,
has a base of 4. The complex numerals from kʷik ‘4’ upwards are easily parsed:33 kʷik
bʷa-kobʷá [4+1] ‘5’, kʷik bʷa-ragó [4+2] ‘6’, kʷik bʷe-tol [4+3] ‘7’, kiki-rua [4×2] ‘8’, kiki-
rua bʷa-kobʷá [(4×2)+1] ‘9’ and so on. If this were a pure base-4 system, the numerals would
continue thus to 15 [(4×3)+3], followed by a new simple term for 16 [42]. But instead 16 is
kiki-vat [4×4] and complex numerals continue to 19 [(4×4)+3], as the new simple numeral is
usú ‘20’. Here there is a hiccup, as counting based on usú continues only to 39
[20+(4×4)+3], as there is no †usu-rua but the new simple numeral kulemʷa ‘40’. At this
point the system settles down, and kulemʷa, like kʷik, is used as far as kulemʷa-vat ‘160’ [(40×4)],
with complex numerals as far as 199 [(40×4)+20+(4×4)+3], and a new simple numeral
udol ‘200’,34 used as far as udol-vat ‘800’ with complex numerals as far as 1,999. This is
followed by lima ‘1,000’, which continues as the base until valú ‘5000’, which in turn gives
way to ka ‘25,000’. The system thus has bases 4, 20, 40, 200, 1000, 5000, 25000.

[33] kʷik may be omitted from 5, 6 and 7.

498 Malcolm Ross

: Table 14.12 The Wogeo (NNG) numeral system

__table__
                  simple
                               fours          twenties forties        200’s      thousands
                  numerals
              1   ta           kʷik           usú       kulemʷa       udol       lima
              2   rua          kiki-rua       —         kulemʷa-rua   udol-rua   lima-rua
              3   tol          kiki-tol       —         kulemʷa-tol   udol-tol   lima-tol
              4   —            kiki-vat       —         kulemʷa-vat   udol-vat   lima-vat

    This extent of this system suggests that it has evolved almost entirely out of
enumerative classifiers used in ceremonial contexts. Hogbin does not discuss counting in
his 1970 ethnography, but often describes feasts, some of them large. The reliance on
groups of four in a system that interacts with a base of 20 suggests a complex history
whereby Wogeo once had a system like that of closely related Manam, with bases of 5, 10
and 20 (§15.4.3), but in which the practice of using basic numerals to count bundles of
aspecific quantity has replaced much of the system. Thus kulemʷa in Manam (and its Kairiru
cognate qolem) mean ‘10’, but in Wogeo kulemʷa means ‘40’, implying that it was once used
to count ten bundles of 4. The use of lima (‘5’ in many Oceanic languages) for 1,000 implies
a use counting 5 groups of 200.

    Owens & Lean (2018:118) seem to attribute the Wogeo base of 4 to counting on one’s
fingers. Alone this leaves too many features of the system unaccounted for, but it is likely
that kʷik ‘4’ and its allomorph kiki- reflect a term meaning something like ‘the four fingers
of one hand’ (§15.6).

    The Sarmi-Jayapura languages Ormu and Yotafa evidently also have a base-4 system,
but the data appear confused and analysis uncertain.

14.6.4 Multiplicative classifiers (MCs)

A multiplicative classifier (MC) is one which refers to a certain number of something,
regardless of what the something is. The POc morphemes *[ŋa]puluq ‘100’ and
*[ŋa]Ratus ‘1000’ were descended from members of an older classifier class (§14.3).
They must still have belonged to the classifier class in POc, as their modern descendants
are MCs in languages that have numeral classifiers. In some cases, an enumerative
classifier denoting a power of 10 has replaced -puluq or *-Ratus or has become the term
for a higher power.

   The set below appears to date back to a POc enumerative classifier. Its form suggests
that it is derived from POc *ikan ‘fish’, but there is nothing in the glosses of its reflexes
that supports this, and why it might have been in competition with POc *puluq is a
mystery.

<
POc *-ika, *ika- ‘unit of 10’ (POc *ikan ‘fish’; vol.4:28–29)
 PT:  Kiriwina         ika-              ‘10 of s.t.’
 PT:  Nimoa (Sabari)   ie-               ‘10’
 PT:  Sudest           |ya-, ye-, yo-|   ‘10’
PMic *-ik[a,e] ‘10 of ??’
 Mic: Woleaian         -ix               ‘10 of anything except shells, coconuts and groups’ (Harrison and Jackson 1984:70)
 Mic: Mortlockese      -ek               ‘10 animate beings’
 Mic: Chuukese         -ik               ‘10’
 Mic: Mortlockese      -eik              ‘10’
 Mic: Ponapean         -ɛk               ‘10’
 Mic: Pulo Annian      -ixi              ‘10’
 Mic: Carolinian       -ix               ‘10’
 Mic: Sonsorol         -ix               ‘10’
 Mic: Ulithian         -ix               ‘10’
>

[34] See §14.4.6 for the etymology of udol.

                                                   Numerals, classifiers and counting 499


   PCP *[-]rau has replaced POc *-Ratus ‘100’ in, e.g., Samoan se-lau ‘100’ and lua-lau
‘200’. The cognate set is given below. The extended meanings noted for Tongan,
Mangarevan and Old Tahitian are derived from counting in pairs (§14.6.3).

   The term *[-]rau reflects POc *raun ‘leaf’ and its genesis is discussed briefly below
the set.

<
PCP *rau ‘100’ (POc *raun ‘leaf’, vol.3:103–104)
  Fij:   Bauan          drau        ‘100’
PPn *[te]rau ‘100’
  Pn:    Tongan         -[ŋe]au     ‘100 pairs of sugarcane thatch’
  Pn:    Tongan         -au         ‘100 scores of coconuts or yams’
  Pn:    Niue           |te au|     ‘100’
  Pn:    Samoan         se-lau      ‘100’
  Pn:    Niuafo’ou      te-au       ‘100’ (Tongan loan)
  Pn:    E Uvea         te-au       ‘100’ (Tongan loan)
  Pn:    Tuvalu         rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Nukuoro        lau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Takuu          se-lau      ‘100’
  Pn:    Rennellese     gau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Anuta          rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    E Futuna       lau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Tikopia        rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Pukapuka       lau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Hawaiian       lau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Rapanui        rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Rapa           rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Tuamotu        rau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Marquesan      ʔau         ‘100’
  Pn:    Mangareva      rau         ‘100 pairs of breadfruit, pandanus, sugarcane, tools’ (Bender & Beller 2006a)
  Pn:    Maori          rau         ‘100, a large number’
  Pn:    Old Tahitian   rau         ‘100 pairs of bonito, breadfruit, coconuts, thatching’ (Lemaître 1985)
  Pn:    Penrhyn        rau         ‘100’
>

500 Malcolm Ross


Owens & Lean (2018:161) wonder whether *Ratus (their *Ratu) and *rau (their *dau)
were in competition in POc. This misconstrues the data (see footnote 17). *Ratus and
*raun were the POc terms for ‘100’ and ‘leaf’ respectively. Reflexes of *raun replaced
*Ratus in certain Oceanic languages. The anecdotal reason for this is given by
Codrington (1885:249), who applies it to both *rau and Proto N Vanuatu *udolu.

__blockquote__
        To count the days after a death a [cycad] frond was taken, and beginning on one side
        of it a leaflet was counted for each day, one being pinched down as a tally for every
        tenth. The frond when treated in this way on both sides furnished tallies for a hundred,
        and the final death-feast was commonly held on the hundredth day.

Fox (1931), talking about Arosi, says,

__blockquote__
        When husia is reached they nip off the leaves (rawa, rau) of a fern tahutahu, and
        when they are all nipped off this number was rau [a million, see Table 14.9], said to
        be 100 husia [10,000], but probably varying in number.

Paraide (2008) reports a similar practice for Tolai.

   SE Solomonic, Micronesian and Polynesian in particular have innovated numerals for
powers of ten (Harrison & Jackson 1984; Bender & Beller 2006a) and many, if not all, of
these seem to have their origin in enumerative classifiers dedicated to counting certain
classes of referent that have been generalised to ever larger classes, as Harrison & Jackson
recognised when they etymologised certain higher numerals in Micronesian languages.
The evidence lies in cognate sets that include both enumerative and multiplicative
classifiers. Two such are Proto Malaita-Makira *sinola and *pʷela, which are usually
enumerative classifiers in Malaita languages but have apparently been generalised to
multiplicative classifiers in Makira. The cognate set reflecting *sinola displays the lability
which is typical of decimal systems of enumerative classifiers like that in Table 14.9
above.

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *sinola ‘10 large fish, 10 collections of ten yams, or ten branches of s.t.’
  SES: To’aba’ita        sinolo             ‘10 biggish fish’
  SES: Lau               sinolo             ‘10 packets of fish; 10 large garfish; 10 bunches of betelnut’
  SES: 'Are’are          |sinora ni|        ‘1,000, counting food’
  SES: Sa'a              sinola             ‘1,000 yams’
  SES: Ulawa             sinola             ‘1,000 yams or taro’
  SES: Arosi             sinora             ‘10,000 yams or 10 sago branches’
  SES: W Arosi           sinora             ‘100,000 yams’ (cf Table 14.9)
  SES: Bauro             sɪnola             ‘1,000’
  SES: Oroha             sinora             ‘1,000’
>

                                                            Numerals, classifiers and counting 501

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *pʷela ‘1000 coconuts’
  SES: ’Are’are         |pera (ni niu)|  ‘1,000 coconuts’ (ni ASSOC; niu ‘coconut’)
  SES: Sa'a             pʷela            ‘1,000 coconuts’
  SES: Arosi            bʷera            ‘1,000 coconuts; 1,000’
  SES: Kahua            ɠera             ‘1,000’
  SES: Owa              ɓera             ‘1,000’
  SES: Santa Ana        pʷera            ‘1,000’
>

14.6.5 Reconstructing classifiers in lower-order subgroups

The reconstructions below are restricted to certain subgroups, and reflect the fact that early
in the history of each subgroup Admiralty, Kilivila-Muyuw and Micronesian languages
expanded the repertoire of classifiers beyond those reconstructed for POc above.

14.6.6 Admiralties

Proto Admiralty (PAdm) has NML-CLF structure along with at least the following classifiers
reconstructed above:

24)      PAdm *-(ə)fu default inanimate classifier (< POc *-pua; §14.6.1)
         PAdm *-kai ‘long rigid object; tree’ (< POc *-kai; §14.6.1)
         PAdm *-manu ‘animate’ (< POc *-manu; §14.6.1)
         PAdm *-kaba ‘flat object; leaf’ (< POc *-qapa; §14.6.1)
         PAdm *-buŋu ‘cluster, bundle (usually of fruit)’ (< POc *-buŋV; §14.6.2)
         PAdm *-iti ‘hand of bananas’ (< POc *-qiti; §14.6.2)

   The NML CLF structure was a variant of the POc *NML ŋa CLF structure, but by the
breakup of PAdm, POc *ŋa had been lost, except as a fossil in PAdm *-ŋafulu ‘unit of 10’,
*-ŋatu ‘unit of 100’ (below) and *-ŋafV ‘fathom’ (§16.2.1).

<
POc *-ŋapuluq ‘unit of 10’ (cf §14.4.5.2)
  Adm: Mussau            -ŋaulu                    ‘10’[35]
PAdm *-ŋafulu ‘unit of 10’
  Adm: Lou               -ŋoul                     ‘10’
  Adm: Baluan            -ŋal                      ‘10’
  Adm: Ponam             -ŋuf                      ‘10’ (abbreviated reflex)
  Adm: Titan             -ŋol                      ‘10’
  Adm: Kele              -ŋʷah                     ‘10’ (abbreviated reflex)
  Adm: Nyindrou          -noh                      ‘10’
>

<
PEAd *-ŋatu ‘unit of 100’
  Adm: Lou                -ŋot               ‘100’
  Adm: Baluan             -ŋot               ‘100’
  Adm: Ponam              -ŋat               ‘100’
  Adm: Titan              -ŋat               ‘100’
  Adm: Kele                -ŋat              ‘100’
  Adm: Loniu               -ŋat              ‘100’
  Adm: Loniu               -ŋon              ‘100’
  Adm: Nyindrou            -nek              ‘100’
>

[35] Mussau is placed above PAdm as we assume it is perhaps coordinate with PAdm (Figure 1.2).

502 Malcolm Ross


   The first three cognate sets below are attributed to PAdm because they have reflexes from
both Western (Wuvulu, Seimat) and Eastern Admiralty languages (the rest).

<
PAdm *-Ruma ‘house’ (< POc *Rumaq ‘house’; vol.1:48–49)
  Adm: Seimat          -hu           ‘house’
  Adm: Sivisa Titan    -em           ‘house’
  Adm: Kele            -im           ‘building’
  Adm: Ere             -ʔim          ‘house’
  Adm: Nali            -um           ‘house’
  Adm: Loniu           -[w]em        ‘house’
  Adm: Levei           -ʔiŋ          ‘house’
  Adm: Bohuai          -ʔem          ‘house’
  Adm: Mondropolon     -em           ‘house’
  Adm: Nyindrou        -em           ‘house’
>

<
PAdm *-mʷaw ‘animate; person (?)’
  Adm: Wuvulu          -mea                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Lenkau          -mow                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Lou             -mo, -om              ‘animate’
  Adm: Baluan          -m                    ‘animate being ’
  Adm: Sivisa Titan    -mo                   ‘animate’ (Bowern 2011); ‘human’
  Adm: Kele            -mow                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Kurti           -mow                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Koro            -mow                  ‘person’
  Adm: Lele            -mow                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Nali            -mow                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Loniu           -mɔw                  ‘person; loose dog’s tooth; feather; fish’
  Adm: Levei           -mop                  ‘animate’
  Adm: Bohuai          -mʷaw                 ‘animate’
  Adm: Mondropolon     -mow                  ‘animate’
>

<
PAdm *-potV ‘fire, firewood’
  Adm: Seimat            -hot                ‘fire’
  Adm: Lou               -pot                ‘fire’
  Adm: Loniu             -pot                ‘pile of firewood’
>

   For the four cognate sets below there is no Western Admiralty reflex. Three of them have
a POc origin, but there is no way of knowing whether or not they became classifiers at a stage
earlier than PAd.

<
PEAd *-fatV ‘container, bag, basket’
  Adm: Ponam             -fat               ‘bag’
  Adm: Kele              -hat               ‘container’
  Adm: Kurti             -hat               ‘basket’
  Adm: Koro              -hat               ‘basket’
  Adm: Loniu             -hat               ‘mat; basket; carrying bag’
  Adm: Levei             -hak               ‘bag’
  Adm: Nyindrou          -hak               ‘sago containers’
>

                                                     Numerals, classifiers and counting 503

<
PEAd *-polV ‘(longitudinal?) half’ (< POc *pʷali- ‘one half or side of something symmetrical’)
  Adm: Lou               -pol              ‘half: side of village’
  Adm: Baluan            -pʷol             ‘half of round object ’
  Adm: Ponam             -ʙul              ‘half of something broken lengthwise; one of pair’ (cog?)
  Adm: Kele              -bul              ‘longitudinal halves’
>

<
PEAd *-cala ‘path’ (< POc *jalan ‘path’, vol.1:61–62)
  Adm: Kele              -sal         ‘paths’
  Adm: Loniu             -can         ‘road, path, boundary’
  Adm: Levei             -saŋ         ‘path’
  Adm: Nyindrou          -san         ‘roads; organised groups; intervals or sequences of time’
>

<
PEAd *-koro ‘village’ (POc *koro ‘fenced-in area’; ‘? settlement fortified by barrier’; §5.4)
  Adm: Kele              -kor              ‘village’
  Adm: Levei             -koŋ              ‘place/village/town/area’
  Adm: Nyindrou          -kon              ‘villages or places’
>

14.6.7 Papuan Tip

PPT (PPT) had CLF-NML structure, along with at least the following
classifiers reconstructed above:

25) PPT *kai[u]- ‘default inanimate classifier (?); long rigid object; wooden thing’ (< POc
       *kai; §14.6.1)
       PPT *tau- ‘human; male human (?)’ (< POc *tau-; §14.6.1)
       PPT *manu- ‘animal’ (< POc *manu-; §14.6.1)
       PPT *waRo- ‘a bundle of coconuts’ (< POc (?) *waRo-; §14.6.3)
       PPT *ika- ‘10 of s.t.’ (< POc *ika-; §14.6.4)

The retention of a reflex of PPT *kai[u]- as either a fossil prefix or as one of very few
classifiers in Central Papuan languages suggests that it may have been the default inanimate
classifier in the shared ancestor of these languages, namely PPT. It was the odd one out among
Oceanic subgroups in that it replaced the POc default inanimate classifier *pua- (§14.6.1). The
only groups of languages within Papuan Tip to retain more than a very few classifiers as part of
a productive system are Kilivila–Muyuw (Malinowski 1920; Lawton, 1993; Senft 1995) and
Sudest–Nimoa (Anderson & Ross 2002).

504 Malcolm Ross


14.6.8 Micronesian

Like Proto Admiralty, Proto Micronesian had NML-CLF structure. It retained from POc at
least the following classifiers reconstructed above:

26)   PMic *-ua default numeral classifier (< POc *-pua; §14.6.1)
      PMic *-kai ‘plant, tree, stick’ (< POc *-kai; §14.6.1)
      PMic *-dau ‘animate; person’ (< POc *-tau; §14.6.1)
      PMic *-manu ‘animate’ (< POc *-manu; §14.6.1)
      PMic *-bui ‘group, herd’ (< POc *-pui; §14.6.2)
      PMic *-iti ‘hand of bananas’ (< POc *-qiti; §14.6.2)
      PMic *-ik[a,e] ‘10 of s.t.’ (< POc *-ika; §14.6.4)
      PMic *-ŋawulu ‘unit of ten’ (see below)

<
PMic *-ŋawulu ‘unit of 10’ (< POc *ŋapuluq; cf §14.4.5.1)
 Mic: Kosraean           -ŋʌul           ‘unit of 10’
 Mic: Kiribati           -ŋaun           ‘unit of 10’ (except things counted with -ua)
 Mic: Marshallese        -ŋoul           ‘unit of 10’
 Mic: Ponapean           -ŋowl           ‘unit of 10’
 Mic: Puluwatese         -ŋōl            ‘unit of 10’
 Mic: Mortlockese        -ŋōl            ‘unit of 10’ (counting inanimates)
 Mic: Chuukese           -ŋōn            ‘unit of 10’ (used only for ‘10’; not used for 20–90)
 Mic: Woleaian           -ŋaul           ‘unit of 10’ (counting groups; Sohn & Tawerilmang 1976:107)
 Mic: Ulithian           -ŋɔlo           ‘bundle of 10 coconuts’ (Sohn & Bender 1983)
>

Micronesian also has a number of unit-of-measurement classifiers with reconstructions in
Chapter 16:

27)   PMic *ŋafa ‘fathom’ PChk *yaŋa ‘finger span’
      PCMic *-mʷanū ‘length from elbow to finger tips’
      PChk *dila-wupʷa ‘distance from outstretched finger-tip to mid-chest (lit. ‘breast
        split’)
      PMic *-mʷanū ‘length from elbow to finger tips’
      PChk *makoto-ciki ‘length of one finger segments’
      PChk *makoto-lapa ‘length of two finger segments’
      Proto Chuukese *-tudu ‘finger-length’

   The NML CLF structure was a variant of the POc NML *ŋa CLF structure, but by the
breakup of PMic, POc *ŋa had been lost, except as a fossil in PMic *-ŋawulu ‘unit of
10’ (above) and *-ŋafa ‘fathom’ (§16.2.1), and as a prenasalisation in PMic *-dau
‘animate; person’ and *-bui ‘group, herd’.

   Although Nauruan is excluded from Bender et al. (2003a)—presumably because its
historical phonology remains almost unknown (Nathan 1973; Johnson 1999)—it is
generally assumed that PMic and Nauruan form the primary branches of a ‘Greater
Micronesian’ subgroup. If a classifier has a Nauruan reflex as well as reflexes from other
Micronesian languages, that classifier can be attributed to Proto Greater Micronesian
(PGMic).[36] However, Nauruan historical phonology is so poorly understood that no
attempt is made at PGMic reconstruction.

                                                              Numerals, classifiers and counting 505


    According to Bender et al. (2003a:3), the internal classification of Micronesian
languages other than Nauruan is as follows:

     28)       Micronesian
               Kosraean
               Central Micronesian
               Kiribati
               Western Micronesian
                   Marshallese
                   Ponapeic-Chuukic
                        Ponapeic: Ponapean, Pingelapese, Mokilese
                        Chuukic: Chuukese, Puluwat, Mortlockese, Satawalese, Carolinian,
                             Woleaian, Pulo Annian, Ulithian

Kosraean and Marshallese have all but lost their numeral classifiers. Their loss in
Kosraean means that PMic classifiers cannot be reconstructed on the basis of internal
evidence alone. If there is a Kiribati reflex, then a Proto Central Micronesian (PCMic)
reconstruction can be made. Failing that—given the virtual absence of Marshallese
classifiers—only a Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic (PPC) reconstruction can be made. If, on
the other hand, there is a reflex of the classifier outside Micronesian, then a PMic
reconstruction is possible.

   Six classifiers with a Nauruan cognate can be reconstructed for PMic.

<
PGMic *[pa]paq[a]- ‘coconut frond’ (< POc; vol 3:380–381)
 Mic: Nauruan             -bɛ               ‘coconut frond’
PMic *paa ‘leaf and stalk, frond’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Ponapean            -pa               ‘frond’
 Mic: Puluwatese          -pa               ‘garland, bead belt, lei’
 Mic: Chuukese            -pa               ‘palm frond, garland, stalk with leaves’
 Mic: Satawalese          -pæ               ‘coconut leaves or taro leaves’
 Mic: Carolinian          -pa               ‘flower leis and compound leaves’
 Mic: Woleaian            -pā               ‘palm frond, lei, shell bead belt’
 Mic: Sonsorol            -pa               ‘coconut leaf, pandanus leaf’
>

PGMic

<
 Mic: Nauruan          -dume                          ‘packet’
PMic *-sukumV ‘package, packet’
 Mic: Puluwatese       -tɨkɨm                         ‘package’
 Mic: Chuukese         -tʉkʉm                         ‘package, packet’
>


[36] Blumenfeld (2022) came to hand as final preparations for publication of the present volume were underway.
     He shows that there is no need to posit PGMic, as Nauruan is not a first-order subgroup of Micronesian.

506 Malcolm Ross

<
PGMic *boŋi ‘night, 24-hour day’ (< POc; vol 2:295–297)
 Mic: Nauruan          -bumi             ‘night’
PMic *-pʷoŋi ‘night’
 Mic: Kiribati         -poŋ              ‘day’
 Mic: Mokilese         -pʷoŋ             ‘days hence’
 Mic: Ponapean         -pʷoŋ             ‘night’
 Mic: Puluwatese       -pʷoŋ             ‘night’
 Mic: Carolinian       -bʷoŋ             ‘night (esp the taboo nights of a funeral wake)’
 Mic: Sonsorol         -bɔŋi             ‘night, timespan’
 Mic: Ulithian         -boŋo             ‘night’
>

<
PGMic *raun ‘leaf’ (< POc; vol.3:103–104)
 Mic: Nauruan              -ra-          ‘flat object’
PMic *-cau ‘thin ( flat object), leaf’
 Mic: Ponapean             -c̣e         ‘leaf, sheet’
 Mic: Puluwatese           -ɽə̄          ‘flat object’
 Mic: Chuukese             -c̣ə         ‘leaflike, sheet’
 Mic: Satawalese           -ɽə           ‘flat object, e.g. leaf’
 Mic: Carolinian           -ʂə           ‘page, flat leaves, pieces of paper’
 Mic: Woleaian             -ʂə           ‘flat object’
 Mic: Sonsorol             -saw          ‘flat, thin object’
 Mic: Ulithian             -cayə         ‘leaflike object’
>

<
PGMic *pʷuku ‘node, joint, knot, knee’ (< PMic; < POc *buku- ‘mound, knob, joint; (?) elbow, knee’) (vol.5:175)
 Mic: Nauruan            -bu              ‘100’
PMic *-pʷukua ‘100’
 Mic: Kosraean           -fok             ‘100’
 Mic: Kiribati           -pʷupʷua         ‘100’ (of anything except coconuts)
 Mic: Marshallese        -bʷikʷiy         ‘100’
 Mic: Mokilese           -pʷiki           ‘100’
 Mic: Ponapean           -pʷiki           ‘100; or 1,000 coconuts’
 Mic: Puluwatese         -pʷʉkʉw          ‘100’
 Mic: Mortlockese        -pʷʉkʉ           ‘100’
 Mic: Chuukese           -pʷʉkʉ           ‘100’
 Mic: Satawalese         -pʷʉkʉw          ‘100’
 Mic: Carolinian         -bʷɨxɨw          ‘100’
 Mic: Woleaian           -pʷʉxʉwe         ‘100’
 Mic: Ulithian           -buxuy           ‘100’
>

<
PGMic *kisi ‘small, little’ (< PMic) (Bender et al 2003a)
 Mic: Nauruan             -kɛ               ‘small parts of s.t’
PMic *-kisi ‘small parts of s.t.’
 Mic: Mokilese            -kic              ‘bit’
  Mic:    Ponapean         -kis               ‘small piece of fragment’
  Mic:    Chuukese         -kis               ‘portion’
  Mic:    Woleaian         -xiti              ‘small piece’
>

                                                     Numerals, classifiers and counting 507


   Below is one PCMic reconstruction. It is possible that this dates to POc, as Wuvulu (Adm)
-papa also is used of flat objects.

<
Proto Central Micronesian *-papa ‘flat object’ (< POc *baban ‘board, plank, leaf’; vol.1:58)
  Mic: Kiribati          -pā               ‘sheet or flat object; leaf’
  Mic: Satawalese        -pə               ‘flat object’
  Mic: Woleaian          -pə               ‘flat object’
>

   Numerous Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic and PChk classifiers could be added. They
are omitted for reasons of space.

14.6.9 Polynesian

PPn retained both POc classifier structures, NML *ŋa CLF and CLF NML, but the classifier
after *ŋa was always enumerative and denoted a multiple of the thing counted (§14.3).
Clark (1999) observes that the latter structure is rare in Tongic and East Polynesian
languages. Unlike Admiralties and Micronesian languages, Polynesian languages use a
classifier only with a restricted class of abundant and culturally significant items (§14.6.3).

   Certain Tongan classifiers imply that Tongan retained a third POc classifier structure
for which only sporadic evidence remains: NML + CLF-*qi/*ni, followed by the counted/
classified noun. This was an application of the POc specific possession structure (Ross
1998b:249). The classifiers concerned are -fo-ʔi ‘coconut’ and -taua-ʔi ‘pair of coconuts’.
The structure appears to be cognate with one found in SE Solomonic languages:

29)   a. Tongan (Pn)
         ha-taua-ʔi             niu
         one-CLF-ASSOCIATIVE coconut
         ‘one pair of coconuts’
      b. To’aba’ita (SES)
         teʔe kobi-ʔi             tāfuliʔae           (kobi-ʔi ‘ a ten of’)
         one CLF-ASSOCIATIVE set.of.shell.money
         ‘10 sets of shell money’ (Lichtenberk 2008b:300)
      c. Lengo (SES)
         sakai na paga ni                  iɣa     (paga ‘ten animals’)
         one ART CLF ASSOCIATIVE fish
         ‘one “ten-animals” of fish’ (Hill & Unger 2018:131)

   PPn retained the POc NML *ŋa CLF structure along with at least the following classifiers
reconstructed elsewhere:

30)   PPn *-fui ‘set of 5 pairs (of coconuts etc)’ (§14.6.2)
      PPn *-fulu ‘unit of 10’ (< POc *-puluq)
      PPn *-rau ‘unit of 100’ (§14.6.4)
      PPn *-kumi ‘ten fathoms high or deep’ (§16.2.5)

508 Malcolm Ross

: Table 14.13        Decades in Proto Polynesian and Polynesian languages

__table__
PPn             *sa=[ŋa ]fulu        *rua [ŋa ]fulu   *tolu ŋa fulu   *fā ŋa fulu   *nima ŋa fulu
Tongan          ho-ŋo-fulu           uo-fulu          tolu-ŋo-fulu    fā-ŋo-fulu    nima-ŋo-fulu
Niuean          ho-ŋo-fulu           ua-fulu          tolu-ŋo-fulu    fā-ŋo-fulu    nima-ŋo-fulu
Niuafo'ou       ho-ŋo-fulu           lua-fulu         tolu-ŋo-fulu    fā-ŋo-fulu    nima-ŋo-fulu
                se-fulu              lua-fulu         tolu-ŋa-fulu    fā-ŋa-fulu    lima-ŋa-fulu
Takuu           si-na-huru           —                —               —             —
Rennellese      a-ŋa-hugu            —                —               —             —
Ifira-Mele      ŋa-furu              —                —               —             —
Luangiua        ŋa-furu              lua-hui          ton-nu-hui      han-na-hui    lima-na-hui
W Futuna        ta-ŋo-furu           roŋofuru         —               —             —
Pukapukan       a-ŋa-ulu (archaic)   —                —               —             —
Rapanui         ʔa-ŋa-huru           —                —               —             —
Tahitian        ʔa-huru              —                —               —             —
Marquesan       ʔo-no-huʔu           —                —               —             —
Tahitian        ʔa-huru              —                —               —             —
Rurutuan        ʔa-ʔuru              —                —               —             —
Rarotongan      ŋa-huru              rua-ŋa-huru      toru-ŋa-huru    ʔā-ŋa-huru    rima-ŋa-huru
Tuamotuan       a-ŋa-huru            —                —               —             —

Supporting data for PPn *-fulu are shown in Table 14.13. Horizontal lines separate the
Tongic languages from Samoic and Samoic from EPn. Hyphens indicate historic morpheme
divisions, and not necessarily present ones. A dash indicates that the numeral does not
reflect the PPn form. Luangiua -hui reflects PPn *-fui (§14.6.2), not *-fulu, but the forms are
included in the table because they illustrate the fact that *ŋa is sometimes absent after PPn
*rua ‘2’ before classifiers other than *-fulu.

    Other reconstructable classifiers that occur in the same slot include PPn *-fua ‘10 of s.t.’.
In Polynesian languages other than Tongan, it is fua-, rather than -fua, that marks a multiple
of 10, but it is included here because it appears to be cognate with Wuvulu -fua ‘10’, which
reflects the NML *ŋa CLF structure. It apparently reflects POc *-pua ‘default inanimate; round
object’ but here has an enumerative or multiplicative function.

<
POc *-pua ‘10 roundish objects’ (?)
  Adm: Wuvulu           (se)fua            ‘10’ (1×10)
  Adm: Wuvulu           (ʔolu)fua          ‘30’ (3×10)
PPn *-fua ‘10 tens or scores of certain food items’ (?)
  Pn:  Tongan           -fua               ‘ten scores of coconuts’
  Pn:  Samoan           -fua               ‘fowls, breadfruit, and some shell-fish’ (Pratt 1862)
  Pn:  Samoan           fua-               ‘10 coconuts’ (Pratt 1862: ‘10 fowls, breadfruit or shellfish’)
  Pn:  Tuvalu           (te)fua            ‘100 coconuts’
>

                                                  Numerals, classifiers and counting 509


   One other classifier that followed the numeral was PPn *-kau. One of its meanings was ‘a
score, 10 pairs’. It is not obvious how this relates to the Samoan and Rennellese glosses.

<
PPn *-kau ‘a score, 10 pairs’
  Pn:   Tongan            -kau              ‘score of coconuts or yams’
  Pn:   Samoan            -ʔau              ‘bunch of bananas’
  Pn:   Rennellese        -kau              ‘pair of yams or breadfruit’
  Pn:   Marquesan         (te)kau           ‘20’
  Pn:   Rurutuan          (ta)ʔau           ‘20’
>

   A number of other such classifiers are found in Tongan, Samoan and Rennellese, but they
do not form cognate sets.

   PPn retained the POc CLF NML structure along with at least PPn *mata- ‘10 fish; 10
taro’ (§14.6.2). One other preposed PPn classifier can be reconstructed. It appears only to
have been used with the numerals 1–9.

<
PPn *toka- ‘person’ (Clark 1999)
  Pn:   Tongan           toko-              ‘people’
  Pn:   Samoan           toʔa-              ‘people’
  Pn:   Rennellese       toka-              ‘animates’
  Pn:   Takuu            taka-              ‘humans’
  Pn:   Luangiua         toka-              ‘humans’
  Pn:   Rarotongan       toko-              ‘humans’
  Pn:   Maori            toko-              ‘humans’
>

This is the only preposed classifier that survives in EPn languages. As a result, the
classifiers below, which have neither a Tongan nor an EPn reflex, must be attributed to
Proto Samoic.

   These preposed classifiers, all of which originally counted tens of something, inherited
from Proto Samoic the odd feature noted by Clark (1999) that, when they count ‘one ten’ ,
‘one’ is expressed by a reflex of Proto Samoic *-a-ŋa-fulu, which includes the postposed
classifier for ‘ten’. When they count from 2 upward, normal numerals are used. Hence, for
example, Rennellese tino aŋahugu ‘10 people’ but tino gima ‘50 people’ (gima ‘5’);
Samoan ʔau ŋa-ulu ufu ‘10 yams’ (ʔau-‘10 yams’; ufu ‘yam’) but ʔau-lua ufu ‘20
yams’ (lua ’2’).

<
Proto Samoic *tino- ‘animate being’
  Pn:    Samoan          tino-              ‘people’
  Pn:    Tuvalu          tino-              ‘people’
  Pn:    Rennellese      tino-              ‘10 animates’
  Pn:    Takuu           tino-              ‘10 humans’
  Pn:    Tokelauan       tino-              ‘people, birds, octopus, skipjack’
  Pn:    Pukapukan       tino-              ‘10 humans, 10 skipjack’
>

510 Malcolm Ross

<
Proto Samoic *fua- ‘unit of ten’ (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Samoan           fua-       ‘10 coconuts’ (Pratt 1862: ‘10 fowls, breadfruit or shellfish’)
  Pn:    Tuvalu           fua-       [prefix indicating ‘ten times’]
  Pn:    E Futunan        fua-       ‘unit of ten’
  Pn:    Nukuoro          hua        [numeral classifier, by tens, for fruit]
  Pn:    Tikopia          fua-       [numeral prefix: ‘ten times’]
>

<
Proto Samoic *lau- ‘unit of ten’
  Pn:    Samoan           lau-               ‘10 big fish’
  Pn:    Rennellese       gau-               ‘10 flat objects’
  Pn:    Pukapukan        lau-               ‘10’
>

<
PNPn *kau- ‘10 roundish objects’
 Pn:    Samoan          ʔau-        ‘10 yams’
 Pn:    Luangiua        kau-        ‘10 puddings, 10 mats, 10 years’
 Pn:    Pukapukan       kau-        ‘10 fruit, round objects, oven stones, pandanus leaves, plaited wall mats’
>

14.7 Conclusions

The main conclusion to be drawn from this chapter is that the inherited POc decimal
system was fairly restricted in its use. Using simple numerals up to 100, one can construct
complex numerals up to 999, and early Oceanic speakers skilled in counting could
probably count far beyond this. Numbers up to 20 doubtless had limited everyday uses,
but the system was mainly used by senior men to count produce of various kinds in wealth
redistribution and exchange (§14.1.2.1). It is reasonably certain that only a small number
of men in any community knew the community’s numeral system in detail, and the
passing of such a large and complex system by a few men from generation to generation
meant that it was prone to change, especially in the least used, i.e. the highest echelons, of
the system (§14.4.6).

   With one exception, reconstruction of POc decimal numerals is straightforward, and the
reconstructions need not be repeated here. They are set out in Table 14.1 on §14.1.2 and
justified in sections 14.4.2 and 14.4.3 and their subsections. The exception is the numeral
form for ‘one’. When it was attached to a classifier, its form was *sa-. Unattached forms
apparently included *(i)sa, *ta-sa, *tai, *ta-kai and *sa-kai (§14.4.1 and subsections).
Why there are so many reconstructable forms is not known. Did they have different
functions? Or were they the result of an emphatic forms meaning ‘one only’ becoming
non-emphatic? What role, if any, did the POc dislike of single-syllable lexical morphemes
play in their formation?

                                                     Numerals, classifiers and counting 511

   Inherited numerals containing the sequences *-[ŋa]puluq LIGATURE + ‘unit of ten’ and
*-[ŋa]Ratus LIGATURE + ‘unit of hundred’ underwent various reanalyses in early Oceanic
and point to the existence of dialects by the time POc broke up (§14.4.5.2).

   The inherited POc system also entailed the use of numeral classifiers in two
constructions: NUMERAL [*ŋa] CLASSIFIER and CLASSIFIER NUMERAL (§14.3). The only
subgroup of Oceanic languages to retain both constructions with any degree of
productivity is Polynesian (§14.6.9), and it is likely that, as with the few surviving
Polynesian systems, the use of enumerative classifiers in POc was limited to nouns
denoting culturally salient and abundant objects, rather than being used with all counted
nouns as in Admiralties, Kilivila and Micronesian languages. Supporting evidence for this
inference lies in the limited number of POc classifiers reconstructable (see below) and in
the ease with which classifiers have been lost in many Oceanic languages. The
Admiralties, Kilivila and Micronesian languages, on the other hand, represent an
elaboration of the classifier system to cover all nouns. Senft’s (1995) work on Kilivila,
where elaboration appears to be ongoing, implies that one reason for the elaboration is an
appreciation of rhetoric in Kilivila society: subtle use of classifiers is one feature of a good
public speech.

   A complication here is that PPn classifiers with the structure NML *ŋa-CLF always
counted multiples of items, i.e. were always numeral classifiers. Was this true of their POc
forebears? Quite possibly, but non-Polynesian data that would clinch this do not exist.

   A question touched on only briefly in this chapter is whether digit tallying, i.e. counting
on fingers and sometimes toes, already influenced numeral systems in early Oceanic
times. This is the topic of the following chapter.

Appendix to chapter 14

This list contains references to sources of grammatical data, numerals and classifiers used in
the present chapter and chapters 15 and 16 and not listed under sources of lexical data in
Appendix A

   Not listed below are the following. Many of the numeral forms from NCV languages of
Malakula, Vanuatu, were collected by Aviva Shimelman in 2015–2016 under the aegis of the
Vanuatu Languages and Lifeways project of the Max Planck Institute for the Science of
Human History, Jena. Many numeral forms and occasional information about classifier forms
are found on the Institute’s website Numeral Systems of the World's Languages (https://
lingweb.eva.mpg.de/channumerals/Austronesian-Eastern.htm) collated by Eugene Chan.
Much of the data on numerals and classifiers in languages of Papua New Guinea is from
Malcolm Ross’ fieldnotes, collected during the years 1978–1982.


Amara         Thurston 1996a                      Balawaia       Kolia 1975
Ambai         Silzer 1983                         Baluan         Schokkin 2020
Ambel         Arnold 2018                         Banoni         Lincoln 1976b
Anejom̃       Lynch 2000c                         Barim          Raymond 2005
Apma          Schneider 2010                      Barok          Du 2010
Araki         François 2002                       Bauan Fijian   Churchward 1941
Are           Paisawa, Pagotto & Kale 1975        Belep          McCracken 2012
Aria          Thurston 1996b                      Big Nambas     Fox 1979
Arop-Lokep    D’Jernes1990, 2002; Raymond         Bing           Bennett & Bennett 1998
              2005                                Boumā Fijian   Dixon 1988
Arosi         Fox 1931; Capell 1971               Bugotu         Ivens 1933
Atchin        Capell & Layard 1980                Bukawa         Eckermann 2007
Avava         Crowley 2006a                       Buli           Maan 1951
Baetora       Ivens 1940b                         Buma           Tryon 2002
512 Malcolm Ross


Buru          Grimes 1991                       Lelepa       Lacrampe 2014
Caac          Cauchard 2014                     Lengo        Hill & Unger 2018
Carolinian    Fritz 1911; Harrison & Jackson    Lengo        Unger 2008
              1984                              Lewo         Early 1994
Chuukese      Benton 1968; Harrison & Jackson   Longgu       Hill 1992
              1984; Bender & Beller 2006b       Loniu        Hamel 1994
Daakaka       von Prince 2012                   Lonwolwol    Paton 1971
Dami          Elliott 1979                      Lou          Stutzman 1994
Dawawa        Knauber & Knauber 1990            Maeng        Müller 1907
Dobu          Arnold 1931                       Magey Matbat Remijsen 2010
Duau          Thune 1978                        Maleu        Haywood 1996
E Kara        Dryer 2012                        Manam        Lichtenberk 1983
Engdewo       Vaa 2013                          Mangap       Bugenhagen 1995
Fehan Tetun   van Klinken 1999                  Mangarevan Lemaître 1985; Bender & Beller
Gabadi        Strong 1912                                    2006b
Gapapaiwa     McGuckin 2002                     Māori        Bender & Beller 2006a, 2006b
Gedaged       Dempwolff nd                      Maringe      Boswell 2018
Halia         Allen 1987                        Marquesan    Lemaître 1985; Bender & Beller
Hawaiian      Elbert & Pukui 1979; Bender &                  2006a, 2006b
              Beller 2006a, 2006b               Marshallese Harrison & Jackson 1984
Hawu          Walker 1982                       Maskelynes Healey 2013
Hoava         Davis 2003                        Matukar      Anderson et al. 2010; Barth 2012
Hula          Lean 1991                         Mav̋ ea      Guérin 2011
Hula          Short 1935                        Merei        Chung 1998
Javanese      Robson 1992                       Minaveha     Lovell 1994
Kairiru       Wivell 1981a                      Miniafia     Wakefield 1975
Kaiwa         Bradshaw 2001                     Minigir      van der Mark 2007
Kalo          King et al 2014                   Mokilese     Harrison 1976; Harrison &
Kambera       Klamer 2010                                    Jackson 1984
Keapara       King et al 2014                   Molima       Engkvist & Engkvist 1997
Kele          Ross 2002a                        Mortlockese Harrison & Jackson 1984
Kéo           Baird 2002                        Motu         Lister-Turner & Clark 1954b;
Kilivila      Malinowski 1920; Lawton 1993;                  Lean 1991
              Senft 1995                        Mouk         Thurston 1996b
Kiribati      Harrison & Jackson 1984;          Mussau       Brownie & Brownie 2007
              Groves, Groves & Jacobs 1985;     Muyuw        Lithgow & Lithgow nd
              Bender & Beller 2006b, 2007a      Mwotlap      François 2003
Kokota        Palmer 2009                       Nadrogā      Geraghty 2002
Koro          Cleary-Kemp 2015                  Nahavaq      Dimock 2009
Kosraean      Lee 1975; Harrison & Jackson      Nakanai      Johnston 1980
              1984                              Nalik        Volker 1998
Kove          Sato 2012                         Namakir      Sperlich 1991
Kubokota      Chambers 2009.                    Naman        Crowley 2006c
Kwaio         Keesing 1985                      Nauruan      Kayser 1993 [1936]
Kwamera       Lindstrom & Lynch 1994            NE Ambae     Hyslop 2001
Label         Peekel 1930                       Nehan        Glennon 2014
Lala          Symonds 1989                      Nêlêmwa      Bril 2014
Lamaholot     Nishiyama & Kelen 2007            Nese         Crowley 2006d
Lamogai       Thurston 1996b                    Neve’ei      Musgrave 2007
Lau           Ivens 1929b                       Neverver     Barbour 2012
                                                   Numerals, classifiers and counting 513


Nguna         Schütz 1969                       Takuu        Moyle 2011
Niuafo’ou     Tsukamoto 1988                    Tamambo      Jauncey 2011
Notsi         Erickson & Erickson 1992          Tami         Bamler 1900
Nukuoro       Carroll 1965; Bender & Beller     Tangga       Maurer 1966
              2006a, 2006b                      Tape         Crowley 2006b
Nyelâyu       Ozanne-Rivierre 1998              Tawala       Ezard 1997
Paamese       Crowley 1982                      Teop         Mosel & Thiesen 2007
Papapana      Smith-Dennis 2020                 Tinrin       Osumi 1995
Patpatar      Condra 1989                       Tirax        Brotchie 2009
Poeng         Panoff 1970; Rath 1996            Titan        Bowern 2011
Ponam         Carrier 1981                      To’aba’ita   Lichtenberk 2008b
Ponapean      Rehg 1981; Harrison & Jackson     Tolai        Mosel 1984
              1984; Bender & Beller 2006b       Tolai        Paraide 2008
Pukapukan     Beaglehole & Beaglehole 1938;     Tongan       Churchward 1953; Bender &
              Salisbury 2002                                 Beller 2006a, 2006b, 2007a,
Puluwatese    Elbert 1974; Harrison & Jackson                2007b
              1984                              Tungak       Fast 1990
Ramoaaina     Davies & Fritzell 1992            Tuvalu       Besnier 2000
Rapanui       Bender & Beller 2006a             Ughele       Frostad 2012
Rennellese    Elbert 1988; Bender & Beller      Ulawa        Ivens 1918
              2006a                             Ulithian     Sohn & Bender 1983; Harrison &
Roinji        Lincoln 1978                                   Jackson 1984; ; Bender & Beller
Rongga        Arka 2008                                      2006b
Roviana       Corston 1996                      Unua         Pearce 2015
Sa            Garde 2015                        Ura          Lynch 1983c; Crowley 1999
Sa’a          Ivens 1918                        Uripiv       McKerras 1988
Sakao         Guy 1974; Touati 2014             Utaha        Lynch 1983d
Saliba        Mosel 1994                        Varisi       Scheffler 1958–1961
Samoan        Mosel & Hovdhaugen 1992;          Vera’a       Schnell 2011
              Bender & Beller 2006a, 2006b      Vitu         van den Berg & Bachet 2006
SE Ambrym     Labrecque 2009                    Vurës        Malau 2016
Seimat        Wozna & Wilson 2005               Waima’a      Himmelmann 2010
Siar          Rowe 2005; Frowein 2011           Wogeo        Exter 2010
Sikaiana      Capell 1935–1937                  Woleaian     Alkire 1970; Sohn 1975; Harrison
Sinaugoro     Tauberschmidt 1999                             & Jackson 1984; Bender & Beller
Sio           Clark & Clark 1987                             2006b, 2007a
Sisiqa        Ross 2002b                        Wuvulu       Hafford 2014
Sobei         Sterner & Ross 2002               Xârâcùù      Moyse-Faurie 1995
Sonsorol      Capell 1969                       Yabem        Dempwolff 1939; Bradshaw &
South Efate   Thieberger 2006a                               Czobor 2005
Sudest        Anderson & Ross 2002              Yapese       Jensen 1977
Sursurunga    Hutchisson 1975                   Zabana       Fitzsimons 1989
Sye           Crowley 1998
Tabar         Hong & Hong 2003
Tahitian      Bender & Beller 2006a, 2006b



15 Digit tallying

15.1 Two early Oceanic counting systems

Alongside their inherited decimal system (§14.1.2: Table 14.1) early Oceanic speakers in
mainland New Guinea, New Britain, New Ireland, Bougainville, Vanuatu and New Caledonia
apparently used a digit tally system, a formalised method of counting on one’s fingers, and in
some communities on one’s toes too. The area for which numerals provide evidence of digit
tallying is geographically discontinuous (Map 15.1). Linguistically it consists of WOc minus
the western Solomons (Choiseul, New Georgia, Santa Isabel) along with SOc. For the sake of
brevity, these areas are called the “digit tally areas" here. Just two languages, Seimat (Adm)
and Gela (SES), that have evidence of digit tallying lie outside these areas.

    The tasks of this chapter are, first, to examine the evidence for digit tallying and, second, to
ask why its presence has brought about changes in numeral systems in the digit tally areas, but
not in Oceanic languages elsewhere. An important question is why the digit tally area is
geographically discontinuous. Why, for example, did digit tallying affect numeral systems in
the digit tally areas, but in almost no Admiralty or SE Solomonic languages?

    The presence of tallying alongside the inherited decimal system in the digit tally areas is
unproblematic. Section 14.2.2 proposes that the decimal system was used to its fullest extent
for ceremonial purposes. It also implies that counting was not used in everyday life to the
degree that it is used in modern Western societies. People, for example, were less frequently
counted than in Europe (§14.2.1.3). Measuring evidently used numbers much less than a
westerner might expect (Chapter 16). When counting was used in everyday life, the fingers
were used along with—in many communities—a small subset of inherited numerals.

    Evidence for digit tallying today, or recently, is given in §15.2. Evidence for digit tallying
in the past is found in many numeral systems in the digit tally areas and some outside them.
Numeral systems with four quite widespread structures are examined in this chapter, and to
this end a more formal terminology than the one used in chapter 14 is needed. This is the
topic of §15.3, and §15.4 employs it to describe the four system structures. The forms of
various numeral words reflect a digit-tallying past (§15.5). Section 15.6 shows the rather
skewed distribution of the four system structures across Oceanic, and §15.7 investigates the
origins of the three system structures that have a 5-base. Using evidence from the foregoing
sections, §15.8 suggests answers to the questions above, and §15.9 summarises the chapter’s
main arguments.

516 Malcolm Ross


15.2 Digit-tallying practices

    Digit tallying takes a number of forms around the world, and is more deeply embedded in
some cultures than in others (Bender & Beller 2012). Observations of children show that
finger-counting is not a necessary part of learning to count, and is thus not essential to
developing a numeral system (Crollen, Seron & Noël 2011). It is not embedded in Ponam
(Adm) culture, for example, where Carrier (1981:468) notes that people generally do not count
on their fingers, except when, for example, an adult is counting something they see or visualise
in memory.

    The general Oceanic pattern of tallying by counting off the fingers of one hand, then the
other, and then perhaps the toes of each foot, to arrive at ‘one person’, i.e. 20, has also been
documented from the Arctic to Mesoamerica (Closs 1986), in west Africa, and in Khoekhoe
languages of southern Africa (Bender & Beller 2012).

    Accounts of tallying among groups of Oceanic speakers indicate that each speech
community had its own procedure, but almost all entailed holding hands open toward the
speaker’s face, then progressively folding the fingers down until one had two fists, i.e. 10.
Some communities also employed the toes, and some repeated the process with the fingers as
a proxy for toes until they reached ‘one person’. Both possibilities existed for Kairiru speakers
(NNG; Wivell 1981). Fingers and toes were used by Mengen (NNG; Panoff 1970) and by
Drehu speakers (NCal; Ray 1926:134). Groups who used fingers only include the Lihir and
Sursurunga of New Ireland (MM; Neuhaus 2015 [1954]:131; Hutchisson 1977) and the
Banks and Ambae islanders of northern Vanuatu (Codrington 1891:353). In other accounts
this information is omitted, perhaps because people only used their hands.

    Some accounts specify whether tallying began with the left hand or the right. Wivell tells
us that the Kairiru started with the left hand, then moved to the right, then to the right foot
before the left. Speakers of Mengen, Tangga of New Ireland (MM; Maurer 1966:75) and Gela
(SES; Codrington 1891:353) started with the right hand, the Banoni of Bougainville (MM;
Lincoln 2010:230) with the left.

    Speakers of Nalik (MM; Volker 1998:118), Tangga, Banoni and Gela started tallying from
the little finger of each hand, speakers of Lihir, Sursurunga and Banks languages from the
thumb. Speakers of Drehu began each hand with the thumb, and each foot with the big toe.

    Codrington reports that Ambae islanders use only one hand to count. They start with the
thumb, and when they have reached 5 and all fingers are down, they straighten all fingers
again, this time counting from the forefinger to the little finger and reserving the thumb for 10.

    If Maurer’s (1966:74) account is correct, Tangga speakers counted both hands and said,
“tika” (‘1’), then counted them again and said, “tike saŋful” (‘one ten’), but meaning that they
had counted 20. They then repeated the whole process and ended with “iu e saŋful” (‘2 tens’),
meaning 40. Maurer offers no explanation for this, but I infer that this was public counting and
involved counting in pairs (cf §14.6.3). Maurer (1966:75) goes on to say that “if the objects
were not present”, i.e. if one was counting something privately in one’s head, then one started
with the little finger of the open hand and counted both hands serially to ten, then repeated the
process, if necessary plucking leaflets from a fern frond to keep count of the tens.

    Panoff (1970:363–364) also describes two modes of tallying among the Mengen. For
numbers below 20, they tallied in pairs:

                                                                                   Digit tallying 517


__blockquote__
     When single units are involved, the Maenge begin counting on the right hand, which is
     held up open. First, the index finger [forefinger] of the right hand touches the thumb of the
       same hand while one says lua (‘two’). The middle and fourth [ring] fingers of the same
       hand are then clustered together and bent downward while one again says lua. Finally, the
       little finger of the same hand is bent while one says ne lima (the ordinal for ‘five’). Once
       this has been done, one passes on to the left hand, using its fingers as tallies in the same
       way as those of the right hand and again calling the numerals lua, lua, ne lima. At this
       point one closes the fists, both hands being held up together, and says tangulelu (‘10’). If
       the number of objects to be counted exceeds ten, one proceeds to the toes of the right foot,
       which are touched with the right forefinger in the same two-two-one succession, the same
       numerals as before being uttered afresh. To reach twenty, one resumes the operation on
       the left foot with the left forefinger used as a pointer. The numeral giaukaena (‘20’) [‘a
       person’s feet’—MR] is then called, and one stoops and places both closed fists on the toes
       to show the completion of the vigesimal series.

The second method, apparently used when a large number of objects was counted in twenties,
was straightforward tallying.

   It is clear, then, that Oceanic speakers in the digit tally areas do or did use tallying as a
means of counting. Whether speakers outside these areas also did so is largely a matter of
conjecture. Carrier (1981) writes that it was not common practice among Ponam (Adm)
speakers. As the examples in this section were noted in the course of reading others’ research,
and no comparative research on digit tallying in the Pacific has been done, it may be sheer
chance that, with the exceptions of Seimat and Gela, examples outside the digit tally areas
have not been found.

   Evidence of earlier digit tallying comes from numeral systems themselves, both from
number words derived from ‘hand’, ‘foot’, ‘thumb’ or person, and from systems that diverge
significantly in structure from the decimal systems described in Chapter 14.

   Note, though, that among the languages mentioned in this section, Sursurunga, Tangga,
Gela and NE Ambae have decimal systems. Thus it need not be supposed that communities
with decimal counting do not also use tallying.


15.3 Terminology

Numerals are unlike many lexical items1 in that in most languages their meanings form a
highly ordered semantic domain. The forms that express those meanings are composed of a
limited number of single-morpheme words—simple numerals—which also serve,
sometimes with modification, as components for the specialised part of the grammar that
constructs numerals with more than one morpheme. These are complex numerals. For
example, two hundred and one is a complex numeral made up of the simple numerals one,
two and hundred and the morpheme and in accordance with the grammar (Booij 2010:195–
204). The grammar allows speakers to generate large numbers of numerals, with the need
only to store simple numerals in memory, probably along with some frequently used complex
numerals (Greenberg 2000:74–75; Moravcsik 2013:47).

   The way a numeral system’s semantic domain is structured varies from language to
language. In a majority of languages worldwide the structure is base-10 (decimal), but
structures with base-5 and base-20, replicating the hands and feet used in digit-tallying, are
fairly common (§15.6).

[1] Whether one calls complex (phrasal) numerals like English one hundred and seventy three lexical items
    depends on one’s theory of grammar, a matter that is beyond the scope of this discussion.

518 Malcolm Ross

: Table 15.1 Cyclicity in Mussau numerals (Brownie & Brownie 2007)

__table__
   tens: 0        10         20                         30              40
   0     —        sa-ŋaulu   lue-ŋaulu                  tolu-ŋaulu      ati-ŋaulu
   1      sesa sa-ŋaulu sesa lue-ŋaulu sesa             tolu-ŋaulu sesa ati-ŋaulu sesa
   2      lua  sa-ŋaulu lua  lue-ŋaulu lua              tolu-ŋaulu lua ati-ŋaulu lua
   3      tolu sa-ŋaulu tolu lue-ŋaulu tolu             tolu-ŋaulu tolu ati-ŋaulu tolu
   4      ata  sa-ŋaulu ata  lue-ŋaulu ata              tolu-ŋaulu ata ati-ŋaulu ata
   5      lima sa-ŋaulu lima lue-ŋaulu lima             tolu-ŋaulu lima ati-ŋaulu lima
   6      nomo sa-ŋaulu nomo lue-ŋaulu nomo             tolu-ŋaulu nomo ati-ŋaulu nomo
   7      itu  sa-ŋaulu itu  lue-ŋaulu itu              tolu-ŋaulu itu  ati-ŋaulu itu
   8      oalu sa-ŋaulu oalu lue-ŋaulu oalu             tolu-ŋaulu oalu ati-ŋaulu oalu
   9      sio  sa-ŋaulu sio  lue-ŋaulu sio              tolu-ŋaulu sio  ati-ŋaulu sio


    Most numeral systems have a cyclic structure (Salzmann 1950:81). The cyclicity of
Mussau’s decimal numeral system in Table 15.1 is self-evident. The lowest numerals in the
system (in column 0) are simple ones counting from 1 to 9 and form the first cycle. In
columns 10 to 40 the element in row 0—call it n—e.g. lue-ŋaulu ‘20’, introduces a round of
this cycle. The cells below it contain a complex numeral, e.g. lue-ŋaulu tolu ‘23’, consisting
of n preceded by an element that replicates 1–9 from the first cycle, each column forming a
fresh round (10–19, 20–29 etc). The first morpheme of each n, namely sa-, lue-, tolu-, ati-, is
a version of one of 1 to 4 and together they form a superordinate cycle. If this cycle were
shown in full, its rightmost column would be headed by sio-ŋaulu ‘90’, and the table would
end with 99, after which a second round of the superordinate cycle would begin with ai ‘100’.

    Thus each column is a round of a 10-cycle, and the superordinate cycle represented by the
first row (sa-ŋaulu etc) is a 100-cycle. A cycle defines a base. The base of the first cycle, 10 (-
ŋaulu), initiates the second and further rounds of the 10-cycle (the columns of Table 15.1).
Similarly the base of the next cycle, 100 (ai), initiates the second and further rounds of the
100-cycle (rua ai ‘200’ etc). Mussau is thus a base-10 (or decimal) system, or, more exactly, a
base-10-100 system.

    Commonly, complex numerals in non-initial rounds of a cycle are formed by adding
lowest numerals to the base numeral (e.g. sa-ŋaulu sesa ‘11’, sa-ŋaulu lua ‘12’, etc) or by
multiplying the base numeral by a numeral smaller than the base (e.g. sa-ŋaulu ‘10’, lue-
ŋaulu ‘20’, etc). Thus Mussau has a canonic system, canonic in that it follows regularly a
small set of rules for generating complex numerals (cf Hammarström 2008:290).


15.4 Cyclicity in numeral systems of the digit tally areas

Decimal systems also occur within the digit tally areas, but three other types of system structure
are common: base-5-10, base-5-20 and base-5-10-20. I will refer to them collectively as
‘base-5+’ systems. The following subsections describe an example of each of these systems.

                                                                             Digit tallying 519

: Table 15.2 Cyclicity in Daakaka numerals (von Prince 2012:224–225)

__table__
                                           base-5
                            fives: 0          5
                            0      —    —     lim                 ‘5’
                            1      sʷa ‘1’ milip-sʸes             ‘6’
                            2      lo   ‘2’ miliv-yo              ‘7’
                            3      sī   ‘3’ milip-sī              ‘8’
                            4      vʸer ‘4’ me-per                ‘9’



                                             base-10
     tens: 10                           20                     30
     0      suŋavi               ‘10’   uŋ lo              ‘20’ uŋ sī                  ‘30’
     1      suŋavi a sʷa         ‘11’   uŋ lo a sʷa        ‘21’ uŋ sī a sʷa            ‘31’
     2      suŋavi a lo          ‘12’   uŋ lo a lo         ‘22’ uŋ sī a lo             ‘32’
     3      suŋavi a sī          ‘13’   uŋ lo a sī         ‘23’ uŋ sī a sī             ‘33’
     4      suŋavi a vyɛr        ‘14’   uŋ lo a vyɛr       ‘24’ uŋ sī a vyɛr           ‘34’
     5      suŋavi a lim         ‘15’   uŋ lo a lim        ‘25’ uŋ sī a lim            ‘35’
     6      suŋavi a milip-sʸes ‘16’    uŋ lo a milip-sʸes ‘26’ uŋ sī a milip-sʸes     ‘36’
     7      suŋavi a miliv-yɔ ‘17’      uŋ lo a miliv-yɔ ‘27’ uŋ sī a miliv-yɔ         ‘37’
     8      suŋavi a milip-sī    ‘18’   uŋ lo a milip-sī ‘28’ uŋ sī a milip-sī         ‘38’
     9      suŋavi a mɛ-pɛr      ‘19’   uŋ lo a mɛ-pɛr     ‘29’ uŋ sī a mɛ-pɛr         ‘39’


15.4.1 Base-5-10

The corresponding table for the NCV language Daakaka of Ambrym, Table 15.2, falls into
two parts because its numeral system has two bases, the second interrupting the cyclicity of
the first.

   Daakaka starts with a 5 base, i.e. the lowest numerals stop at 5, as shown in the first part of
Table 15.2. As the base-5 matrix in Table 15.2 shows, this part of the system lasts just two
rounds. In Mussau the next higher base is 100, i.e. base×base (10×10). One might expect the
next higher base in Daakaka to be base×base (5×5=25), but it isn’t. The base suŋavi ‘10’
intervenes, and from here on the system is decimal, with decades from 20 upward employing
the much abbreviated uŋ in place of suŋavi, as shown in the base-10 matrix of Table 15.2.

   Unlike Mussau, Daakaka has no further bases. 100 is simply uŋ suŋavi (10×10). Within
each base-10 round are two subordinate base-5 rounds.


520 Malcolm Ross


   The numerals in the second base-5 round, 6 to 9, are formed additively, albeit with some
morphophonemic changes. Such numerals began life as 5+1, 5+2 etc, with a ligature
morpheme that functions like a plus sign. In many NCV languages the ligature reflects the
POc neutral caused-motion verb *lapi ‘take, get, give’ (vol.5:426).2 The second syllable of
the Daakaka ligature milip- reflects *lapi, while various origins of initial mi- can be posited
(Lynch 2009:402).3 It is common for the ligature alone to function as the expression of 5+ in
this context. Daakaka thus has a base-5-10 system, common throughout the digit tally areas
(see Map 15.1). Where they reflect POc numerals such systems are treated as decimal in
Chapter 14, as they differ from a base-10 system only in their treatment of 6–9.

    Lynch’s (2009) “imperfect decimal” category of Oceanic numeral systems lumps together
the additive 6–9 sequences in Daakaka, Mangap and Tuam with subtractive sequences like
7-9 in Ponam aha-talo-f [minus-3-CLF] ‘7’, aha-luo-f [minus-2-CLF] ‘8’, aha-se [minus-1-CLF]
‘9’ (§14.4.3.5).4 However, the subtractive sequence is not cyclic, so in this respect Ponam 10
does not define a base. The numeral ‘10’ is a base in Ponam, but because there is a base-10
cycle, not because it is a minuend.[5]

15.4.2 Base-5-20

The Mangap (NNG) system, shown in Table 15.3, is similar to Daakaka insofar as it has two
bases, but differs from it in several ways, the most salient of which is that the second base is
20, not 10, i.e. it is a base-5-20 system Hence there are four base-5 rounds before tomō-ta
[20×1] ‘twenty’ interrupts base-5 cyclicity. After this interruption, numeration continues quite
consistently, with base-5 rounds occurring within each superordinate base-20 round.

    There is an oddity in the base-5 matrix. Instead of counting across row 0 lama-ta ‘one
five’, lāmu-ru ‘two fives’, †lāmu-tel ‘three fives’, the expected -tel ‘3’is replaced by -ro-ma-
ta ‘2 plus 1’. Probably lamo-ro-ma-ta [hand-2-and 1] ‘15’ abbreviates a phrase meaning ‘two
hands and one foot’, harking back to digit-tallying. Viewed from the perspective of numeral
system structure, however, lamo-ro-ma-ta breaks a rule that would generate †lāmu-tel.

    Base-5-20 systems are found scattered across parts of the digit tally areas (see Map 15.1). The
Mangap system is not quite transparent because the language has undergone various vowel
changes, mainly vowel harmonisations. The lowest base, lama- ‘5’, reflects POc *lima ‘five’.
The second base, tomō-ta ‘one twenty’, is apparently a haplologic6 reduction of tomōto-ta and
means ‘one man’, again suggesting a digit-tally system that counts two hands, one foot and
four toes (lamo-ro ma-ta mi paŋ) for 19, then counts ‘one person’ or ‘one man’ for ‘20’.

    It is a little difficult to believe that numerals the length of those in the bottom four lines of
the base-20 matrix were used with any regularity in traditional societies, but grammar after
grammar describes such systems, and they are not the inventions of the grammar writers. If
one thinks of them as describing a tally, then, for example, tomtō-ru lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ru does
not say, ‘57’, but ‘2 people (plus) 2 hands and (a foot) plus 2 (toes)’.

[2] With minor differences, this is the position taken by Lynch (2009:401–403), who did not have access to
   cognates outside Vanuatu.

[3] The form for 9, meper is rather opaque, but von Prince (2012:401) cites nearby Dalkalaen melafer and
  Daakie melapet, which still reflect the ligature without the abbreviation that occurs in Daakaka.

[4] Codrington (1885:223–228) coined the term “imperfect decimal” for base-5-10. Lynch extends it to include
  subtractive numerals between 6 and 9 (Garde 2015:124). Blust’s (2013:280) “structurally modified decimal”
  adds to this by including any arithmetical operation used to generate a numeral between 6 and 9.

[5] A minuend is the number from which another number is subtracted.

[6] Haplology is the loss of one of two successive (near-)identical syllables.

                                                                Digit tallying 521

: Table 15.3    Cyclicity in Mangap numerals (Bugenhagen 1995:147–148)

__table__
                                    base-5
fives: 0 5                      10                    15
0      —   lama-ta        ‘5’   lāmu-ru        ‘10’   lamo-ro-ma-ta        ‘15’
1      ta  lama-ta mi ta ‘6’    lāmu-ru mi ta ‘11’    lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ta ‘16’
2      ru  lama-ta mi ru ‘7’    lāmu-ru mi ru ‘12’    lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ru ‘17’
3      tel lama-ta mi tel ‘8’   lāmu-ru mi tel ‘13’   lamo-ro-ma-ta mi tel ‘18’
4      paŋ lama-ta mi paŋ ‘9’   lāmu-ru mi paŋ ‘14’   lamo-ro ma-ta mi paŋ ‘19’

                                    base-20
  20s: 20                                 40
  0    tomō-ta                      ‘20’   tomtō-ru                      ‘40’
  1    tomō-ta mi ta                ‘21’ tomtō-ru mi ta                  ‘41’
  2    tomō-ta mi ru                ‘22’ tomtō-ru mi ru                  ‘42’
  3    tomō-ta mi tel               ‘23’ tomtō-ru mi tel                 ‘43’
  4    tomō-ta mi paŋ               ‘24’ tomtō-ru mi paŋ                 ‘44’
  0    tomō-ta lama-ta              ‘25’ tomtō-ru lama-ta                ‘45’
  1    tomō-ta lama-ta mi ta        ‘26’ tomtō-ru lama-ta mi ta          ‘46’
  2    tomō-ta lama-ta mi ru        ‘27’ tomtō-ru lama-ta mi ru          ‘47’
  3    tomō-ta lama-ta mi tel       ‘28’ tomtō-ru lama-ta mi tel         ‘48’
  4    tomō-ta lama-ta mi paŋ       ‘29’ tomtō-ru lama-ta mi paŋ         ‘49’
  0    tomō-ta lāmu-ru              ‘30’ tomtō-ru lāmu-ru                ‘50’
  1    tomō-ta lāmu-ru mi ta        ‘31’ tomtō-ru lāmu-ru mi ta          ‘51’
  2    tomō-ta lāmu-ru mi ru        ‘32’ tomtō-ru lāmu-ru mi ru          ‘52’
  3    tomō-ta lāmu-ru mi tel       ‘33’ tomtō-ru lāmu-ru mi tel         ‘53’
  4    tomō-ta lāmu-ru mi paŋ       ‘34’ tomtō-ru lāmu-ru mi paŋ         ‘54’
  0    tomō-ta lamo-ro-ma-ta        ‘35’ tomtō-ru lamo-ro-ma-ta          ‘55’
  1    tomō-ta lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ta  ‘36’ tomtō-ru lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ta    ‘56’
  2    tomō-ta lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ru ‘37’ tomtō-ru lamo-ro-ma-ta mi ru     ‘57’
  3    tomō-ta lamo-ro-ma-ta mi tel ‘38’ tomtō-ru lamo-ro-ma-ta mi tel   ‘58’
  4    tomō-ta lamo-ro ma-ta mi paŋ ‘39’ tomtō-ru lamo-ro ma-ta mi paŋ   ‘59’

522 Malcolm Ross


15.4.3 Base-5-10-20

Another NNG language, Tuam, has a base-5-10-20 system, as Table 15.4 shows. Whereas the
base-5 matrix in Mangap (Table 15.3) breaks off at 19, the base-5 matrix in Tuam (Table
15.4) breaks off at 9, as the next base, 10, intervenes, as in Daakaka. Notice that the form for
‘10’, saŋavul, reflects POc *saŋapuluq (§14.4.5.1). However, the 20 base, Tuam tamōt-,
resembles Mangap tomō-, both in meaning ‘person’ and in hinting at an earlier digit tally
system.

: Table 15.4        Cyclicity in Tuam numerals (Bugenhagen 2011)

__table__
                                                                      base-10
                                                         tens:   10
                                                         0       saŋavul            ‘10’
                     base-5                              1       saŋavul ve ēz      ‘11’
    fives:   0             5                             2       saŋavul ve ru      ‘12’
    0        —      —      līm           ‘5’             3       saŋavul ve tol     ‘13’
    1        ēz     ‘1’    līm ve ēz     ‘6’             4       saŋavul ve pāŋ     ‘14’
    2        ru     ‘2’    līm ve ru     ‘7’             0       saŋavul ve līm     ‘15’
    3        tol    ‘3’    līm ve tol    ‘8’             1       saŋavul līm ve ēz ‘16’
    4        pāŋ    ‘4’    līm ve pāŋ    ‘9’             2       saŋavul līm ve ru ‘17’
                                                         3       saŋavul līm ve tol ‘18’
                                                         4       saŋavul līm ve pāŋ ‘19’

                                        base-20
    20s: 20                                   40
    0     tamōt-ē                       ‘20’    tamōt ru                               ‘40’
    1     tamōt-ē ve ēz                 ‘21’    tamōt ru ve ēz                         ‘41’
    2     tamōt-ē ve ru                 ‘22’    tamōt ru ve ru                         ‘42’
    3     tamōt-ē ve tol                ‘23’    tamōt ru ve tol                        ‘43’
    4     tamōt-ē ve pāŋ                ‘24’    tamōt ru ve pāŋ                        ‘44’
    0     tamōt-ē ve līm                ‘25’    tamōt ru ve līm                        ‘45’
    1     tamōt-ē līm ve ēz             ‘26’    tamōt ru līm ve ēz                     ‘46’
    2     tamōt-ē līm ve ru             ‘27’    tamōt ru līm ve ru                     ‘47’
    3     tamōt-ē līm ve tol            ‘28’    tamōt ru līm ve tol                    ‘48’
    4     tamōt-ē līm ve pāŋ            ‘29’    tamōt ru līm ve pāŋ                    ‘49’
    0     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul            ‘30’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul                    ‘50’
    1     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul ve ēz      ‘31’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul ve ēz              ‘51’
    2     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul ve ru      ‘32’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul ve ru              ‘52’
    3     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul ve tol     ‘33’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul ve tol             ‘53’
    4     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul ve pāŋ     ‘34’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul ve pāŋ             ‘54’
    0     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul ve līm     ‘35’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul ve līm             ‘55’
    1     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul līm ve ēz ‘36’     tamōt ru ve saŋavul līm ve ēz          ‘56’
    2     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul līm ve ru ‘37’     tamōt ru ve saŋavul līm ve ru          ‘57’
    3     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul līm ve tol ‘38’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul līm ve tol         ‘58’
    4     tamōt-ē ve saŋavul līm ve pāŋ ‘39’    tamōt ru ve saŋavul līm ve pāŋ         ‘59’

                                                                                           Digit tallying 523


15.4.4 Verbalisations of tallying

The four systems described above—base-10 and the three base-5+ types—almost exhaust the
system types in the digit tally areas. They correspond to the terms used by Lynch (2009,
2016b), respectively decimal, imperfect decimal (with the proviso above), quinary and mixed.
Two languages have a base-4-20-40 system, but this is attributed to infiltration by
enumerative classifiers, not to digit tallying (§14.6.3).

   There are also a number of languages with nascent numeral systems. A numeral system is a
conventionalised set of labels with which one counts. A number of languages within the WOc
digit tally area appear not to have a numeral system in this sense, but rather a collection of
verbalisations used while tallying. Their characteristics (and not all have all characteristics)
are:

1)       a. there are terms only up to 20;
         b. beyond the lowest numerals, usually 1–4 but sometimes 1–2, numerals tend to be
            phrases that indicate which fingers and toes have been tallied; they are thus
            sometimes quite long, or are obvious abbreviations of longer phrases;
         c. the term for 20 is also phrasal, and typically declares that all fingers and all toes have
            been tallied;
         d. because the terms are not fully conventionalised, there is sometimes more than one
            phrasal expression in use for certain numbers;
         e. tallying has not yet accommodated to numeral system conventions (see below).

   Table 15.5 shows the set of Yalu (NNG) terms, collected by Holzknecht in the late 1970s.
They are typical of sets of terms in Markham Valley languages. All terms except 1 and 2 are
phrasal, including 20, which tells the listener that the digits of both hands and both feet have
been counted. There are two terms for 20: the phrasal expression and a word meaning ‘whole
man’. This seems to be the subject of ongoing conventionalisation, in that arcamo is a single
word, and could be used to form higher terms like 30, 40 and so on.

   The only numeral words are uruc ‘1’ and siruʔ ‘2’, which have cognates throughout the
Markham family (Holzknecht 1989:128). From these are created 3, siruʔ aruc, and 4, siruʔ
siruʔ. Holzknecht (1989:127) writes:

__blockquote__
        All the languages of the Markham family except Labu have binary number systems,
        having two numerals only—‘one’ and ‘two’. Numbers above two are made up of
        compounds of ‘two plus …’ ; five is, in most languages, a phrase with the word for
        ‘hand’, ten is ‘two hands’, and twenty is either ‘two hands and two feet’ or a phrase
        that means ‘a whole man’.

However, it is not strictly correct to call this system “binary”, as a binary system requires that
a new base intervenes at 4.7 The concept of a “base” requires that the next higher base (or the
highest conventional numeral) be a multiple of the lower base, and 5, the next higher base, is
not a multiple of 2 (but 4 would be). Thus 2 is not a base, but simply an element from which
3 and 4 are built in each quinary round (Hammarström 2008:291–292). Tallying seems to
have been done in pairs (cf Poeng; §15.2), and the set of terms is still in the process of
becoming a conventionalised numeral system. For convenience’s sake such a set of numeral
terms is labelled base-5-(20), the parentheses indicating that 20 is the highest numeral in the
system and not itself a base.

[7]  Just as in a decimal system the next base is 10 × 10 = 100, so in a binary system the next base is also BASE ×
     BASE, i.e. 2 × 2 = 4.

524 Malcolm Ross

: Table 15.5          Cyclicity in Yalu numerals (Holzknecht 1998)

__table__
                                                   base-5
fives:              5                              10                         15
                      pagi-g lefe-n
                                  a
                                                        pagi-g siruʔ              pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ menen
0        —                                         ‘5’                       ‘10’                         ‘15’
                      hand-my half-its                  hand-my two               hand-my two, foot one
                      pagi-g lefe-n nicin uruc          pagi-g siruʔ nicin
                                                                                  pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ menen
1       uruc          hand-my half-its and ‘6’ uruc hand-my two ‘11’                                      ‘16’
                                                                                  nicin uruc
                      one                               and one
                      pagi-g lefe-n                     pagi-g siruʔ nicin        pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ menen
2       siruʔ                                      ‘7’                       ‘12’                         ‘17’
                      nicin siruʔ                       siruʔ                     nicin siruʔ
                      pagi-g lefe-n                     pagi-g siruʔ nicin        pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ menen
3       siruʔ aruc                                 ‘8’                       ‘13’                         ‘18’
                      nicin siruʔ aruc                  siruʔ aruc                nicin siruʔ aruc
                      pagi-g lefe-n                     pagi-g siruʔ nicin        pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ menen
4       siruʔ siruʔ                                ‘9’                       ‘14’                         ‘19’
                      nicin siruʔ siruʔ                 siruʔ siruʔ               nicin siruʔ siruʔ
a
  The word lefe-n is glossed ‘half’, but in this context it probably means ‘one pagi-g siruʔ ofoŋ siruʔ
of a pair’.                                                                       hand-my two, foot two, ‘20’
                                                                                  or arcamo ‘whole man’

   The use of 1 and 2 to create other lower numerals is taken furthest in Roinji (NNG)
(Stober 2011, including data from Lincoln 1978). Data are incomplete, but the language
counts from 1 to 9 with additive combinations of tenina ‘1’ , takesi ‘add 1 (?)’ and lua[zua]
‘2’, such that 9 is luazua luazua luazua luazua takesi. 10 is nima-ra lua [hand-P:1INC.PL] ‘our
(INC) 2 hands’, and 20 limu tenina dima-na kee-na [man one hand-P:3SG foot-P:3SG] ‘one
man’s hands and feet’. No numerals from 11-19 have been recorded. To the extent that this is
a system, it is base-10-(20).

   Besides the Markham languages and Roinji there are several other languages with base-5-
(20) numerals, all of them within NNG or PT. They are recorded for Matukar, Bing (both
NNG) and Bwaidoka (PT). The set of terms in Matukar is interesting for the fact that some
numbers can be described in more than one way, i.e. they have yet to be conventionalised.
Terms for 20 include (Anderson et al. 2010; Barth 2012):

2)       a. numa-u gudu-n yawa-yawa
            hand-my nape-its 4
            ‘4 wrists’, i.e. 20
         b. ne-u      da numa-u da
            foot-my with hand-my with
            ‘my feet and my hands’, i.e. 20 digits

         c. ne-u      aru
            foot-my two
           ‘my two feet’ (abbreviated from ‘my two feet and my two hands’?)

                                                                                      Digit tallying 525


Barth states that this terminology does not extend beyond 20.

   Closely related to Matukar is Takia. Its terminology is clearly based in finger tallying
because, unlike other NNG languages, it uses the names of fingers for 5–10. The term for 5,
kafe-n, means ‘its thumb’ (‘its’ because the full form was bani-g kafe-n [hand-my thumb-its]
‘my hand’s thumb’), and alludes to Takia speakers counting four fingers, then their thumb (cf
§15.2), i.e. the thumb is the fifth digit counted. Terms for 6-9 are the five fingers of the other
hand from the little finger to the thumb. However, the terminology has a second set of terms
for 6-9, using kafe-n ‘thumb’ as a base and counting ‘thumb plus one’, ‘thumb plus two’ and
so on to 10, ‘2 thumbs’. The alternative terminology suggests that the system is (or was)
being conventionalised, such that kafe-n is treated as the numeral 5 and the added numerals
are a second round of 1–4. The word bani-g ‘my hand’ then stands in for ‘ten’ throughout the
teens. The term for 20, on the other hand, is still phrasal. Thus Takia appears to have (had) a
nascent base 5-10-(20) system.

: Table 15.6         Takia numeral terms (Waters 1996)8

__table__
                numeral term                         morpheme-by-morpheme gloss
                kisaek, kaek                    ‘1’ one
                uraru                           ‘2’ two
                utol                            ‘3’ three
                iwo-iwo                         ‘4’ pair-pair
                kafe-n(=da)                     ‘5’ thumb-its(=with)
                suku-n(=da)                     ‘6’ little.finger-its(=with)
                balab                           ‘7’ ring.finger
                ari abe-n                       ‘8’ wristband place-its
                bemfufu                         ‘9’ index.finger
                kafe-n=dad kaek                 ‘6’ thumb-its(=with.them) one
                kafe-n=dad uraru                ‘7’ thumb-its(=with.them) two
                kafe-n=dad utol                 ‘8’ thumb-its(=with.them) three
                kafe-n=dad iwoiwo               ‘9’ thumb-its(=with.them) four
                bani-g ananaem                  ‘10’ hand-my both.sides
                kafe-n uraru                    ‘10’ thumb-its two
                bani-g ananaem kisaek           ‘11’ hand-my both.sides one
                bani-g ananaem uraru            ‘12’
                bani-g ananaem utol             ‘13’
                bani-g ananaem iwoiwo           ‘14’
                bani-g ananaem kafen            ‘15’
                bani-g ananaem sukun da         ‘16’
                bani-g ananaem balab            ‘17’
                bani-g ananaem ali aben         ‘18’
                bani-g ananaem bem fufu         ‘19’
                bani ŋie=da tumani              ‘20’ hand.your foot.your=with join

[8] The terms in this table are drawn from Waters (1996), but corrected from Waters (1998). The morpheme-by-
    morpheme glosses are mine, based on Waters’ notes.

526 Malcolm Ross


15.5 Lexical reflexes of digit tallying

Of base-5+ systems, it is base-5-20 systems that are structurally least like decimal systems
and that most obviously reflect digit-tallying. Base-5-20 systems use 5 as a base, reflecting
the number of fingers on a hand. These systems often use a term for ‘person’ or ‘man’ for 20,
or use a complex expression meaning ‘both hands and both feet’. Not only the structure of the
system, then, but also the sources of the numerals for 5 and 20, reflect a digit-tallying origin
in quite an obvious way.

   Where 5 is a reflex of POc *lima, it is difficult to assess whether this reflects very ancient,
pre-Oceanic finger tallying or the Oceanic fact that reflexes of *lima also mean ‘hand’. But
where 5 reflects some other term for ‘hand’, i.e. a post-POc innovation, the probability that it
arose as part of a tally system is high. There are four sets of cases where this applies.

   The first case consists of Seimat te-pani-m and Wuvulu ai-pani, both reflecting Proto W
Admiralty *tai pani ‘one hand’ (< POc *tai ‘one’, §14.4.1.3.1; *banic ‘wing, fin (probably
pectoral); (?) arm, hand’, vol.5:162). Seimat has a base-5-20 system, Wuvulu an unusual
base-10 system (§14.6.3: Table 14.10).

   The second case reflects PWOc *baqe- ‘wing’, which at least in the Huon Gulf languages
(marked NNG below) had come to mean ‘hand’. These languages employ a reflex of *baqe-
for 5. In each instance an added morpheme indicates that only one hand is involved. The first
four languages belong to the Markham group of no-base or base-5-20 languages, their
analysis depending on data not currently available (§15.4.4). Kaiwa and Hote are base-5-20
languages.

<
PWOc *baqe ‘wing, (?) hand’
 NNG: Wampur              baʔi-an              ‘hand’
 NNG: Wampur              baʔi-nasih           ‘5’
 NNG: Silisili            baᵑgi                ‘hand’
 NNG: Silisili            baᵑgi-face           ‘5’
 NNG: Yalu                pagi-n               ‘hand’
 NNG: Yalu                pagi-g-refen         ‘5’
 NNG: Wampar              baŋi-n               ‘hand’
 NNG: Wampar              |baŋi-d oŋan|        ‘5’ (= ‘my one hand’)
 NNG: Kaiwa               bage                 ‘hand’
 NNG: Kaiwa               bage-ta-vlu          ‘5’
 NNG: Hote                bahe-ŋ               ‘hand’
 NNG: Hote                bahe-ŋ-pi            ‘5’
 NNG: Mumeng (Patep)      vge                  ‘hand’
 NNG: Mumeng (Patep)      vgɛ-vlu              ‘5’ (= ‘hand-part’)
 MM: Papapana             bae                  ‘(bird) wing; shoulder’
 MM: Banoni               ba                   ‘(bird) wing’
 MM: Torau                bae                  ‘arm’
 MM: Lungga               (ba)ba               ‘wing’
 MM: Kokota               baɣi                 ‘wing; feather’
>

                                                                            Digit tallying 527


   The third case is different in that it has to do with fingers rather than a hand. Suauic (PT)
languages have a set of lower numerals that draw from a pool that includes reflexes of POc
numerals as well as forms from an unknown source. Thus for 5 Proto Suauic had *nima (<
POc *lima) and *valigigi (reflected as Bohutu faligigi, Suau haligigi and Tubetube valigigi).
Proto Suauic *valigigi has a partial etymology, in that reflexes of *gigi mean ‘digits: fingers
and toes’ (Russ Cooper, pers. comm., 11 March 2018). The term *vali-gigi perhaps meant
‘five fingers’ or ‘all the fingers’. Suauic languages have base-5-20 or base-5-10-20 systems.

    Possible cognates are Wogeo kʷik, kiki- ‘four’ (§14.6.3: Table 14:11) and Proto Kimbe
*gigi ‘count, tally’, which perhaps originally meant ‘to count on one’s fingers’.

<
Proto Kimbe *gigi ‘count, tally’
  MM: Bola                 gi                 ‘count’
  MM: Bulu                 gi                 ‘count’
  MM: Nakanai              gigi               ‘count, read’
  MM: Meramera             gi                 ‘count’
>

   The fourth case is Takia (NNG) kafe-n [thumb-P:3SG], also used for ‘five’, and consistent
with a tally that first counts four fingers.

   Below are listed a sample of terms for 20 that literally mean ‘(2) hands and (2) feet’, along
with morpheme-by-morpheme glosses. In the two PT phrases, fafa- ‘side’ is used for ‘one of
a pair’, which is followed by ‘2’, giving ‘both of a pair’.

__formgroup__
  NNG: Malalamai           |nima-nda ai-nda              | [hand-our foot-our]
  NNG: Roinji              |limu tenina dima-na kee-na   | [man one hand-his foot-his]
  NNG: Dami                |ima uru ye uru               | [hand 2 foot 2]
  NNG: Takia               |bani ŋie=da tumani           | [hand.your foot.your=with it.joins]
  NNG: Bing                |dima-d ruw yē-d ruw          | [hand-our 2 foot-our 2]
  NNG: Mindiri             |ma-da-ru kie-da-ru           | [hand-our 2 foot-our 2]
  NNG: Yalu                |bagi-ag siruk oho-ŋg siruk   | [hand-my 2 foot-my 2]
  NNG: Musom               |ho-ŋ siruk bai-ŋ siruk       | [foot-my 2 hand-my 2]
  PT:   Bwaidoga           |age-fafa-liga                | [foot-side-two]
  PT:   Kaninuwa           |nima fafa-na nua keta kae nua| [hand side-its 2 and foot 2]
  NCal: Xârâcùù            |xɛ̃ ʃā kamũrũ                |  [hand.foot 1 person]

Of these languages all have a base-5-20 system except Roinji (base-2-20), Bwaidoga and
Xârâcùù (both base-5-10-20).

   Two of the languages above, Roinji and Xârâcùù, specify ‘hands and feet of one man/
person’. A far larger number of languages with a 20 base abbreviate this to ‘one man’ or ‘one
person’. Examples are Mangap tomō-ta and Tuam tamōt-ē, both [person-one] (Tables 15.3
and 15.4) and the following terms for 20:

__formgroup__
  Adm: Seimat              |seilon tel  |             [person one]
  NNG: Sio                 |tamota taitu|             [person-one]
  NNG: Kilenge             |tamta tei   |             [person one]
  NNG: Malasanga           |korap ta    |             [person-one]
  NNG: Gedaged             |fun daŋa-n  |             [owner whole-3SG]
  NNG: Yabem               |ŋaʔ-sàmuʔ   |             [person-whole]
  NNG: Numbami             |tamota te   |             [person one]
  PT:  Dobu                |to-ʔebʷeu   |             [person-one]
  PT:   Ubir               |orot kaita  |             [person one]
  PT:   Gapapaiwa          |tomow-ina   |             [man-SG]
  MM: Lihir                |a ziktun    |             [ART person]
  MM: Patpatar             tunan                    [man] (used with food or shell money)
  NCV: SE Ambrym           |hanutap tei        |      [person one]
  NCV: Paamese             |hanu mau           |      [person whole]
  NCV: Nasvang             |na-məxar           |      [ART-person]
  SV: Lenakel              |ieramím karena rəka|      [person one 3SG-not]
  NCal: Nêlêmwa            āxi-ak                   [one-person]
  NCal: Yuanga             |axɛ ɛᵑgu           |      [one person]
  NCal: Nemi               |hēc khāk           |      [one person]
  NCal: Pije               |hē kahyuk          |      [one person]
  NCal: Ajië               |kanī kãmɔ          |      [one person]
  NCal: Iaai               |xaca at            |      [one person]
  NCal: Drehu              ca-aʈ                    [one-person]

528 Malcolm Ross


Apart from Seimat (Adm) and Lihir (MM), all the terms above are from languages that
belong to the digit-tallying areas. Patpatar (MM) has a decimal system but uses tunan when
certain objects are counted. It seems likely that ‘one man/person’ was used for 20 in digit-
tallying in early Oceanic, but only the meaning, not the form, can be reconstructed with any
certainty.

    In many PT languages 20 is a phrase that most literally means ‘one man has died’ or
something similar, expressing the idea ‘one man is complete’:

__formgroup__
  PT:     Gumawana         |koroto tayamo i-kavava|          [one man 3SG-finish]
  PT:     Bunama           |lohea i-moasa         |          [man 3SG-die]
  PT:     Tawala           |lawa emosi i-hilaga   |          [man one 3SG-die]
  PT:     Bwanabwana       |tau kaigeda si-mate   |          [man one 3PL-kill]
  PT:     Saliba           |tau kesega ye mate    |          [man one 3SG die]

   Digit-tallying has effects on specific numerals in specific 3SG that go beyond those noted
above. They affect the numerals shown in Table 15.7.

   The numeral kavitmit ‘5’ in Nalik of New Ireland is analysed as ka-vit-mit [3-NEG-hand]
‘no hand’, reflecting the practice of putting the fingers down as one counts: reaching 5, there
are no fingers showing, hence ‘no hand’. In the numerals 6–9, ka-vizik [3-go.down] means ‘it
goes down’, and refers to the fingers of the hand being lowered (Volker 1998:118).

   Lincoln (2010:230) discusses the numerals in Banoni and Piva (MM), a closely related pair
of Bougainville languages. The hyphenations in Table 15.7 are his, and in 2, 4 and 5 it is the
morpheme after the hyphen that reflects the POc etymon. The numeral 3 has undergone lexical
replacement. The numeral 6, bena, at first sight seems to be a lexical replacement for *onom
‘6’. But it can’t be, as 7 is bena to-m (‘bena 2’) and 8 is bena ka-isa (‘bena 3’). In other
contexts bena means ‘cross over (to the other side)’, and is here a reference to changing hands
during counting: 6 is implicitly †bena kadaken ‘cross over (and) one’. The system then falls
into place.

                                                                                Digit tallying 529

: Table 15.7        Numerals that reflect digit tallying

__table__
                    Nalik (MM)             Banoni (MM)      Piva (MM)           Kwamera (SV)
       POc
                    (base-5-10)            (base-10)        (base-10)           (base-5-20)
   1   *sa-kai      a-zaɣei                kadaken          kadaken             kʷatia
   2   *rua         u-ru[a]                tō-m             to-nua              kə-ru
   3   *tolu        o-rol                  da-pisa          to-pisa             ka-har
   4   *pat[i]      o-rol-a-vāt            to-vaci          e-vaci              ke-fa
   5   *lima        ka-vit-mit             ɣi-nima          nīma                kə-rirum
   6   *onom        ka-vizik-saɣei         bena             e-bena              kə-rirum-kʷatia
   7   *pitu        ka-vizik-uru[a]        bena to-m        bena to-nua         kə-rirum-kəru
   8   *walu        ka-vizik-tal           bena ka-pisa     bena to-pisa        kə-rirum-kahar
   9   *siwa        ka-vizik-fāt           visa             sia                 kə-rirum-kefa
  10   *sa-ŋapuluq sanaflu                 manoɣa           manoɣa              kə-rirum-kərirum
                    sanaflu vara           manoɣa tō-m      manoɣa to-nua       iuan u m-iuan u
  20   *rua-ŋapuluq
                    urua
                                                                                Lindstrom & Lynch
                       Volker 1998         Lincoln 2010     Lincoln 2010
                                                                                1994

    In Kwamera, the numeral of interest is 20, which is a puzzle until iuan u m-iuan u is
glossed [not.exist this and-not.exist this]. The description resembles Nalik 5 above, but this
time it is all fingers and all toes that no longer ‘exist’ because they (or at least the fingers) are
folded down.

    The languages of the Epi-Efate group (NCV) all have a base-5-10 system, but their terms
for 10 all reflect Proto Epi-Efate *lua-lima [2×5], implying an earlier system in which 10 was
not a base. But the order of its components is unexpected. If it originally meant ‘two fives’,
then ‘five’ was the noun head and ‘two’ the attribute. Since the regular order in early Oceanic
was N NML (and still is in Epi-Efate languages), one would expect †*lima-lua rather than *lua-
lima.

    We can infer from this material that early Oceanic speakers used digit-tallying. No POc
etyma involved in a tally system can be reconstructed, but this is not surprising, as a tally
system is a strategy rather than a specialised set of lexical items. It is suggested in §15.7 that
tally systems resulted from early contact, so their use in early Oceanic speaking communities
may have been patchy. This takes us to the question, were a decimal system and a tally system
in use side by side in some early Oceanic communities? The functions of the two systems in
these communities, as set out here and in the subsections of §14.1.2, were different enough
that their simultaneous use in a community is quite plausible. The decimal system was largely
reserved for ceremonial occasions, and only a few senior men or perhaps aspirants to
seniority, had the fullest knowledge of it and its accompanying formalities, including the
proper use of enumerative classifiers. The digit tally system was in informal use and was
known to the whole community. Its uses were restricted in comparison with modern western
enumeration (§14.1.2.3–4). However, one system sometimes spilt over into the domain of the
other, and over time hybrid systems came into being.

530 Malcolm Ross


15.6 The distribution of Oceanic numeral cycles

Map 15.1 shows the distribution of numeral cycles in Oceanic languages of the western
Pacific. Oceanic languages east of longitude 180˚ are not included: all are Polynesian. Map
15.2 shows NW Melanesia,9 and Map 15.3 Vanuatu, both on a larger scale. The three maps are
derived from a database of 383 Oceanic languages compiled as part of the research for this
chapter. Numerals for many more languages are available, but insufficient data are provided to
determine the cyclicity of their numeral systems.

   Among these languages numeral cycles are distributed as in (3). Percentages are rounded to
the nearest whole number.

3)      Cycle            Number of languages
        base-10          148       39%
        base-5-10        130       34%
        base-5-10-20      43       11%
        base-5-20         43       11%
        base-2-20          1         0%
        base-4-20-40       2         0%
        base-8-12-24       1         0%
        base-5             5         1%
        No base           10         4%
        Total            383        100%

     These figures gainsay a comment by Bender & Beller (2006:380):

__blockquote__
       These decimal [base-10—MDR] systems still prevail in most languages originating from
       Proto-Oceanic, the eastern-most branch of Austronesian. With only a small number of
       exceptions that are not relevant here, their words for the numbers 1 through 9 widely reflect
       the numerals reconstructed for Proto-Austronesian and Proto-Oceanic, and reflexes of the
       Proto-Oceanic (POC) term for 10. (Italics mine)

   The largest category in (3) does indeed comprise base-10 languages like Mussau (Table
15.1) but they are closely followed by base-5-10 languages like Daakaka (Table 15.2).
Together these two decimal categories comprise 278 languages. 89 languages (23 per cent)
include 20 among their bases.

   The geographic distributions of these categories as revealed in the three maps are striking.
Almost all languages of the Admiralties and all languages of Micronesia, the Solomons, Fiji
and Polynesia have a base-10 system. A base-10 system also occurs in about half the MM
languages of New Britain, New Ireland and Bougainville, with a scattering in north Vanuatu
from the north of Espiritu Santo southward to the northern cape of Malakula. Base-10 systems
are found almost nowhere in mainland New Guinea, and nowhere in New Caledonia. The vast
majority of base-10 languages reflect the POc terms for 1 to 10 (Table 14.1), and most
base-5-10 languages reflect POc terms for 1 to 5.

   The remaining MM languages of New Britain, New Ireland and Bougainville have a
base-5-10 system, and base-5-10 systems are in the majority in Vanuatu (Map 15.3).

[9] ‘NW Melanesia’ is a convenient abbreviation for ‘New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago plus
    Bougainville’.

532 Malcolm Ross

Map 15.2: Distribution of numeral cycles in NW Melanesia

                                                                                  Digit tallying 533

                      Map 15.3.      Distribution of numeral cycles in Vanuatu

   Languages with a base-5-20 system are found scattered among NNG and PT languages of
mainland New Guinea, in a clump in southern New Caledonia and the Loyalties, and in
various isolated spots: one language each on Ninigo Atoll (Seimat, Adm), Lihir (MM, east of
New Ireland) and on Ambrym (NCV), and in the languages of Tanna (SV).

15.7 The origins of base-5+ systems

It is obvious that most base-5+ systems are hybrids, in the sense that a 5- and a 20-base reflect digit-
tallying, while the numeral morphemes of which they are composed reflect those of the POc
decimal system.

     The POc simple numerals that might survive into a base-5-20 system are, of course, 1–5. Except
for 20, other base-5-20 numerals are complex and usually contain one or more simple numerals (e.g.
Mangap lama-ta mi ru [5-1 and 2] ‘7’). The term for 20 is usually ‘a person’, and this is often of POc
ancestry.

     How might this blending have occurred? The answer must in some cases refer to language
contact. Map 15.4 shows the retention of POc numerals from 2 to 5 in base-5+ systems. The
map does not distinguish between the four numerals. It simply shows how many of the four are
retained in each language, from a maximum of 4 to a minimum of zero. It is striking that Vanuatu
and New Caledonia are more conservative in this regard than New Guinea and New Britain
and scattered languages elsewhere in NW Melanesia. Only in NW Melanesia does one find
languages that retain fewer than three of the four. Since these islands were occupied by
Papuan speakers when speakers of pre-Oceanic arrived in the Bismarcks,10 whereas Vanuatu
and New Caledonia were not, this attrition of POc numerals can be attributed to contact.

4

    Map 15.4

                                                                                     Digit tallying 535


   One might expect that base-5-20 systems, being closer to tallying, would have
significantly fewer POc numerals than are in base-10 and other base-5+ systems, but the only
remotely salient difference in Table 15.8 between retentions in base-5-20 languages and those
in other base-5+ languages is that only 29.5 per cent of base-5-20 languages retain all four
POc numerals, as against 65.7 per cent in other base-5+ languages. But this difference is
compensated for by the fact that 54.5 per cent of base-5-20 languages retain three POc
numerals, as against 17.4 per cent in other base-5+ languages. This does not seem to tell us
anything significant about base-5-20 retentions in comparison with other base-5+ languages.

: Table 15.8 Retentions of POc numerals from 2 to 5 in each base-5+ system, where n is
                                  the number of languages

__table__
                              base-5-20    base-5-10-20           base-5-10            Totals
                               n per cent     n        %            n        %        n          %
          0 retentions         1       2.3    1       2.2           1       0.7       3         1.4
          one retention        3       6.8    5     11.1            7       5.2      15         6.8
          two retentions       3       6.9    4       8.9          12       9.0      19         8.6
          three retentions    24      54.5   10     22.2           21     15.8       55        24.8
          four retentions     13      29.5   25     55.6           92     69.2      130        58.6
          Totals              44     100.0   45 100.0             133     99.9      222       100.2

    The reason for this is probably that base-5-10-20 and base-5-10 languages have each
arisen by more than one route. In Vanuatu and New Caledonia these are partly homegrown,
away from contact with Papuan languages. We turn now to the genesis of the three base-5+
systems.

15.7.1 Are base-5-20 systems hybrids?

In base-5-20 systems the term for 5 is (or is derived from) a term for ‘hand, arm’ (vol.5:160–
162), the term for 10 is often ‘two hands’, the term for 15 sometimes includes the term for
‘foot, leg’ (vol.5:167–168), and the term for 20 is typically ‘man’ or ‘person’ in the sense that
one had exhausted one person’s digits (§15.5). It is self-evident that these systems, like
Mangap (§15.4.2), are derived from a digit-tally system like those described in §15.2.

    Language contact studies suggest strongly that where a language draws at least its basic
lexicon from one source and its grammatical structures (at least in part) from another, this is
the result of bilingualism—of children growing up with two languages and adapting the
structures of their heritage language to those of their ‘other’ language. In a pre-modern context
the heritage language is the language of group identity, and that identity is represented by the
heritage lexicon (Ross 2013 and references therein). The ‘other’ language may be the language
of in-marrying parents or a major language of communication with neighbouring groups.

[10] “Pre-Oceanic” because the innovations that characterised POc had not yet occurred (Pawley 2008a:52).

536 Malcolm Ross


   Base-5-20 numeral systems appear to reflect this pattern fairly directly. In many of them
three or all of 2 to 5 reflect the POc forms reconstructed in Table 14.1, and many of them also
appear to reflect a POc term for ‘one’.11 That is, the lexicon is drawn from speakers’ heritage
language. Their 5- and 20-base structure, on the other hand, reflects their ‘other’ language,
being a digit-tally system like those found in Papuan languages in various areas of New
Guinea (Owens & Lean 2018:76–77). In this sense, then, base-5-20 systems are hybrids.

   Owens & Lean (2018:79) provide a map of base-5+ systems in Papuan languages:
base-5-20 systems are common, but base-5-10+ systems (i.e. base-5-10-20 and base-5-10) are
very rare. Base-5-10+ Oceanic systems are likely, then, to be at least partly “homegrown”, as
the next section shows.

15.7.2 The genesis of base-5-10-20 and base-5-10 systems

Map 15.5 shows the sources of terms for 10 in base-5-10+ languages. The numbers
underlying the map are shown in Table 15.9.12 Terms for 10 that reflect POc *sapuluq or
*saŋapuluq ‘10’ (§14.4.5.1) are abbreviated here as *puluq. Terms that reflect *rua-lima [two
hand] ‘10’ are shown separately as they tell another story (see below). Other terms that mean
‘two hands’ are also shown, as are terms for 10 with an unknown origin, which make up 35
per cent of the relevant data.

   Terms for 10 are singled out here as they provide clues to the history of base-5-10+
systems. Terms for 20 are less informative, as in 31 out of 43 base-5-10-20 languages (72 per
cent) the term means ‘person’, and in a further three it means ‘hands and feet’, clearly
witnessing to the digit-tally origin of these systems (§15.4.3).

   However, there is more than one way in which the role of digit tallying might have been
played out.

: Table 15.9 Sources of terms for 10 in base-5-10-20 and base-5-10 languages

__table__
                                        base                                 Totals
                                     5-10-20     % base 5-10       % base-5-10+            %
              *puluq                     15 31.3           67 59.3               82     50.9
              *rua-lima                   5 10.4            9   8.0              14      8.7
              ‘two hands’a                8 16.7            0   0.0               8      5.0
              origin unknown             20 41.7           37 32.7               57     35.4
              all                        48 100.1         113 100.0             161   100.00
              a
                but not *rua-lima.


[11] Terms for ‘one’ are omitted from Table 15.8 because of the difficulties associated with their
     reconstruction (§14.4.1ff).

[12] In principle sources of terms for10 in base-5-10-20 and base-5-10 could be mapped separately, but the
     distributional differences between them are slight, apart from the fact that there are no base-5-10
     systems in New Caledonia (Map 15.1).

Digit tallying 537

538 Malcolm Ross


4)    Possible origins of a base-5-10-20 system
      a. In the production of a hybrid with POc simple numerals and a digit-tallying model,
         there was a compromise such that the POc numeral for 10 and the 10-cycle from 10
         to 19 was never lost.
      b. Under the influence of a decimal system, a numeral for 10 was introduced into an
         existing base-5-20 system.
      c. Under the influence of a decimal system, the numeral for 3×5 = 15 was lost from an
         existing base-5-20 system, so that counting from 10 to 19 formed a 10-cycle and the
         existing numeral for 2×5 was reinterpreted as a 10-base.

    There is no obvious way of distinguishing between (4a) and (4b), as outcomes of either
process are likely to have a term reflecting *puluq. What can be said is that instances of *puluq
did not arise via a (4c) process, to which we now turn.

    Items reflecting *rua-lima ‘two hands = 5’ are shown separately in Map 15.5 and Table 15.10.
The presence of a single reflex in Tuam, far away from the geographic area formed by
all other reflexes in central and south Vanuatu and New Caledonia, is almost certainly the
result of independent innovation.

    The *rua-lima area embraces Paama, Epi, Efate and Erromango in Vanuatu and the north
of New Caledonia. The northernmost *rua-lima language is thus Paamese (Table 15.10).
Immediately to the north of Paama is SE Ambrym (Parker 1970:ix), the only base-5-20 NCV
language in the database. None of the *rua-lima languages has a base-5-20 system, but there
is good evidence that they are descended from a system like that in SE Ambrym. Three
closely related languages in the far north of New Caledonia—Belep, Nyelâyu and
Nêlêmwa—illustrate the first step in their development. The Nêlêmwa system is shown in
Table 15.10. Belep and Nyelâyu have similar systems, but Belep differs from other other two
in one significant feature.

    The relevant data are in (5).

5)           Belep      Nyelâyu      Nêlêmwa      Proto Far N NCal      Earlier Oceanic
      ‘10’   tũnik      -rulī̃k      tujic        *rũnik                *rua-lima
       ‘2’   tu         -ru          -ru          *-ru                  *rua
      ‘15’   cĩnik      —            —            *tĩnik                *tolu-lima
       ‘3’   cen        —            —            *ten                  *tolu
       ‘5’   -nem       -nem         -nem         *nem                  *lima

Belep arguably has a base-5-20 system (McCracken 2012), Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa
base-5-10-20 (Ozanne-Rivierre 1998; Bril 2014). The shared ancestor of the three languages,
Proto Far North New Caledonia, had terms for 10 and 15: *rũnik and *tĩnik respectively.
Tentatively, these reflect earlier *rua-lima (2×5) and *tolu-lima (3×5), as the forms for 2 and 3
show that the initial consonants do reflect POc *r- and *t-. The morph -ni in *rũnik ‘and
*tĩnik reflects *lima ‘5’: cf nearby Yuanga pɔ-ni [CLF-5] ‘5’ (Bril 2014), Pije/Jawe/Nemi nim
‘5’ (Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre 1982). The origin of final *-k of *rũnik ‘and *tĩnik is
unknown.

   Belep is conservative and continues to reflect *tĩnik ‘15’, which Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa
have lost. All three languages count 10+1, 10+2, 10+3, 10+4. Belep then counts 15, 15+1,
15+2, 15+3, 15+4 for 15 to 19, whereas Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa count 10+5 to 10+9 for 15 to 19.[13]
In other words, Belep counts three rounds of a 5-cycle from 5 to 19, but Nyelâyu
and Nêlêmwa count one round of a 5-cycle from 5 to 9, and one round of a 10-cycle from 10
to 19. Nêlêmwa numerals from 1 to 40 are included in Table 15.10. Thus the loss of *tĩnik
‘15’ and the consequent change in the numerals 15–19 turn the Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa
systems into a base-5-10-20 system.



: Table 15.10      Nêlêmwa, Paamese, Lewo and  SE Ambrym numerals

__table__
                                        Nêlêmwa (NCal)a                             Paamese (NCV)b                     Lewo (Epi, NCV)c                      SE Ambrym (NCV)
                                          base-5-10-20                               base-5-10-20                          base-5-10                             base-5-20
                       1 pʷa-gīk                      1                 tāi                   1              taŋa                  1              tei             1
                       2 pʷa-du                       2                 elu                   2              lua                   2              lu              2
                       3 pʷa-gan                      3                 etel                  3              tɛlu                  3              tol             3
                       4 pʷa-bāk                      4                 ehat                  4              vari                  4              hat             4
                       5 pʷa-nem                      5                 elim                  5              lima                  5              lim             5
                       6 pʷa-nem-gīk                  5+1               lahi-tāi              5+1            o-rai                 5+1            tei he sap      1 and other
                       7 pʷa-nem-du                   5+2               lau-lu                5+2            o-lua                 5+2            …               …
                       8 pʷa-nem-gan                  5+3               lau-tel               5+3            o-rɛlu                5+3            …               …
                       9 pʷa-nem-bāk                  5+4               lau-hat               5+4            o-vari                5+4            …               …
                      10 tujic                        2×5               hālualim              2×5            lualima               2×5            he xa-lu        hand × 2
                      11 tujic ɣa bʷāt pʷa-gīk        10+1              tāi dan tāi           10+1           lualima tāŋa pa tāŋa (10×1)+1        tei e le        one on leg
                      12 tujic ɣa bʷāt pʷa-du         10+2              tāi dan elu           10+2           lualima tāŋa pa lua (10×1)+2         …               …
                      15 tujic ɣa bʷā-t pʷa-nem       10+5              tāi dan elim          10+5           lualima tāŋa pa lima (10×1)+5        le tei bus      leg one finish
                      16 tujic ɣa bʷāt pʷa-nem-gīk 10+(5+1)             tāi dan lahi-tāi      10+(5+1)       lualima tāŋa pa orai (10×1)+(5+1) tei mun e le tei one again on leg one
                      17 tujic ɣa bʷāt pʷa-nem-du 10+(5+2)              tāi dan lau-lu        10+(5+2)       lualima tāŋa pa olua (10×1)+(5+2) …                  …
                      20 ā-ɣi ak                      1 person          hanu mau              1 person       lualima yam lua       10×2           hanu tap        person whole
                      30 ā-ɣi ak ɣa bʷā-t tujic       1 person+10       hanu sav hālualim     1 person+10 lualima yam tɛlu         10×3           …               …
                      40 ā-ru ak                      2 persons         hanu mau elu          2 persons      lualima yam vari      10×4           …               …


                                            Bril 2014                                Crowley 1982                          Early 1994                           Parker 1970

                   4a
                      Nêlêmwa numerals have prefixed classifiers, here pʷa- ‘inanimate’ and ā- ‘animate’. Components of complex numerals include ɣa ‘and’ and bʷāt ‘(on) top’.
                   b
                     Paamese complex numerals contain dan ‘below’, mau ‘whole’ and sav ‘the other’.
                   c
                     Lewo complex numerals contain pa ‘and’ and yam ’times’.

540 Malcolm Ross


   Returning to the base-5-10 *rua-lima systems on Epi, Efate and Erromango (see Lewo of
Epi in Table 15.10), an obvious inference is that they reflect the same history as the
base-5-10-20 systems of New Caledonia (§15.7.1) but have gone a step further. They first
underwent the same step as Nyelâyu and Nêlêmwa, replacing a reflex of *tolu-lima [3×5]
‘15’ with an additive 10+5 numeral to give a base-5-10-20 system. Then the *rua-lima
systems on Epi, Efate and Erromango also replaced the ‘person’ term for 20 with a 10×2
term, so that the 20-cycle disappeared and the 10-cycle took over (bolded in Table 15.10).
Reflexes of *rua-lima were treated as a 10-base: ‘20’ in Epi, for example, is lualima yam lua
[10×2]. Reflexes of *rua-lima are evidently a single morpheme in speakers’ lexicon, and the
result is a base-5-10 system.

   The sequence of changes reconstructed here is thus

6) base-5-20            >    replacement of 3×5 by 10+5              >
   base-5-10-20         >    replacement of ‘person’ by 10×2         > base-5-10

In this way the *rua-lima systems have acquired a term for 10 without borrowing from a
decimal system.

   The *rua-lima story has taken us beyond base-5-10-20 systems to base 5-10, but there are
also base-5-10 systems in NW Melanesia and north and central Vanuatu that do not share this
history. Logically, base-5-10 systems could have originated in two diametrically opposite
ways.

7) Possible origins of a base-5-10 system:
       a. from a base-5-10-20 system: the term for 20 (often ‘person’) is lost, giving a
          base-5-10 system (i.e. as in Epi, Efate and Erromango).
       b. from a decimal system: under the influence of digit tallying simple numerals for 6–9
          are replaced with additive numerals 5+1 to 5+4.

   If base-5-10 systems were generally descended from base-5-10-20 systems, i.e. via (7a),
one would expect the origins of their terms for 10 to pattern similarly to those in base-5-10-20
systems, but Table 15.9 shows that they don’t. A base-5-10 system is twice as likely to display
a reflex of *puluq as is a base-5-10-20 system (59.3% vs 31.3%). A smallish proportion of
base-5-10-20 systems reflects a term for 10 meaning ‘two hands’: 17 per cent when *rua-
lima reflexes are excluded—but no base-5-10 system has such a reflex.


[13] Thus Nyelâyu pʷa-rulĩk bʷār pʷar-nem [CLF-10 top CLF-5] ‘15’.

                                                                                       Digit tallying 541

: Table 15.11 Sa and Notsi base-5-10 and base-10 numeral systems

__table__
            POc               Sa: base-5-10      Sa: base-10      Notsi: base-5-10       Notsi: base-10
       1    (various)         su                 wantua           a-kuk                  koso
       2    *rua              ru                 urua             a-lua                  lua
       3    *tolu             tıl                teul             a-tūl                  tūl
       4    *pat[i]           ıt                 fa               a-et                   et
       5    *lima             lim                [l,n]ima         a-lima                 lima
       6    *onom             le-su ~ li-jia     ondo             a-pas-kuk              wan
       7    *pitu             le-ʊru             fiti ~ piji      a-pas-a-lua            it
       8    *walu             lı-tıl             walo             a-pas-a-tūl            wān
       9    *siwa             li-apat            suan             a-pas-a-et             ciu
      10    *sa-ŋapuluq       suŋul              tendu            saŋaul                 saŋaul

   In light of this it is possible that many base-5-10 systems reflect (7b), simple
replacement of 6 to 9 by additive numerals. There is support for this in situations where a
decimal and a base-5-10 system coexist. An example is Notsi (New Ireland, MM; Table 15.11),
where the base-10 set is “used at mortuary feasts to count the pigs displayed on the
special platform by the feast organizer.” (Erickson & Erickson 1992) and the base-5-10
system is used otherwise. Garde (2015:125–126) reports a similar situation in Sa (south
Pentecost, NCV, Table 15.12), well away from Papuan influence. The base-5-10 system is in
regular use, but an earlier base-10 system is remembered and is now used in restricted
contexts as follows:

        (1) to count people present,
        (2) to count parcels of food or meals to be distributed,
        (3) for heritage purposes, for their inherent historical value as part of the kastom ideology.

The difference between the forms for 2 to 5 in the two Sa systems leaves open the
possibility that one system has been borrowed, but the two Notsi systems may indeed
reflect the modification of the more formal base-10 system by everyday tally-based forms for 6–9.

    There is, however, a piece of counter-evidence to this hypothesis. Oceanic languages that
retain the POc decimal system intact reflect the POc decades *sa[ŋa]puluq ‘1×10’, *rua-
ŋapuluq ‘2×10’, *tolu-ŋapuluq ‘3×10’, and so on. But many Oceanic languages retain a reflex
of either *saŋapuluq or *ŋapuluq ‘10’ in the sense ‘unit of ten’ (§14.4.5.2), so that multiples of 10
are formed as complex numerals reflecting, e.g. *ŋapuluq rua ‘10×2’, *rua saŋapuluq or
*saŋapuluq rua (Table 14.6). If a base-5-10 system were formed from a decimal system just
by replacement of 6 to 9, one would expect the POc decade forms to be retained, but this
happens only in three closely related languages: Motu, Gabadi and Lala of the Central
Papuan subgroup of PT. All other base-5-10 systems, if they retain a reflex of *saŋapuluq or
*ŋapuluq ‘10’, treat it as a ‘unit of ten’ morpheme. The inference to be made here is that
among base-5-10 systems only those of the three Central Papuan languages can be said with
any certainty to be direct descendants of the decimal systems.14 All others have undergone
other modifications in the process of becoming base-5-10 systems, with ramifications too
complex to unravel. The genesis of base-5-10 systems is therefore clouded with some
uncertainty.

[14] The numeral systems of these three languages are unlike other base-5-10 systems in other respects. The
     numerals 6-9 are not formed by simple addition. Motu counts taura-toi 2×3 = 6, hitu 7 (< POc *pitu ‘7’),
     taura-hani 2×4 = 8, taura-hani ta (2×4)+1 = 9. The presence of hitu ‘7’ implies local modification of a
     decimal system.

542 Malcolm Ross

: Table 15.12 Two MM and two NCV languages reflecting the ligature *lapi-

__table__
                                                                 Maskelynes
         Early Oceanic Tungak (MM) Vinitiri (MM)                                    Lelepa (NCV)
                                                                 (NCV)
                           N New Ireland E New Britain           SE Malakula        Efate
     1 *sikai, *tikai      sikei             tikai               sua                skei
     2 *-rua               po-ŋuə            u-ruə               ɛ-ru               rua
     3 *-tolu              po-tol            u-tulu              i-tör              tolu
     4 *-pat[i]            pu-at             i-vati              i-vat              pati
     5   *-lima            palpallima        i-limə              ɛ-ɾım              lima
     6   *lap-t…           [lima]le-sikei    ləp-tikai           mə-lɛf-tes         la-tsa
     7   *lavi-rua         [lima]le-ŋuə      ləva-uruə           mə-lɛv-rʊ          la-rua
     8   *lavi-tolu        [lima]le-tul      ləvu-tulu           mə-lɛv-töɾ         la-tolu
     9   *lavi-pat[i]      [lima]le-at       ləvu-vati           mə-la-pat          l-for
                           Fast 1990         van der Mark 2007 Healey 2013          Lacrampe 2014


15.7.3 Numerals 6–9 and numeral ligatures in base-5-10 languages

In base 5-10 languages each of the numerals 6–9 typically consists of the numeral for 5
followed by one of the numerals 1–4 or variants thereof. In some languages the numerals 1-4
directly follow the 5 numeral, in others a conjunction or a ligature intervenes. A ligature is a
morpheme, often derived from a verb, that has no other function in the language; in particular,
it is not a conjunction. In constructions with a conjunction or a ligature, 5 may be omitted,
leaving the conjunction/ligature plus a numeral between 1–4. This happens in all the languages
in Table 15.12. For example, in Tungak, 7 is either lima-le-ŋuə [5-LIG-2] or the abbreviated
form le-ŋuə.

    A language in which 5 and 1–4 are directly concatenated is Dobu (PT), counting ʔebʷeu
‘1’, ʔerua ‘2’, ʔeto ‘3’, ata ‘4’, nima ‘5’, nima ʔebʷeu ‘6’, nima ʔerua ‘7’, nima ʔeto ‘8’,
nima ata ‘9’, sanau ‘10’.

    A language that makes transparent use of a conjunction is Tuam (NNG), counting es ‘1’,
ru ‘2’, tol ‘3’, paŋe ‘4’, lim ‘5’, lim be es ‘6’, lim be ru ‘7’, lim be tol ‘8’, lim be paŋ ‘9’, saŋul
‘10’.

    For NCV languages Lynch (2009) reconstructs three ligatures: PNCV *lave-a, S Santo/N
Malakula *[la]kau-, C and S Malakula *zau-. PNCV *lave-a has widespread reflexes in
Vanuatu: in the languages of the Torres and Banks Islands, Maewo, Pentecost (except Raga),
the Shepherds and Efate, and in some Ambrym languages, in all base-5-10 Santo languages
and some base-5-10 Malakula languages, and in Paamese (base-5-10-20). PNCV *lave-a also
has cognates in three MM languages, as Lynch recognises: Tungak, Vinitiri and Tolai (the
Tolai reflexes closely resemble those in Vinitiri). It evidently reflects POc *lapi ‘take, get,
give’ (vol.5:426).

                                                                           Digit tallying 543

: Table 15.13 New Britain languages and Äiwoo of the Reefs reflecting the ligature *polo-

__table__
         Early Oceanic    Vitu (MM)        Bola (MM)       Avau (NNG)         Äiwoo (TM)
                          French Islands   New Britain     New Britain        Reef Islands
     1   *sikai, *tikai   katiu            taku            ke                 ñi-gi
     2   *-rua            rua              rua             su                 li-lu
     3   *-tolu           tolu             tolu            moyok              eve
     4   *-pat            vata             va              pɛnɛl              u-væ
     5   *-lima           lima             lima            limi               vi-li
     6   *lap-tikai       polo katiu       polotara        ke polo            pole-gi
     7   *lavi-rua        polo rua         polorua         su polo            pole-lu
     8   *lavi-tolu       polo tolu        polotolu        moyok polo         pole-e
     9   *lavi-pat        polo vata        polova          pɛnɛl polo         polo-uvæ
                          van den Berg & van den Berg
                                                      author’s fieldnotes Næss 2016
                          Bachet 2006    & Wiebe 2019

   One other ligature appears to transcend local boundaries. This is polo-, glossed as Vitu ‘go
aboard’ (van den Berg & Bachet 2006) and Bola ‘go across’ (Wiebe n.d.). It appears to occur
in Bali, Vitu, Bola, Avau and Äiwoo—“appears” because one cannot be certain whether the
ligatures in these languages are cognate or merely homophonous. The data are in Table 15.13.


15.8 Pulling the threads together

15.8.1 Did POc speakers have a base-5-20 system?

The hybridisation referred to in §15.7 implies that both decimal and tally-based systems were
in simultaneous use in some locations. Was this already the case in POc?

    It is incontestable that POc inherited the PMP decimal system (Chapter 14). The question is
whether POc speakers also used a tally system like that outlined in §15.6. It is hard to be
certain. As there are no cognate sets peculiar to Oceanic base-5-20 systems, a POc tally
system cannot be reconstructed. Instead, the occurrence of a word for ‘person’ as the term for
20 represents a common counting strategy. A conservative inference is that tally systems were
in use across much of New Guinea when Austronesian speakers arrived (see, e.g., Owens &
Lean 2018:46), and that the latter adopted them from speakers of Papuan languages.

    This inference is partially supported by the distribution of base-5-20 systems in Map 15.1,
as they are found dotted across New Guinea with a couple of examples in the Bismarcks.

    Further evidence comes from non-Oceanic Austronesian languages immediately to the
west. Austronesian languages around Cenderawasih Bay (just east of the Bird’s Head of New
Guinea) are members of the South Halmahera/West New Guinea (SHWNG) subgroup. They
also use ‘person’ for 20 (Schapper & Hammarström 2013:432–433) within a base-5-10-20
system (Ongkodharma n.d.; Dalrymple & Mofu 2012). Thus speakers of SHWNG and
Oceanic languages that neighbour Papuan-speaking groups have in a number of cases
acquired a tally system. On the other hand, numeral systems of SHWNG and Oceanic
languages that do not immediately neighbour Papuan-speaking groups show no evidence of a
tally system. The SHWNG languages of Halmahera and Ambel in the Rajah Ampat islands
have a straightforward decimal system inherited from PMP (Maan 1951; Bowden 2001;
Arnold 2018), and Map 15.1 shows that Oceanic languages distant from New Guinea have
decimal systems. The likelihood that tally systems in Austronesian languages arose through
copying rather than inheritance is also evidenced by the fact that their distribution within
Papuan-speaking areas is rather random. Dusner of Cenderawasih Bay has a base-5-10-20
system with ‘person’ for 20 (Dalrymple & Mofu 2012), whilst its close relatives Biak and
Wooi reflect a decimal system inherited from PMP (Van den Heuvel 2006; Sawaki 2016).

544 Malcolm Ross


    The mechanism of copying, namely childhood bilingualism, was briefly described in
§15.7.1, but the question of the languages in which children grew up bilingually was left
open. Were they bilingual because their parents spoke different languages or because
everyone in the community spoke a lingua franca alongside their heritage language?

    There is no linguistic evidence to support an answer, but the simplest account is that after
speakers of pre-Oceanic arrived in the Bismarcks, there were soon marriages with Papuan
speakers. If Hage & Marck (2003) are right that POc society was matrilocal, then adult males
joined POc-speaking hamlets,15 and, as adult language learners are wont to do, imposed their
own ways of speaking on the language of their new community. Their children either inherited
these ways of speaking or, more probably, grew up bilingually, restructuring their Austronesian
language on the model of the Papuan language(s) of their fathers (§15.7.1). One of these ways
of speaking was a digit-tallying strategy. The inference that the decimal system and digit-
tallying were used side by side is unproblematic and so is the inference that this resulted in
hybrid systems (§15.7.1).

    The discussion above answers some of the questions asked in the introduction to this
chapter. Base-5+ systems are found in much of NW Melanesia because of contact with
Papuan speakers who used such systems. They are absent from much of Oceanic because
Oceanic speakers were the earliest inhabitants of Remote Oceania.

15.8.2 The Southern Oceanic question

    The paragraph above leaves an important fact unaccounted for, namely the Southern
Oceanic digit-tally area covering much of Vanuatu and all of the Loyalty Islands and New
Caledonia. In this area there is no evidence of human habitation before Oceanic speakers
arrived. How did base-5+ systems come to be here? This is the Southern Oceanic question.
Any answer to it must also account for the fact that the distribution of system types differs
between Vanuatu and New Caledonia (Map 15.1).

    Blust (2005:552–553) asks a variant of the Southern Oceanic question. He queries the
historical reasons for the distribution of “quinary” systems, in which he includes any base-5+
system. He links the distribution of quinary systems to the distributions of other features, one
linguistic, one biological, and two cultural. The last are not relevant here. The linguistic feature
is the distribution of serial verb constructions. The biological feature is the unexpected
phenotype of Oceanic speakers across Melanesia, whose people (Blust 2005:554)

[15] Posth et al’s (2018) literature summary gives some support to this scenario. Polynesian populations have
     maternal ancestry of almost entirely Austronesian origin but paternal ancestry which is more than 60 per
     cent ‘Papuan’. They cite Kayser et al. (2006), Wollstein et al. (2010), and Skoglund et al. (2016).

                                                                                         Digit tallying 545

__blockquote__
        are almost invariably characterized by darker skins and frizzier hair than other An
        [Austronesian] speakers, and in this respect are largely indistinguishable from most
        Papuan speakers. In some parts of Melanesia beyond the reach of Papuan languages, as in
        the islands of Espiritu Santo and Malakula in Vanuatu, the prominent noses and full beards
        of many men are strikingly similar to features common among New Guinea highlanders.

This is problematic because Blust (2005:555) assumes “on distributional grounds that POc
speakers were southern Mongoloids” and

__blockquote__
        if (all) An speakers had acquired Papuan physical, cultural, and linguistic traits through
        contact in western Melanesia, these would have been part of the linguistic communities
        ancestral to those of Vanuatu, southern Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. But this is
        not true, because Papuan phenotypic, cultural, and linguistic traits are essentially absent in
        Micronesia and Polynesia.

   On the basis of these observations Blust argues that speakers of Papuan languages must
have already been present in Vanuatu long before the arrival of Oceanic speakers. He
recognises that there is no archaeological evidence for this, but finds the linguistic evidence
compelling.16 He rightly comments (2005:553) that the presence of ‘one man’ for 20 in
Paamese (NCV) and in NCal languages invites a Papuan-based explanation.

   Pawley (2006:243–248) offers a response to Blust. He proposes that Oceanic speaking
migrants from the Bismarcks were not necessarily all of one phenotype. Some might have
been “southern Mongoloid”, others “Papuan”. The people who “reached Tonga, presumably
via Vanuatu and Fiji” were of the former phenotype (2006:248). The linguistic evidence,
Pawley suggests, is in any case not compelling. Serial verb constructions are reconstructable to
POc (one kind is reconstructed in vol.2:256–282), and not an outcome of Papuan contact. He
surmises that “quinary” numeral systems may have existed in early Oceanic alongside decimal
systems (cf §15.2) or that they may have spread into Southern Oceanic languages after initial
Lapita settlement.

   Blust (2005) and Pawley (2006) were followed by Donohue & Denham (2008), who
added several phonological features to Blust’s list. Blust wrote an “addendum” to their paper
in which he seemingly modified his conclusion of three years earlier and wrote (2008:455):

__blockquote__
        Putting aside the current lack of archaeological support, the idea that large numbers of
        Papuan speakers who had adopted key elements of Proto-Oceanic culture arrived in
        Vanuatu shortly after the first wave of SM [southern Melanesian] Austronesians is not
        inherently implausible.

   The issue was reopened recently by two groups of archaeogeneticists. Skoglund et al. (2016)
found that the genomes of three individuals from the Lapita cemetery at Teouma on
Efate (central Vanuatu) matched those of Tongans (Blust’s ‘southern Mongoloids’), not those
of modern niVanuatu. They hypothesised that the ‘Papuans’ who have made a large
contribution to niVanuatu genomes arrived somewhat later. Posth et al. (2018) conducted a
wider survey, and found that people with Papuan genomes had first arrived roughly around 500 BC,
not in a sudden “invasion” but over several centuries. This meant that they started to
arrive 500 years or perhaps less after the first Lapita settlement in Vanuatu. A second paper
from the first group (Lipson et al. 2018) reaches a similar conclusion.

[16] Blust alludes to the fact that Papuan speakers had allegedly found their way as far as Santa Cruz, located
     in isolation between the Solomons and Vanuatu island chains. However, Ross & Næss (2007) have
     shown that the languages of the Reefs Islands and Santa Cruz are Oceanic Austronesian, not, as earlier
     claimed, Papuan. The easternmost Papuan languages are Savosavo and Lavukaleve in the central
     Solomons.

546 Malcolm Ross

    Posth et al. (2018) comment that

__blockquote__
        The almost complete replacement of a population’s genetic ancestry that leaves the original
        languages in situ is extremely rare—possibly without precedent—in human history and
        requires explanation.

As far as one can tell, the misalignment they see between genetic replacement and linguistic
continuity has its linguistic roots in Blust’s (2005, 2008) and Donohue & Denham’s (2008)
papers. But there is an alternative explanation which avoids the misalignment and was hinted
at by both Pawley (2006) and Blust (2008). There was apparently quite intense contact
between Papuan speakers and pre-Oceanic speakers soon after the latter’s arrival in the
Bismarcks, with Papuan speakers marrying into pre-Oceanic speaking villages and influencing
the way people counted (and perhaps modifying the linguistic inventory in other ways)
(§15.8.1). If this is true, it is a reasonable inference that the base-20 and base-5-20 systems
found in Vanuatu have their ancestry in the Bismarcks. In other words, the ‘Papuans’ who
arrived in southern Oceania perhaps 300 years after the first Lapita arrivals spoke one or more
Oceanic languages. Murray Cox, in his contribution to Bedford et al. (2018) (a set of
commentaries on Skoglund et al. 2016, Posth et al. 2018 and Lipson et al. 2018), arrives
independently at a similar conclusion, echoing Pawley (2006), and suggests that Papuan
speaking communities in the Bismarcks may also have shifted to Oceanic languages as part of
their absorption into Lapita culture. Sometime after their transition to Lapita and Oceanic,
some of their number migrated to (perhaps various islands in) Vanuatu.[17]

    One small piece of linguistic evidence also implies a New Britain–Vanuatu connection,
namely the use of POc *lapi ‘take, get, give’ (vol.5:401–403) as a ligature in the numerals 6–9
in three MM languages (two in eastern New Britain, one in northern New Ireland) and widely
in base-5-10 systems in Vanuatu (§15.7.3). It is of course possible that the verb *lapi has been
adopted as a ligature independently in two or more locations, but it is tempting to infer that it
reflects a shared innovation, transported to Vanuatu by ‘Papuan’ migrants.

    By implication the account above touches on two Oceanic-speaking groups outside
Vanuatu. One is the Reefs and Santa Cruz Islands, where modern but not ancient genetic
material is available. Åshild Næss, in her contribution to Bedford et al. (2018), suggests that a
hypothesis of two migrations to the Reefs and Santa Cruz is linguistically plausible, as the
Äiwoo language of the Reefs, at least, appears structurally conservative and the archaeological
evidence indicates that Lapita settlement occurred early, yet the genetic evidence points
strongly to ‘Papuan’ immigration. The presence of base-5-10 numeral systems in Äiwoo and
in Natügu of Santa Cruz places them typologically with Vanuatu, not the Solomons.

    The second group comprises speakers of the languages of the Loyalties and New
Caledonia, which form a single subgroup within SOc. Because ancient and modern genetic
material has been available from Vanuatu but not from New Caledonia, the hypothesis that
‘Papuan’ migrants southward were Oceanic speaking has focussed on Vanuatu. Might it also
apply to New Caledonia? Early in this section a typological difference in numeral systems
between Vanuatu and New Caledonia was noted. In Vanuatu we find a few decimal systems,
numerous base-5-10 systems, a cluster of base-5-10-20 systems and very few base-5-20
systems (Map 15.1). In New Caledonia, on the other hand, there are no decimal or base-5-10
systems, but base-5-20 systems in the Loyalties, in the northernmost NCal languages and in
the southern half of the mainland, and base-5-10-20 systems in the rest of the mainland.

[17] Lipson et al (2020) summarise and validate the findings mentioned here, but prefer a single large-scale
     Papuan intrusion rather than repeated intrusions over centuries.

                                                                           Digit tallying 547


    The *rua-lima story (§15.7.2) fairly strongly supports a connection between central and
southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia. The conclusion to be drawn from the story is that there
was at least one base-5-20 language, an ancestor of SE Ambrym or a relative thereof, and that
its descendants spread southward to Paama, Epi, Efate and Erromango, and thence to the
Loyalties and New Caledonia. Languages around the periphery of this area, on Ambrym,
Erromango, the southern part of New Caledonia and on the Belep Islands off its northern tip
retained the base-5-20 pattern. Others, on Paama and in northern mainland New Caledonia,
lost the dedicated ‘foot’-based term for 15 and thereby acquired a base-5-10-20 pattern, while
the languages of Epi and Efate also replaced the ‘person’ term for 20 with a 2×10 term, giving
a base-5-10 pattern.

    Base-5-10 systems elsewhere in Vanuatu do not reflect this history, nor do the base-5-10-20
systems clustered in south Malakula. That the latter arose in situ through the modification of
base-10 systems cannot be excluded, but the possibility that the base-5-10-20 arose through
in-situ hybridisation can be excluded, as it requires the immediate presence of Papuan
speakers. A plausible alternative explanation is that the clusters of base-10 and base-5-10-20
systems are the results of bottlenecks during the later immigration, i.e. one group brought a
base-10 system with them and settled in north Malakula, another group a base-5-10-20
system and occupied a location in southwest Malakula. This is a matter for more research.


15.9 Conclusion

This chapter complements Chapter 14. The latter reconstructs, along with numeral classifiers,
the POc decimal numeral system. The present chapter tracks the history of base-5-20,
base-5-10-20 and base-5-10 systems. These three numeral systems all reflect in some
measure the influence of digit tallying which was evidently present in many early Oceanic
communities in NW Melanesia, presumably as the result of bilingualism in a Papuan
language. Two digit tally areas are found, one in NW Melanesia, the other in Vanuatu and
New Caledonia. There is no evidence that POc speakers used a tally-based base-5-20 system,
and it is very probable that such systems developed early alongside the inherited decimal
system, and that the two systems coexisted in some communities because they had different
functions.

   Recent genetic research indicates that relatively large numbers of Papuan speakers arrived
in Vanuatu, and probably in the Loyalties and New Caledonia, over a period that began only a
few centuries after the original Oceanic settlers of the Lapita culture, and that these Papuan
speakers are responsible for the base-5+ numeral systems found in SOc languages. This
chapter puts forward the hypothesis that these “Papuans” had already shifted to Oceanic
languages before they moved from NW Melanesia to the SOc area and simply brought NW
Melanesian base-5+ counting with them. This does not preclude further developments in
these systems after their speakers’ arrival, and one such set of developments, in languages
that reflect *rua-lima for ‘10’, is sketched in §15.7.2.

548 Malcolm Ross


   Finally, the previous section suggests that their numeral systems are at least consistent
with hypotheses that the Reefs Islands, Santa Cruz, the Loyalty Islands and New Caledonia
were also recipients of “Papuan” immigration after the original arrival of speakers of an
Oceanic lect or lects. The linguistic evidence from numeral systems suggests that
immigration into the Loyalty Islands and New Caledonia was via central Vanuatu.




16 Linear measurement

16.0 Introduction

The most widespread form of measurement in traditional Oceanic societies was linear, used
in house and canoe construction and for measuring lengths of strung shell used as currency.
Alkire (1970) provides perhaps the best account of measurement in an Oceanic society,
namely Woleai in Micronesia. His description is detailed, discussing what measurement is
used for and how it is applied.

   In the formal distribution of wealth and in trade, foodstuffs and other valued items were
measured by counting. Counting included the use of conventionally accepted measures
such as baskets or bunches. Matters relating to counting and its linguistic consequences are
treated in some detail in chapter 14.

   POc speakers almost certainly had a verb for measuring the depth of seawater, and at
least one for measuring the volume, particularly of food, but no reconstructions can be
made. There was no regular means of measuring weights.


16.1 Units of linear measurement

The units of linear measurement that Alkire lists for Woleaian (Mic) are listed in (1). The
items in Alkire’s list have been checked against Sohn & Tawerilmang (1976) and the list of
measurement classifiers in Sohn (1975:61), and Alkire’s forms have been replaced by Sohn’s
and re-spelled in accordance with the orthographic convention used in these volumes
(§1.4.2).

1)    a. maxō-ṣix        length of one finger joint (maxō ‘finger-joint length’; ṣix ‘small’)
      b. maxō-rap        length of two finger joints (maxō ‘finger-joint length’; rap ‘big’)
      c. -xatt           length of a finger
      d. -peṣa-nim       width of the palm (lit. ‘handle of hand’)
      e. (maiarulpu)     fist width plus thumb length (Alkire’s spelling: not recorded by Sohn)
      f. (ngalit)         with hand extended, length from end of thumb to end of first
                          finger (Alkire’s spelling: not recorded by Sohn)
      g. -yaŋ             with hand extended, length from end of thumb to end of middle finger (hand span).
      h. xumʷüṣ           from wrist to end of fingers (xumʷüṣ ‘wrist’)
      i. -mʷarü           length of forearm, from elbow to end of fingers (a cubit).
      j. -paü             length of whole arm (only with se- ‘one’; paü ‘arm, hand’)
      k. -teroufʷ         with arm extended, length from sternum to end of fingers
      l. -yefaẓ           with arm extended, length from end of fingers to shoulder of opposite arm
      m. wōpaü            with arms extended, length from end of fingers to elbow of opposite arm
      n. -ŋaf             with arms extended, length from finger tips to finger tips (a fathom)

550   Malcolm Ross


   This list perhaps gives some idea of traditional units of linear measurement in Oceanic
societies, which in many places have vanished for ever. However, before we turn to issues
associated with reconstructing lexical items, it is necessary to look briefly at the
morphosyntax of such items, as it bears on their reconstruction.


16.2 The morphosyntax of units of linear measurement

Some of the terms listed in (1) are preceded by a hyphen, others not. Those with no hyphen
are nouns. Those with a hyphen are numeral classifiers, described at some length in §14.7.
For convenience’s sake a short summary is given here.

   A numeral classifier is a word that occurs with a numeral but has some semantic
relationship to the entity that is being counted. Six types of numeral classifier are
distinguished in §14.1.1, but only three types, multiplicative, mensural and unit-of-
measurement concern us here. Mensural classifiers—or something performing the same
semantic functions—occur in all languages., as in English ten grains of sand, two pinches of
salt, a bottle of beer and so on. The classifier (in bold) provides a unit that is or can be
counted with a numeral. This unit is one that is conventionally associated with what is
counted: sand comes in grains, salt is quantified (in more traditional western recipes) in
pinches, and so on.

   In Oceanic languages that have numeral classifiers the numeral and the classifier are
usually combined to form a word. The PMP order within these words was *numeral-
[ŋa-]classifier. POc retained this order with some classifiers, for example the multiplicative
classifiers *-Ratus ‘unit of a hundred’ and *-puluq ‘unit of ten’ in POc *sa-ŋa-Ratus ‘one
hundred’ or *tolu-ŋa-puluq ‘thirty (= three tens)’. But POc also used the *classifier numeral
order with other classifiers. Each language that retains classifiers uses one or the other
ordering, except for some Polynesian languages, which have both structures. Micronesian
languages reflect the *numeral-[ŋa-]classifier, usually without *-ŋa- and exemplified by (2),
with the mensural classifier -xumʷ ‘mouthful’.

                                                                             Linear measurement 551


2)       Woleaian (Mic) (Sohn 1975:202)
         wari-xumʷ                 ṣal
         eight-CLF:mouthful        water            ‘eight mouthfuls of water’

  The multiplicative classifier -ix ‘ten’ behaves in the same way as POc *-Ratus and
*puluq above.

3)       Woleaian (Mic) (Sohn 1975:204)
         seri-ix                fʷuk
         three-CLF:ten          book       ‘thirty books’

  Finally, a unit-of-measurement classifier specifies a measurement, and together with the
numeral gives the size of the following item.

4)       Woleaian (Mic) (Sohn 1975:61)
         se-xatt                fʷurax
         one-CLF:finger         swamp.taro          ‘a swamp taro of one finger-length’

This, then, is the structural context of the items in (1) that begin with a hyphen.


16.3 Melanesian shell money

Many of the measurement terms discussed in this chapter have their origin in the
measurement of Melanesian shell money. These ‘currencies’ are found in a more or less
continuous region that stretches from the Admiralties via New Britain, New Ireland,
Bougainville and the NW and SE Solomons to the Banks and Torres Islands of Vanuatu.1 In
smaller units they appear to have been used for everyday transactions at some locations, e.g.
among the Tolai of NE New Britain. Perhaps wherever they were used, large quantities were
accrued by individuals and were used in a variety of ceremonies, including bride wealth
payments, land rights payments, mortuary exchanges, initiation presentations (Hogbin 1964a;
Epstein 1969:ch.7; Counts & Counts 1970; Simet 1991; see §13.5). The literature on the
cultural roles of shell money is substantial and often engages in controversy, and we lack the
relevant expertise to discuss it here.[2]

   In parts of the NW Solomons, shell money consists of rings or drums made from the shell
of the giant clam (genus Tridacna; vol.4:189–190). Elsewhere in the region it consists of
disks manufactured from various shell species, each disk about a centimetre in diameter with
a hole in the centre. The disks are threaded onto strong, fine string, packed together so that,
where disks made of shells of different colours alternate, they form a colourful pattern. A
number of different shellfish species supply the shells. A major shell-money production
centre in Malaita is at Langalanga Lagoon, where inhabitants of the artificial islets built from
coral make their living by manufacturing shell money. Four shell species are used: omu ‘red-
lipped oyster, Chana pacifica’; kakadu ‘ridged white cockleshell, Anadara granosa’; kurila
‘black mussel, Atrina vexillum’; and ke’e ‘half-round cardita, Beguina semiorbiculata)’ (Goto
1996). In other locations nassa shells (dog whelks), cowries, cone shells or Spondylus shells
are used.

[1] Sources are, for Baluan (Adm), Schokkin (2015); for NW New Britain, Counts & Counts (1970); for NE
    New Britain, Salisbury (1966), Epstein (1969:ch.7), Strathern (1978) and Simet (1991); for Bougainville,
    Connell (1977); for the NW Solomon Is, Miller (1978) and Aswani & Sheppard (2003); for the SE
    Solomon Is, Hogbin (1964a) and Connell (1977); and for the Banks and Torres Islands, François
    (2013:235).

[2] See Salisbury (1966), Epstein (1979), Clark (1995) and Martin (2018).

552      Malcolm Ross


   The strings of shell money circulate in varying lengths, and the main use of a number of
the unit-of-measurement terms discussed below is to denote these lengths, ranging from a
length of two finger segments up to many fathoms. A fathom is the measurement from the
fingertips of one hand to the fingertips of the other when both arms are stretched our
sideways. Counts & Counts (1970:100) list the terms traditionally used by the Lusi (NNG)
speakers of NW New Britain for various lengths of vula ‘shell money’, along with their 1970
Australian dollar valuations, which serve to indicate relative values.

5)          Term          Length                                              Valuation in 1970 AUD
            korui         fingertips to mid-forearm (half-cubit)                       0.10
            mase          fingertips to elbow (cubit)                                  0.20
            pupuye        fingertips to mid upper arm                                  0.30
            igiligita     fingertips to shoulder joint (arm’s length)                  0.40
            vataŋa        fingertips to centre chest (half-fathom)                     0.50
            pram          double arm span (fathom)                                     1.00

Rickard’s (1893:48–49)3 and Salisbury’s (1966:115–116) Tolai lists include terms for longer
strings and a ‘coil’.

6)          Rickard (1893)        Salisbury (1966)
            a tip                 …                       1/32 fathom (10 shells)
            a tip na arip         …                       1/16 fathom (20 shells)
            …                     pidik                   one-tenth of a fathom
            a wartuk              …                       ⅛ fathom (40 shells)
            a bal                 …                       ¼ fathom (80 shells)
            a papara              peapar                  ½ fathom
            a pokono              pokono                  one fathom
            a wuna em tabu        …                       two fathoms
            a gaina               …                       three fathoms
            a rip                 rip                     ten fathoms
            …                     gogo, lolo              a coil of between 100 and 1,000 fathoms


[3]  Cited by Simet (1991:107) but not listed in his references. This must be the Methodist missionary R.H.
    Rickard, and the reference may be to his Dictionary of the New Britain dialect (1889). The terms in (6)
    are listed in a much revised version of the dictionary, Rickard, Fellmann and Linggod (1964).

                                                                    Linear measurement 553


16.4 Reconstructing linear measurement terms

    The list in (1) is a decidedly conservative set of traditional measurement units—
conservative in two respects. First, even for other Micronesian languages, comparable lists
are hardly to be found. Jackson & Marck (1991:328) come closest, recording Carolinian units
corresponding to ten of Alkire’s. Capell (1969:67–68) and Sohn & Bender (1983:202–203)
record five each for Sonsorol and Ulithian respectively. Other Micronesian languages appear
to retain only a term for fathom. The second aspect of conservatism is that Woleaian retains
unit-of-measurement classifiers, which elsewhere are being lost in favour of nouns. Thus in
Puluwatese Elbert (1974:112) notes that (7a), where ‘fathom’ is a classifier, is being replaced
by (7b), where it is a noun.

7)     Pulwatese (Mic)
       a. walɨ-ŋaf
          eight-CLF:fathom                     ‘eight fathoms’
       b. wal-ūw                 ŋāf
          eight-CLF:default      fathom        ‘eight fathoms’

    The only unit of measurement recorded for Mokilese/Ponapean is the noun ŋap/ŋāp
‘fathom’ (Harrison & Albert 1977; Rehg 1981). No traditional units of measurement are
recorded for Marshallese (Abo et al 1976) or Kosraean (Lee 1975). This patchiness in
recording is also found across the SE Solomons, where measurement terms were used at least
until recently to measure lengths of shell money. Indeed, some definitions given in
dictionaries of SE Solomonic languages (Ivens 1918; Fox 1955) and elsewhere are explicit
that some of these terms, particularly those involving more complicated paths across the
human body, were used to measure strings of shell money. For example:

__formgroup__
  NNG: Kove        |wala-ra varexe|  ‘shell money measured to opposite shoulder’ (wala ‘shoulder’; varexe ‘side, half, portion’)
  MM: Ramoaaina    babaluka          ‘fathom of shell money, twice the length of hand to chest’
  SES: Gela        kogana            ‘a string of red money; a fathom’
  SES: Gela        |alo ni toɣo|     ‘measure, length of arm’ (alo ‘string’)
  SES: Sa’a        māpou             ‘a measure of shell money, from the fingertips to the elbow; a cubit’
  SES: Ulawa       |ida ʔapala|      ‘a length of money from the fingertips to the opposite shoulder, a yard and a quarter’ (ʔapala ‘shoulder’)
  SES: Arosi       māmoku            ‘a measure of shell money from finger tips to elbow’

   The absence of records of these terminologies from dictionaries of SE Solomonic and
Micronesian languages has two possible causes. The first is that the terms had died out before
the dictionary data were recorded, perhaps because shell money usage has diminished. The
second is that the dictionary-maker was only interested in recording the modern language,
and omitted more traditional or more archaic terms.

554   Malcolm Ross


   In the Ulawa term ida ʔapala above, ʔapala means ‘shoulder’, but no separate item ida is
recorded by Ivens. This is, we assume, an idiomatic phrase, the full original meaning of
which is now lost. This seems to be true of a number of the terms cited below.

   Our goal here is not just to reconstruct POc terms (or terms in a later interstage language)
but to ascertain how far back the unit-of-measurement concept can be traced. If we can show
that a certain meaning is expressed in daughters of a particular protolanguage (often
phrasally), then, even if the terms are not cognate, we can be reasonably certain that the
concept was expressed by a dedicated term in the relevant protolanguage.

   All the terms reconstructed below have their basis in the fingers, hands and arms of the
human body. This is unsurprising, as traditional units of measurement the world over have
been based on the human body. The cubit (elbow to fingertip; §16.6.4) was an important
measure used around the Mediterranean. Mongolian had the ald, Ancient Greek the orgyiá,
Old English the fæðm, all denoting a pair of embracing or outstretched arms and
corresponding to the Oceanic fathom. The pre-metrication English system had the inch, based
on the width of a person’s thumb, and the foot. The length of the foot is recorded as a unit of
measurement in a few Oceanic sources, but no dedicated term is reconstructable.

   There is a further division to be made among these body-based terms. The few
reconstructable measure concepts other than the span were involved in measuring strings of
shell money. The (flexible) object to be measured—the shell money—was strung across the
measuring instrument, the human body. The span, however, was used in the converse
manner: instead of taking the object to the instrument, one took the instrument—the
hand—like a tape measure to the (typically rigid) object to be measured. Alkire (1970:33)
shows that the span was used in canoe building. There is no evidence that it was used to
measure money strings.

   Section 16.5 is thus devoted to the measurement of rigid objects, §16.6 to measurements
employed for flexible objects. Section 16.6.1 takes the fathom as its starting point, followed
by the half-fathom in §16.6.2 and measures between the half-fathom and the fathom in
§16.6.3. With the cubit (§16.6.4) we move to measures less than half a fathom. Section 16.6.5
looks briefly at the scrappy evidence for units longer than the fathom. Section 16.7 is devoted
to verbs of measuring, and §16.8 draws some rather restricted conclusions.

   One might expect a chapter entitled ‘Measurement’ to deal with terms for ‘length’ and
‘breadth’. If we exclude the use of length in a length of X, then Oceanic languages tend not to
have dedicated terms for ‘length’ and ‘breadth’. Instead they either use the terms for
‘long’ (especially reflexes of POc *[ma]lawa ‘long, tall’; vol.2:198) or ‘broad’ as nouns,
occasionally with nominalising morphology, or as adjectives as in It is 3 metres long.


16.5 Measuring rigid objects

16.5.1 The span

The most widely reflected term for a hand-based measurement is POc *saŋa, which Blust
(ACD) glosses ‘crotch, fork of the legs; span, fork of the fingers’. This gloss captures the fact
that the POc meaning of this term was less specific than it is in a number of daughter-
languages. Further, according to the ACD, POc *saŋa had two PMP ancestors, *saŋa
‘bifurcation’ and *zaŋan ‘handspan’, which merged in PEMP and POc as *saŋa. To judge
from its Oceanic reflexes, it retained this range of meaning, and also had the senses of a
forked stick or branch (vol.3:96) and the crotch (the bifurcation of the legs; vol.5:173). This
breadth of meaning has ensured the word’s retention in numerous languages, along with the
probable fact that the hand span was a commonly used means of everyday measurement.
There is some evidence that it may also have denoted spans other than those formed with the
hand. Its Mangseng reflex means ‘fathom’; in Tuamotuan ‘measure across chest to
fingertips’. Even at the level of hand-span, reflexes vary as to whether the involved finger
was the forefinger, the middle finger or the little finger (and many definitions do not
specify which). It seems possible from the glosses below that in Proto Nuclear Polynesian
this was the little finger.

                                                                    Linear measurement 555


   Jackson (1983:77) notes that the loss of *s- in the Chuukese reflexes of *saŋa, all of
them numeral classifiers prefixed by a numeral, is an irregular innovation that along with
others defines the Chuukese subgroup. Non-Chuukese Micronesian languages have lost the
term.

   The non-cognate items listed below as ‘other terms for the span’ indicate that the
concept and use of the hand span as a measure was clearly present in Oceanic regions
where a reflex of *saŋa was not used to denote it. However, it is perhaps significant that no
reflexes of *saŋa are found in mainland New Guinea or in Admiralties, N-C Vanuatu or
New Caledonian languages. In the latter cases, this may reflect insufficient data sources; in
the case of New Guinea it may reflect contact with Papuan systems of measurement, but
this is a matter for further research.

<
PMP *saŋa ‘bifurcation, fork of a branch’
PMP *zaŋan ‘handspan’ (ACD)
PEMP *saŋa ‘crotch, fork of the legs; span, fork of the fingers’ (ACD)
POc *saŋa- ‘fork (in tree), forked stick or branch; crotch, fork of the legs; span, fork of the fingers’ (ACD) (vol.3:96; vol.5:173)
  NNG: Mangseng        ðaŋa          ‘fathom: length between two stretched arms’
  MM: Vitu             ðaŋa          ‘span’
  MM: Banoni           saŋa          ‘span of hand’
  SES: Gela            haŋa          ‘span, outstretched fingers’
  SES: ’Are’are        tana          ‘span, between thumb and first finger; to span with this measure’
  SES: Sa’a            taŋa-a        (N) ‘a span’; (VT) ‘to span with the hand’
  SES: Arosi           taŋa(a)       ‘a hand’s breadth, fingers extended’ (-a nominaliser)
PChk *yaŋa ‘finger span’ (Bender et al. 2003b)
  Mic: Puluwatese      -yaŋ          ‘span’
  Mic: Chuukese        -yāŋ          ‘span between thumb and forefinger’
  Mic: Carolinian      -yaŋ          ‘hand span: distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the little finger of an outstretched hand’
  Mic: Woleaian        -yaŋ          ‘finger-length’ (Sohn 1975); ‘span from end of thumb to end of middle finger’
  Mic: Ulithian        -yaŋe         ‘span between thumb and forefinger’
  Mic: Sonsorol        -aŋ           ‘span’
  Fij: Boumaa          ðaŋa          ‘span of outstretched fingers and thumb’
  Fij: Wayan           ðaŋa          ‘span between thumb and extended middle finger’
PPn *haŋa ‘span (measurement)’ (POLLEX); ‘measure in spans’
  Pn:  Tongan          haŋa          ‘span; to measure by spans’
  Pn:  Niuean          haŋa(tike)    ‘span (from tip of thumb to tip of index finger)’
PNPn *aŋa ‘span formed by thumb and little (?) finger; measure’
  Pn:  Samoan          aŋa           ‘span (measurement)’
  Pn:  Tuvalu          aŋa           ‘span; to measure by spans’
  Pn:  Tokelauan       aŋa           ‘hand-span (used as a measuring-unit)’
  Pn:  K’marangi       aŋa           ‘unit of measure from tip of thumb to tip of little finger (of outstretched hand)’
  Pn:  Nukuoro         aŋa           ‘the span of the outstretched thumb and little finger; a measurement of one span’
  Pn:  Takuu           (se)ana       ‘handspan; to measure in handspans’
  Pn:  Hawaiian        ana           ‘measure’
  Pn:  Marquesan       ʔaka          ‘to measure’
  Pn:  Mangarevan      aŋa           ‘fathom’
  Pn:  Tahitian        aa            ‘measure length or breadth’
  Pn:  Tuamotuan       aŋa           ‘measure across chest to fingertips’
  Pn:  Rarotongan      aŋā(rima)     ‘span between thumb and little finger, used as a measure of length’
>

556      Malcolm Ross


Other terms for the span include:

__formgroup__
  NNG: Bariai        leoa         ‘measure, to measure by hand spans’
  MM: Sursurunga     keslim       ‘width measurement equivalent to hand span’
  MM: Banoni         para         ‘span of hand’
  MM: Nehan          haili        ‘hand span, unit of measure’
  MM: Halia          seilo        ‘hand span as unit of length (from tip of little finger to thumb tip)’
  MM: Babatana       pidoko       ‘hand's span (tip of middle finger to tip of thumb)’
  MM: Roviana        pidoko       ‘to span with the thumb and second finger.’
  MM: Maringe        kakʰamo      ‘length from end of thumb to little finger of an outstretched hand’
  SES: Bugotu        kakamo       ‘a measure, handbreadth, span’
  SES: Tolo          tinagea      ‘to measure with outstretched thumb and middle finger’
  SES: Longgu        nivinivi     ‘measurement of a span of one hand’
  SES: To’aba’ita    malafunu     ‘measure of length: finger span: from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the index finger or another finger, with the fingers fully spread’
  SES: Lau           malafunu     ‘take a long stride; a span, length of foot or extended fingers’
  SES: Kwaio         balafonu     ‘span between index finger and thumb’
  SES: Arosi         sinaʔake     ‘a measure, extending thumb and first finger’

                                                                Linear measurement 557


16.5.2 Fingers

There are thinly scattered terms for the lengths of one finger segment and two finger
segments in SE Solomonic and Micronesian languages. The fact that there is a (non-
Oceanic) Kéo term for a finger segment suggests that a term may have been present in
POc, but there is no evidence for a reconstruction.

<
  CMP: Kéo          fatə             ‘a finger segment’
  MM: Babatana      |papado tutuku|  ‘distance between first and second finger joints’ (papado ‘joint’; tutuku ‘finger’)
 SES: Longgu        kidoi            ‘an inch; the length of one finger joint’
PChk *makoto-ciki ‘length of one finger segment’ (-ciki ‘small’; Bender et al. 2003b)
 Mic: Carolinian    mʷɔwo-ṣix        ‘length of one finger segment’ (about an inch = 2.5 cm)
 Mic: Woleaian      maxō-ṣix         ‘length of one finger segment’ (maxō ‘finger-segment’; ṣix ‘small’)
>

The evidence for a measurement term meaning two finger segments is weaker and in any
case does not go back beyond PEOc.

<
 SES: ’Are’are      ato-ato        ‘a measure, the two joints of a thumb’
PChk *makoto-lapa ‘length of two finger segments’ (-lapa ‘big’; Bender et al. 2003b)
 Mic: Carolinian    mʷɔwo-lap      ‘length of two finger segments (about 5 cm)’
 Mic: Woleaian      maxō-rap       ‘length of two finger segment’ (maxō ‘finger-segment’; rap ‘big’)
>

   A PChk term for ‘length of a finger’ is reconstructable, and the non-cognate
terms listed below suggest that a finger length has been used as a unit of measure at least
from PEOc times and perhaps earlier.

<
POc *tusu- ‘forefinger’ (vol.5:178)
PChk *ka-tudu ‘finger, finger length’ (Jackson 1983)
 Mic: Chuukese       -wɨt         ‘length of a finger’
 Mic: Carolinian     -xat         ‘counting classifier for fingers and parts thereof, used to measure, e.g., depth by widths of fingers’
 Mic: Woleaian       -xatt        ‘length of a finger’
 Mic: Sonsorol       -xat         ‘finger’
>

Other terms for ‘finger length’ are:

__formgroup__
  SES: Bugotu       posileɣo         ‘a measure, finger's length, fork of thumb to top of first finger’
  SES: Gela         |ɣoto kehetu|    ‘finger’s length’
  Mic: Ulithian     -male            ‘length of a finger’

558   Malcolm Ross


16.5.3 Hand-related units larger than a finger

Just a few terms meaning ‘width of the palm’ have been found: Kéo (CMP) pəʔba ‘width
across widest part of hand at base of the thumb’; Kwaio (SES) fadaleʔenima ‘width of palm
and four fingers’; Sa’a kʷaŋo i saʔo ‘a measure, a hand’s breadth’; and Woleaian (Mic) -peṣa-
nim ‘width of the palm’ (lit. ‘handle of hand’). It isn’t clear, however, that these refer to the
same dimension, and they may reflect independent innovations.

   Some Eastern Oceanic languages have a term for a unit of measure from the wrist to the
fingertips, and such a unit was perhaps present in PEOc, but no term is reconstructable.

__formgroup__
  SES: Ulawa         |kʷaŋo i saʔo|  ‘a measure, from finger tips to wrist’ (in Sa’a ‘a hand’s breadth’)
  Mic: Carolinian    -xumʷuṣ         ‘counting classifier for measurement from the tip of the finger to the wrist, for measuring depth of rice or liquids’
  Mic: Woleaian      xumʷüṣ          ‘from wrist to end of fingers’ (xumʷüṣ ‘wrist’)
  Pn:  Samoan        lauiʔa          ‘a measure from above the wrist to the tips of the fingers’ (Pratt 1862)


16.6 Measuring flexible objects

As was noted earlier, the main flexible object measured in Oceanic communities was
probably a string of shell money (§16.3). We start with the most widely attested unit, the
fathom, then move to various part-fathom measures, then finally to measures longer than the
fathom. Looking at the Tolai terms in (6), it is possible that there were more early Oceanic
terms for lengths greater than the fathom, but these are lost to us.

16.6.1 The fathom

When both arms are stretched out sideways, the fathom is the measurement from the
fingertips of one hand to the fingertips of the other. In English this has become principally a
nautical term (1.8288 metres = 6 feet), but in Oceanic languages the measurement was
applied in many locations to a length of shell money. It was and remains the basic unit in
measuring shell money, where this still exists, but it had other functions, otherwise it would
not be reported from so many languages whose speakers do not have or no longer have the
shell money tradition.

   POc appears to have had two terms for fathom, but they had different grammatical
functions. POc *ropa was a noun, and POc *-ŋapa a numeral classifier.

<
PAn *depah ‘fathom’ (ACD)
POc *ropa (N) ‘fathom: with arms extended, length from finger tips to finger tips’ (ACD); (v) ‘measure in fathoms’
  Adm: Seimat          kaha(ina)    ‘fathom, measure by fathoms’[4]
  Adm: Levei-Drehet    (a)lap       ‘span; e.g., distance between fingertips of a person's extended arms’
  NNG: Tuam            rōv          ‘armspan’
  NNG: Kilenge         lewe         ‘armspan; fathom of shell money’
Proto Kilivila *ova- (CLF) ‘fathom; double-arm span’
  PT:  Kiriwina        uva-         ‘double-arm span’ (clf)’
  PT:  Muyuw           ová-         ‘double-arm span (clf)’
  PT:  Gumawana        ova          ‘one hand length’ (loan from Kilivila)
  PT:  Dobuan          loa          ‘fathom’
  PT:  Motu            roha         ‘fathom; length’
  PT:  Motu            roha-ia      ‘to measure; to fathom’
  MM:  Nakanai         lova         ‘fathom’
  NCV: Mota            rova         ‘fathom, i.e. distance between outstretched arms’
  Pn:  Tongan          ofa          ‘fathom; (in gardening) the distance between two consecutive rows of yams’
  Pn:  Niue            ofa          ‘fathom; to measure in fathoms (i.e. with outstretched arms)’
  Pn:  E Futunan       lofa         ‘measure by fathoms’
  Pn:  E Uvean         lofa-lofa    ‘to measure by fathoms’
  Pn:  Nukuoro         loha         ‘fathom: the span of one’s outstretched arms:’
  Pn:  Nukuoro         loha-loha    ‘to measure off in fathoms’
  Pn:  K’marangi       loho         ‘fathom, measure in fathoms’
  Pn:  Rennellese      goha         ‘fathoms of line or distances; to be a fathom’
  Pn:  Sikaiana        (se)loha     ‘one fathom’ (se- ‘one’)
  Pn:  Takuu           (sa)rofa     ‘measure of distance between the fingertips of one’s outstretched hands: fathom; to measure in fathoms’ (sa- ‘one’)
  Pn:  W Futuna        rafa         ‘fathom’
>

                                                                                Linear measurement 559


   The numeral classifier *-ŋapa continues to be reflected as a classifier in Admiralties and
some Micronesian languages. In other languages it has been reanalysed as a noun. It
reflects the PMP classifier construction *numeral-[ŋa-]classifier, mentioned in §16.2 and
discussed in more detail in §14.3. Blust (ACD) does not reconstruct *-ŋapa to a stage earlier
than POc, and we have found no non-Oceanic cognates. Nonetheless, from its form it seems
probable that it occurred in the environment of, e.g. †*sa-ŋa-ropa ‘one fathom’, †*rua-ŋa-
ropa ‘two fathoms’, and so on. However, rather than †*-ŋa-ropa the data require
reconstruction of the abbreviated form *-ŋa-pa. Section 14.4.5.2 shows that, for example,
*sa-ŋa-puluq ‘(one) ten’ was reanalysed as *sa-ŋapuluq in very early Oceanic. An analogous
change evidently reanalysed †*sa-ŋa-ropa as *sa-ŋa(ro)pa, resulting in forms such as in (8).

[4]  Seimat kaha-ina is a verb, but reflects the putative PAd noun *drapa ‘fathom’, which in turn reflects POc *na
    ropa, where *na was the specific determiner which gave rise to PAd initial secondary nasal grade in alienable
    nouns (Ross 1988:337–341). The medial -a- of Seimat kaha- is an unexplained development that is also
    reflected in the Levei-Drehet cognate a-lap. It is possible that it reflects analogy with *-ŋapa ‘fathom’.

560      Malcolm Ross


8)      fathoms:             one            two             three
        POc                  *sa-ŋapa       *rua-ŋapa       *tolu-ŋapa
        Loniu (Adm)[5]         ha-ŋah         maʔ-u-ŋeh       ma-culu-ŋah
        Puluwat (Mic)        ye-ŋaf         rua-ŋaf         yelɨ-ŋaf

Many of the reflexes below reflect a reanalysis of the classifier as a noun.

<
POc *-ŋapa (CLF) ‘fathom’ (ACD)
 Adm: Lou               ŋap               (v) ‘measure’
 Adm: Titan             ŋa                (VT) ‘measure’
 Adm: Loniu             -ŋah              ‘fathom’
 Adm: Nali              -ŋah              ‘fathom’
 Adm: Nyindrou          ŋaha              ‘span’
 MM: Tangga             nāf               ‘fathom’
 MM: Tangga             ŋafu              (v) ‘measure with armspans’
 MM: Nehan              ŋau               (v) ‘measure distance or time’
 MM: Halia              ŋaha              ‘unit of length equal to the height of a man’
 MM: Banoni             (sa)ŋava          ‘fathom; measure with outstretched arms’
 MM: Varisi             nava              ‘fathom’
 MM: Babatana           ŋava              ‘fathom: measure of length span of both arms’
 MM: Roviana            ŋava              ‘fathom’
 MM: Maringe            (kʰa)ŋafa         ‘unit of measurement equal to the breadth of outstretched arms, approximately one fathom’
 SES: Bugotu            (ha)ŋava          ‘fathom’
 NCV: Raga              ŋava(na)          ‘fathom; length’
 NCV: Mafea             ŋava              ‘measure of two arms’ length, of a person standing with arms wide open’
 NCal: Belep            ãvã(na)           ‘armlengths’
PMic *ŋafa ‘fathom’ (Bender et al. 2003a); (v) ‘measure in fathoms’
 Mic: Kiribati          -ŋā               ‘fathom’
 Mic: Ponapean          ŋāp               ‘fathom: the distance between outstretched arms’
 Mic: Mokilese          ŋāp               ‘fathom; to measure with outstretched arms’
 Mic: Mortlockese       -ŋaf              ‘fathom’
 Mic: Chuukese          -ŋaf              ‘fathom’
 Mic: Puluwat           ŋāf               ‘fathom’
 Mic: Puluwat           (ye)ŋaf           ‘one fathom’ (ye ‘one’)
 Mic: Satawalese        -ŋaf              ‘fathom’
 Mic: Carolinian        -ŋaf              ‘fathom’
 Mic: Carolinian        ŋāf               ‘fathom’
 Mic: Woleaian          -ŋaf              ‘with arms extended, length from finger tips to finger tips (a fathom)’
 Mic: Ulithian          -ŋafa             ‘fathom’
 Mic: Sonsorol          -ŋava             ‘fathom’
 Pn:  Tongan            ŋafa              ‘length or section of tapa cloth’
 Pn:  Samoan            ŋafa              ‘fathom’
 Pn:  Samoan            ta-ŋafa           ‘to measure in fathoms’
 Pn:  Samoan            ŋa-ŋafa           ‘measure with the arms’ (Pratt 1862)
 Pn:  Tuvalu            ŋafa              ‘a fathom; distance encompassed by outstretched arms’
 Pn:  Rennellese        ŋa-ŋaha           ‘to measure distance in approximate fathoms (distance between fingertips arms extended)’
 Pn:  Pukapuka          ŋawa              ‘fathom’
>

[5] The origin of ma-, prefixed to numerals above ‘one’ when they are themselves prefixed to a classifier, is
    not known (Hamel 1994:54).

                                                                 Linear measurement 561


   Listed below are terms for ‘fathom’ in languages that lack a reflex of *ropa or *-ŋapa. The
Drehu and Nengone terms below may reflect POc *-ŋapa, but our knowledge of the sound
correspondences of these languages is insufficient to be certain.

__formgroup__
  NNG: Mbula           re[o]         ‘measure of length/ armspan length (for sago thatch, planks)’
  NNG: Bariai          leoa          ‘measure by hand spans’
  NNG: Yabem           ŋa-saka       ‘distance between the tips of the middle fingers when the arms are outstretched, a fathom’
  PT: Tawala           guli          ‘measurement (length of outstretched arms)’
  MM: Ramoaaina        babaluka      ‘fathom of shell money, twice the length of hand to chest’
  SES: Gela            ɣoto          ‘measure of both arms extended’
  SES: Longgu          tavaŋa        ‘fathom; the span of outstretch arms’
  SES: Owa             tafaŋana      ‘measure of thumb tip to thumb tip with outstretched arms of s.o.’ (tafaŋa ‘long’)
  SES: To’aba’ita      ʔabala        ‘measure of length: from the tips of the fingers of one arm extended to the side to the tips of the fingers of the other arm extended to the side; fathom’
  SES: ’Are’are        ahana         ‘a measure, one fathom, i.e. the opening of a tall man's arms’
  SES: Kwaio           tafaŋa        ‘fathom’
  SES: Sa’a            tahaŋa        ‘fathom, to measure a fathom’
  SES: Arosi           duʔu          ‘fathom’
  NCal: Cèmuhî         [è]ādā        ‘fathom’
  NCal: Drehu          apæn          ‘to measure with the arms outstretched’
  NCal: Drehu          n̥āpæn       ‘a measure’
  NCal: Nengone        n̥aepan      ‘span (of arms)’
  Fij:  Wayan          katu          ‘fathom in length or depth, the arm-span with both arms extended’
  Fij:  Boumaa         ʔatu          ‘distance between finger tips with arms outstretched, fathom’

562    Malcolm Ross


16.6.2 The half-fathom

The terms listed below all denote a measurement from the centre of the sternum (breastbone)
to the fingertips of one outstretched arm, i.e. half a fathom.

    The only term that can be reconstructed for a half-fathom is PChk *dila-wupʷa,
literally ‘breast split’. Beneath its reflexes are listed terms for half-fathom for a wide range of
Oceanic languages. They indicate that the concept was present in POc but was probably
expressed by a phrasal idiom. A couple of the terms listed below appear to mean something
similar to ‘breast split’: see the glosses of the Banoni and Babatana terms. Within this list are
two obvious cognate pairs: Longgu and Arosi, Wayan and Boumaa Fijian. Beyond these,
there are no cognate items.

    Some glosses mention ‘yard’. In pre-metric Imperial measure a yard is exactly half a
fathom, i.e. 0.9144 metres).

<
PChk *dila-wupʷa ‘distance from outstretched finger-tip to mid-chest’ (lit. ‘breast split’; Bender 2003b)
 Mic: Carolinian        -tilo-ubʷ         ‘distance from the tips of the fingers to the center of the sternum’
 Mic: Woleaian          -tero-ufʷ         ‘with arm extended, length from sternum to end of fingers’
 Mic: Chuukese          tine-wupʷ         ‘fathom’
 Mic: Sonsorol          -tiro-uba         ‘measure from finger tip to centre of chest’
 Mic: Pulo Annian       tino-upʷa         ‘fathom’
>

Other terms for the half-fathom include:

__formgroup__
  NNG: Kove         vataŋa              ‘shell money measured to middle of sternum’
  PT: Kilivila      sividoga            ‘unit of horizontal measurement, from fingertip to centre of chest (e.g. measuring the exact length of a yam)’
  MM: Teop          ato                 ‘unit of measurement: yard’
  MM: Banoni        |koci kobusu|       ‘half-fathom: finger tip to midline of breast’ (koci ‘cut’, kobusu ‘break’)
  MM: Babatana      |düli kürisi|       ‘centre of chest to tip of fingers: half-fathom’ (düli ‘tear apart’; kürisi ‘arm’)
  SES: Bugotu       |maða i sono|       ‘a measure, from finger-tip to breast-bone or throat’ (maða ‘bed mat’, sono ‘swallow’)
  SES: Gela         levutilima          ‘measure, chest to finger tips’
  SES: Longgu       |aba-i lima-i|      ‘half a fathom: from breast bone to finger tips’ (aba- ‘side’; lima- ‘(whole) arm’)
  SES: To’aba’ita   ʔāʔaba, gʷaʔaba   ‘half-fathom: from centre of chest to fingertips of extended arm’ (ʔaba ‘hand, arm’)
  SES: Arosi        ʔaba-i-rima         ‘a measure, from middle of chest to extended fingers’
  SES: Sa’a         |hahani ʔonoʔonoma| ‘measure: a half-fathom’
  NCV: Mota         |alo masalepei|     ‘measure from breastbone to finger-tips’
  Fij: Wayan        taba                ‘half a fathom: from the breastbone to the tip of the extended arm’
  Fij: Boumaa       taba                ‘measure from middle of chest to end of outstretchcd fingers’
  Pn:  Tongan       tofi-fata-fata      ‘distance from centre of chest to tip of middle finger when the arm is fully extended sideways; half a fathom’ (fata-fata ‘chest’)

                                                                Linear measurement 563


16.6.3 Between fathom and half-fathom

No reconstruction is possible for any measurement term between a fathom and half a fathom.
The variation among the glosses of these in-between terms prevents us from inferring what
measurements POc speaks might have used..

   The most widespread of these measures is a length from the fingertips of one hand of an
extended arm to the opposite shoulder. The lowest three items below reflect POc *qapaRa
‘shoulder’ (vol.5:142).

__formgroup__
  NNG: Kove        |wala-ra varexe|  ‘shell money measured to opposite shoulder’ (wala ‘shoulder’; varexe ‘side, half, portion’)
  MM: Tangga       paklu-n-tua-n-er  ‘span from fingertips to opposite shoulder’ (paklu- ‘head’, tua- ‘bone’, er ??; Maurer 1966:76)
  SES: Bugotu      |tao haðavu|      ‘a measure, finger tips to further shoulder’ (tao ‘mountain pass, saddle’)
  SES: Ulawa       ʔapala            ‘a sum of money reaching from finger tips to opposite shoulder’ (ʔapala ‘shoulder’)
  Mic: Woleaian    -yefaẓ           ‘with arm extended, length from end of fingers to shoulder of opposite arm’ (yefaẓe ‘shoulder’)
  Mic: Sonsorol    -avala           ‘from fingers of one hand to shoulder of opposite arm’ (avala ‘shoulder’)

   A slightly longer measure was the length from the fingertips of one hand to the opposite
elbow. The root of the Arosi and Owa items appears to reflect POc *bakewa
‘shark’ (vol.4:30), but, if it does, the association is not clear. Mellow (2014) writes
somewhat mysteriously that ‘this measurement looks like a shark’. It is tempting to
reconstruct PNPn *fati-uku (PPn *fati ‘angle, bend’; PPn *qutu(a) ‘promontory’) here, but
POLLEX questions this, presumably because of the distribution of the Polynesian reflexes
below, which embraces no Polynesian subgroup.

__formgroup__
  PT:  Kilivila    lipoi       ‘unit of length measurement, from left fingertip of outstretched arms across to right-hand elbow (three-quarters of a span)’
  SES: Arosi       babaʔewa    ‘a measure, from bent elbow of one arm to the extended fingers of the other’
  SES: Owa         paɣewa-na   ‘distance from fingertips to opposite elbow, about 1.4 metres’
  Mic: Woleaian    wō-paü      ‘with arms extended, length from end of fingers to elbow of opposite arm’ (paü ‘arm’)
  Pn:  E Futunan   fatiku      ‘old fabric measure: distance from one hand of stretched arm to the elbow of the other arm’
  Pn:  Nukuoro     hadiugu     ‘a unit of linear measure (from the end of an outstretched hand to the bent elbow of the other arm)’
  Pn:  Takuu       fatiuku     ‘measure from fingertip to opposite elbow’
  Pn:  Māori       fatiaŋa     ‘unit of measure (from elbow to fingertip)’

564     Malcolm Ross


    Similar terms, presumably arising from the need for graduated and acceptably precise
measurement of shell-money strings, include the following: from fingertips to the opposite
armpit/biceps/ear or to the throat. Whether any of these concepts existed in POc one cannot
tell.

__formgroup__
  PT: Kilivila        tomʷaidona        ‘from left fingertip to right armpit’ (lit. ‘the whole of him’)
  MM: Banoni          ɣarara            ‘part of fathom from right finger tips to left biceps’
  SES: Ulawa          roŋo-roŋo         ‘a measure, from the finger tips to the right ear’ (roŋo ‘to hear’)
  SES: Owa            onomiga-na        ‘measure from fingertips to throat’ (onomiga-na ‘throat of s.o.’ < onoa ‘swallow’)
  NCV: Mota           avawosua          ‘a measure of length; from right breast to fingers of left hand’

16.6.4 The cubit

The unit denoted by the archaic English word cubit is recorded across much of Oceanic. It
refers to the length of the forearm, from the elbow to the fingertips. Although the cubit in
Mediterranean society was a measure of both rigid and flexible objects, its application in
Oceanic communities was to flexible things like strings of shell money. A PMic form (a
numeral classifier) can be reconstructed. The non-cognate data below serve to indicate that
this was probably a POc concept, but one that was probably expressed by a phrase
containing the term for ‘arm’ or ‘elbow’.

<
PMic *-mʷanū ‘length from elbow to finger tips’ (Bender et al. 2003a)
 Mic: Kiribati         -mʷanū            ‘elbow joint’
 Mic: Chuukese         -mʷalʉ            ‘length from inside elbow to finger tip, a cubit’
 Mic: Carolinian       -mʷalʉ            ‘length from inside elbow to finger tip, a cubit’
 Mic: Carolinian       |-mʷalʉ̄(l peṣe)|   ‘inside of the knee or elbow joint; inside of the knee’
 Mic: Woleaian         -mʷarǖ            ‘length of forearm, from elbow to end of fingers; a cubit’
 Mic: Pulo Annian      -mʷaɾʉ            ‘length from elbow to fingertip’
 Mic: Sonsorol         -mʷar             ‘cubit’
 Mic: Ulithian         -mʷalo            ‘cubit’
>

                                                                Linear measurement 565


   Other terms for the cubit are found quite widely:

__formgroup__
  NNG: Mangap         yok                 ‘cubit’
  PT:  Gumawana       |[k]aba katuguyala| ‘length of one’s forearm’
  MM: Babatana        |pado körisi|         ‘cubit, from elbow to finger tip’ (papado ‘joint’; körisi ‘arm’)
  SES: Bugotu         |lopo i guema|      ‘a measure, from finger-tip to elbow-joint’ (lopo ‘be rolled up’, guema ‘fishing rod’)
  SES: Gela           levu                ‘measure from the elbow to finger tips’
  SES: Gela           louloɣulima         ‘measure, elbow to finger tips’
  SES: To’aba’ita     |kadeʔe ʔaba|       ‘measure of length: from the elbow to the fingertips; cubit ’(ʔaba- ‘arm’)
  SES: Lau            fātafaŋa            ‘measure, from tip of thumb to elbow’
  SES: Lau            kadeʔaba            ‘a cubit’ (ʔaba- ‘arm’)
  SES: Arosi          māmoku              ‘a measure of shell money from finger tips to elbow’
  SES: Sa’a           māpou               ‘a measure of shell money, from the fingertips to the elbow, a cubit’
  SES: Ulawa          |āni sūsū|          ‘a cubit’ (āni PREP; sūsū ‘elbow’)
  NCV: Mota           |alo maluk panei|   ‘a measure of length’ (maluk panei ‘inner bend of elbow’)
  NCV: Raga           |ŋadu-n lima|       ‘measure of length: hand to elbow’ (ŋadu ‘measure of length’; lima ‘arm’)

   A few Oceanic languages have a term for the length of the arm as a measure, each
involving a term for ‘arm’, but it is possible that these are parallel developments.

16.6.5 Longer than the fathom

The lists in (6) show that Tolai (MM) had terms for units of shell money longer than the
fathom. Arosi (SES) had terms for larger units still: tahaŋa ‘4 fathoms of shell money’;
gagau ‘25 fathoms of shell money’; ita ‘40 fathoms of shell money’. Arosi ʔauhoa is ‘a
measure, about a furlong’ (Fox 1978).’ Owa (SES) wairina is ‘ten fathoms’. However, the
evidence for such terms is very fragmentary indeed.

   Clark (1999) reconstructs Proto Polynesian *(ŋa)kumi ‘ten fathoms’.

<
PPn *(ŋa)kumi (CLF) ‘ten fathoms’ (Clark 1999 )
  Pn: Tongan           (se)kumi          ‘ten fathoms’ (se- ‘one’)
  Pn: Samoan           ʔumi              ‘ten fathoms’ (Pratt)
  Pn: Rennellese       kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Takuu            (se)kumi          ‘ten fathoms’ (se- ‘one’)
  Pn: Tuvalu           kumi              ‘ten fathoms of line’
  Pn: E Uvean          kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Pukapuka         kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Rapanui          kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Marquesan        kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Mangarevan       kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Niuean           kumi              ‘ten fathoms’
  Pn: Rarotongan       kumi              ‘60 feet, ten fathoms; a linear measurement, esp. of rope or fishing line’
  Pn: Hawaiian         ʔumi              ‘ten’
>

566     Malcolm Ross



16.7 Verbs of measuring

The POc verb for measuring out a length, for example, of wood and marking it accordingly
was *topoŋ. Final *-ŋ is reflected before a suffix in Mussau and Numbami. It is thus a regular
continuation of PAn *tepeŋ ‘to measure quantities, as amounts of grain’, but appears to have
undergone a change in meaning, as only one of the Oceanic reflexes listed below, namely
Longgu (SES), refers to measuring volume rather then length. Wherever the glosses of
other items are specific about what is being measured, it is the length of a rigid object.
Given the distinction made earlier between measuring rigid objects (§16.5) and measuring
flexible objects (§16.6), one might also expect a verb for measuring flexible objects. POc
*ropa ‘fathom’ also served this purpose, as the meaning ‘measure in fathoms’ is
reconstructable from its reflexes (§16.6.1). The same meaning appears to be reconstructable
for *-ŋapa, but as it was a POc classifier, and thus a bound morpheme, it seems unlikely
that it was also used as a POc verb, and probable that reflexes with the meaning ‘measure
in fathoms’ are later developments.

<
PAn *tepeŋ ‘to measure quantities, as amounts of grain’ (ACD: Formosan and WMP)
POc *topoŋ ‘to measure; to mark (for cutting); to try (s.t.) out’
 Adm: Mussau          tōŋ-i             ‘to mark, measure’
 Adm: Nyindrou        (mu)droh          ‘to measure out’
 NNG: Takia           tou               (N) ‘measure, mark, linear size’
 NNG: Mutu            tov               ‘to measure (e.g. house)’
 NNG: Numbami         |(-aᵐbi) tuaŋ(ana)| ‘to measure, judge, assess’ (-aᵐbi ‘hold, get, take’, tuaŋana (nominalisation) ‘measurement’)
 NNG: Mengen          to[e]             ‘to measure’
 PT:   Yamalele       (ʔe)towava[i]     ‘to measure length’ (final -va unexplained)
 PT:   Motu           toho-a            ‘to try; to mark for cutting; to rule lines’
 MM: Nakanai          tovo              ‘to record, to measure, to try out’
 MM: Sursurunga       toho-i            ‘try’
 MM: Sursurunga       |toh (pasi)|        ‘to measure’ (pasi ‘get, acquire’)
 SES: Tolo            tovo-a            ‘to try, attempt’
 SES: Longgu          tovo-a            ‘to test s.o. or s.t. (to see if any good); to measure (quantity of rice, sugar)’
 SES: Lau             tō-a              ‘to measure’
 SES: ’Are’are        to-toho           ‘a measure, mark, sign’
 SES: ’Are’are        to-toho-a         ‘to measure with a measuring stick’
 SES: Kwaio           toʔo-a            ‘to measure out’
 SES: Sa’a            toho              ‘to measure with a rod’
 SES: Arosi           toho              ‘to measure’
PNCV *tovo ‘measure’ (Clark 2009)
 NCV: Mota            towo              ‘to measure (s.t.) out’
 NCV: Araki           tovo              ‘to measure, count, read’
 NCV: W Ambrym        tō(tene)          ‘measure’ (tene ‘towards’)
 NCV: Mafea           tovo-             ‘count’
 NCV: Port Sandwich   tö-to(rini)       ‘measure’
 NCV: Raga            dov               ‘measure, appoint, design’
 NCV: Lonwolwol       tɔ̄                ‘to measure’
 NCV: N Ambrym        tɔu               ‘to measure’
 NCV: Paamese         te-toho-ni        ‘to imitate’
 NCV: Lewo            tou-tou-ni        ‘to measure, imitate’
 NCV: Nguna           to-towo           (N) ‘figure, amount; size’
 NCV: S Efate         to-n              ‘to compare ; to measure’
>

                                                                Linear measurement 567


   POc *topoŋ was evidently lost in PPn, and was replaced by PPn *fua. There are possible
cognates in some Western Oceanic languages.

<
PPn *fua ‘weigh, measure’ (POLLEX)
  Pn: Tongan          fua                 ‘weigh, measure’
  Pn: Niuean          fua                 ‘to weigh’
  Pn: Samoan          fua                 ‘measure; size’
  Pn: Tuvalu          fua-fua             (VT) ‘measure; correct’
  Pn: E Futunan       fua                 ‘a measure, to measure’
  Pn: E Uvean         fua                 ‘a measure’
  Pn: K'marangi       hua                 ‘supervise’
cf. also:
  PT: Ubir            ifofo-n            ‘to measure’
  MM: Madak           po                 ‘to measure’
  MM: Patpatar        puo                (VT) ‘measure; price something; mark as unsuccessful’
>

16.8 Conclusions

The data considered in this chapter suggest strongly that there was a distinction in POc
between measuring rigid objects and measuring flexible things such as shell money. This is
borne out both in the units of measurement and in the verbs of measuring that can be
reconstructed. The material also indicates that the lexicon for measuring flexible things was
more complex than that for measuring rigid objects. The complexity of measurement units
for flexible items was evidently driven by the need to accurately measure pieces of shell
money.

568    Malcolm Ross


   Units of measurement applied to shell money and other items centred on the fathom,
which with its definition as the distance between the fingertips of two outstretched arms,
served as a baseline for the creation of other terms. It is significant that two POc terms for the
fathom are readily reconstructable—*ropa and *-ŋapa—but that POc terms for the half-fathom and
units between the half-fathom and the fathom are not. The fact that a number of
Oceanic languages agree on expressing these meanings implies that the concepts existed in
POc, but the fact that no POc lexical items for them are reconstructable suggests that they
were perhaps referred to by phrasal idioms that have been continually replaced. Among
shorter units of measurement, terms for the cubit are found across Oceania, and there was
presumably a POc term for it, but the evidence does not permit a reconstruction.

   The two POc reconstructions for ‘fathom’, *ropa and *-ŋapa, are respectively a noun and
a classifier. Classifiers are discussed at some length in chapter 14.
