                                               The lexicon of Proto Oceanic
                                                     The culture and environment of ancestral
                                                                  Oceanic society








                                PACIFIC LINGUISTICS


FOUNDING EDITOR:          Stephen A. Wurm

EDITORIAL BOARD:          Malcolm D. Ross and Darrell T. Tryon (Managing Editors),
                          Thomas E. Dutton, Nikolaus P. Himmelmann, Andrew K. Pawley

Pacific Linguistics is a publisher specialising in linguistic descriptions, dictionaries, atlases
and other material on languages of the Pacific, the Philippines, Indonesia and southeast Asia.
The authors and editors of Pacific Linguistics publications are drawn from a wide range of
institutions around the world.

Pacific Linguistics is associated with the Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies at the
Australian National University. Pacific Linguistics was established in 1963 through an initial
grant from the Hunter Douglas Fund. It is a non-profit-making body financed largely from
the sales of its books to libraries and individuals throughout the world, with some assistance
from the School.

The Editorial Board of Pacific Linguistics is made up of the academic staff of the School's
Department of Linguistics. The Board also appoints a body of editorial advisors drawn from
the international community of linguists. Publications in Series A, B and C and textbooks in
Series D are refereed by scholars with relevant expertise who are normally not members of
the editorial board.

To date Pacific Linguistics has published over 400 volumes in four series:

• Series A:    Occasional Papers; collections of shorter papers, usually on a single
               topic or area.

• Series B:    Monographs of intermediate length.


• Series C:    Books; publications of greater length, especially reference books such
               as dictionaries and grammars, and conference proceedings.

• Series D:    Special Publications; including archival materials, pedagogical works,
               maps, audiovisual productions, and materials that do not fit into the
               other series.




                                     Series C, Volume 1 52
THE LEXICON OF PROTO OCEANIC
   The culture and environment of ancestral
                Oceanic society



              1    Material culture




                     edited by
         Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley
             and Meredith Osmond




        Pacific Linguistics
        Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies
        The Australian National University
        Canberra
Published by Pacif ic Linguist ics
Research School of Pac ific and Asian Stud ies
The Australian Nat ional Un ivers ity
PO Box 1428
Canberra A Cf 260 1
Australia




First published 1998

Copyright © The authors




B ib liography.
I SSN 0078- 7 5 5 8
I SBN 0 8 5 8 8 3 507 X (v. 1 ).


1 . Proto-Ocean ic language. 2. Ethnology - Ocean ia .
3. Oceania - Soc ial life and customs. 1. Ross, Malcolm
(Malcolm D. ). I I . Pawley, Andrew. III. Osmond, Meredith.
IV. Austral ian National University. Research School of
Pac ific and As ia n Stud ie s. Dept. of L ingu ist ics. (Se ries:
Pac if ic Lingu is t ic s. Ser ies C -15 2 ).




Copyed ited ffypeset by Margaret Forster
Printed by ANU Pr int ing Serv ice, Canberra
Bound by F & M Perfect Bookb ind in g , Canberra
                                         v




   The Pacific Linguistics logo was
designed by Ian Scales after one small
panel of a para batuna from Vella
Lavella, held in the Australian
Museum (A8S17). This is an artefact
made from a plaque of fossilised giant
clam shell (Tridacna sp.), carved into
an elaborate fretwork design. These
particular artefacts were made in the
western Solomon Islands, probably
between 100 and 200 years ago.
   The basic cover design is also by
Ian Scales. The motif was drawn by
Malcolm Ross after the stylised
representation of a design on Lapita
pottery found by Roger Green in the
Reefs-Santa Cruz Islands (source:
Matthew Spriggs (ed.), Lapita design,
form and composition . Canberra:
Department of Prehistory, Research
School of Pacific Studies, The
Australian National University.)
        Contents overview

toc.txt

                                                                                        xvii




        Acknowledgements




   We are indebted to a number of people and institutions who have assisted us during the
preparation of this volume. Its contents are in large measure a product of the Oceanic
Lexicon Project in the Department of Linguistics of the Research School of Pacific and
Asian Studies (RSPAS) at the Australian National University in Canberra. A half-time research
assistant was provided for the Project by RSPAS during 1991-93. The project was foreshadowed
by a conference, Austronesian terminologies: continuity and change, held at the ANU in
1990 as part of the interdisciplinary Comparative Austronesian Project, for which funds
were also provided by RSPAS.
   We would also like to acknowledge support from (i) the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,
which funded a visiting professorship in the Southeast Asian Studies department of Frankfurt
University during which Malcolm Ross did some early work on the Project; (ii) the Australian
and New Zealand Association of Lexicographers which supported Paul Geraghty's visiting
fellowship to the Department in 1993; and (iii) the Pacific Island Visitor's Fund of RSPAS,
which supported a second visiting fellowship by Geraghty in 1996. Visits by Roger Green in
1994 and Ross Clark in 1997 were funded by the Linguistics Department, RSPAS.
   The sources of our data are listed in the Appendix, but we wish to thank staff of the
Summer Institute of Linguistics at Ukarumpa, Papua New Guinea, for allowing us access to
unpublished dictionaries and to members of SIL who have generously given us copies of their
work in progress. We are also very grateful to Bruce Biggs and Robert Blust for allowing us
access to their comparative computer files of POLLEX: Proto-Polynesian lexicon and the
Austronesian Comparative Dictionary respectively and to Jeff Marck and David Stampe for
technical help in obtaining this access.
   Various scholars have commented on the individual chapters in this volume, and are
acknowledged there. We are grateful to Wal Ambrose and Ann Chowning who have each
commented on several chapters, and, in the latter's case, suggested numerous additions to the
data. John Lynch has taken an active interest throughout our years of research, and made
useful contributions to our reconstructions.
   Malcolm Ross drew the maps. Except where otherwise indicated, the illustrations are by
Philippa Ross. The diagram from Oliver in Chapter 3 is reproduced with permission from Dr
Douglas L. Oliver.
xviii
