           Acknowledgments

This work is interdisciplinary and, as the author of chapters 2 and 5-13, I owe a considerable
debt of gratitude to a number of people who have advised me or provided me with relevant
materials from the fields of botany, agriculture, ethnobotany and archaeobotany-fields in
which I have no academic grounding at all. 1
    Robin Hide provided me with lists of likely sources of plant names, one list from each
coastal and island province of Papua New Guinea. These have proven invaluable, taking me
to sources that I would otherwise certainly have missed, and which at the same time have
educated me about the ways people use plants in the Bismarck Archipelago. The marks of
his contribution are all over this volume, and I am deeply grateful to him.
    R. Michael Bourke talked with me about food plants in Papua New Guinea on a number
of occasions, both while I was writing chajpters 9-12 and when I wrote an earlier article
about Proto Oceanic food plants (Ross 1996c). He also provided me with copies of important
books on food plants in Melanesia and of his own articles, some unpublished or otherwise
inaccessible, some still in press. At the end of the authoring process he also kindly read
chapters 9-13 and commented in detail on matters to do with NW Melanesian agriculture,
providing many pieces of information about its prehistory and about present-day crops and
saving me from potentially embarrassing gaffes. The food plant chapters in this book are the
richer for his contribution.
    Jean Kennedy pointed out that the classification of bananas in Ross (1996c) was outdated
and gave me access to papers then in press. She also read chapters 2 and 9-13 and gave
me detailed information about the archaeobotany of food plants and about their present-day
distributions, and directed me to literature that I would otherwise have missed.
    Several other colleagues read pre-final drafts and generously provided comments of var-
ious kinds. Ann Chowning drew my attention to published reconstructions that I had missed
and provided me with additional pieces of                     information and data from Kove,
Sengseng, Molima and Nakanai, some of which proved crucial to a reconstruction. Frederick
Damon read chapters 2 and 5-9 and provided comment based on his ethnographic fieldwork
on W oodlark Island. Rhys Gardner offered numerous botanical corrections, many of them
relating to current usage of Linnaean terms, as well as information about the distributions
of various plants. Peter Lincoln read parts of the manuscript and made useful editorial sug-
gestions. John Lynch read the whole manuscript and gave me numerous pieces of data from
Vanuatu which filled gaps, making some reconstructions more precise and others better sup-
ported. His editor's eagle eye spotted all kinds of small errors. Will McClatchey read chapters

1
    Bethwyn Evans acknowledges help she has received in a footnote at the beginning of each of her chapters.
xxiv   Acknowledgments


2 and 5-7, corrected some of my ecological generalisations and offered many emendations as
well as lists of plant terms from Solomons languages and pieces of ethnographic information
gleaned from his fieldwork which helped to solve a number of riddles.
     A number of people have kindly given me electronic files containing vernacular plant
names in Oceanic languages. I am particularly grateful to John Lynch, who generously shared
files which not only contained plant names in :Southern Oceanic languages but also recon-
structed plant names, mostly for Proto Southern Vanuatu. This was beautifully complemented
by a file of plant names and reconstructions from the Banks and Torres Islands of northern
Vanuatu assembled by Alexandre Fran9ois. Others who provided field materials were Alana
Burley for Lihir, Frederick Damon for Muyuw, Simon Foale for Lihir, Jeff Kinch for Mis-
ima, Anna Margetts for Saliba, Will McClatchey for the Alu dialect of Mono-Alu, A vaso,
Babatana, Blablanga, Bugotu, Gao, Gela, Kia, Kwara' ae, Maringe, Marovo, Ririo, Sisiqa,
Ulawa and Varisi, Mary Raymond for Kubukota and Ian Scales for Nduke. A number ofthe
reconstructions in this volume depend crucially on these materials. Robin Torrance provided
a database (Kononenko 2005) of information from various sources on plant use on the north
coast of New Britain.
     Many of the chapters in the volume are stmcturally quite complex, and the volume was
typeset in LaTeX in order to facilitate formatting, consistency, crossreferencing and indexing.
I am very grateful to Martin Steer, who                 volumes 1 and 2 of this series and worked
out a LaTeX style to match them. The file he provided has undergone numerous tweaks in
the meanwhile, and I am responsible for any infelicities in formatting, but without Martin' s
masterly assistance I would probably never have managed to take advantage ofthe facilities
that LaTeX offers.
     Finally, I would like to thank my fellow e:ditors, who have painstakingly read all the
chapters in this volume more than once, offering many corrections and suggestions.
     Despite all the help that I have received, I am sure that errors of fact and of interpretation
remain, and for these I am solely responsible.
     The figures in this volume are from a number of sources. Those from Henderson & Han-
cock ( 1988) were drawn by Sue Wickison, those from French & Bridle ( 1978) by Celia
Bridle, and I am grateful to both of them for allowing me to reproduce their superb drawings
here.
     Published sources of figures are as follows: Barrau (1962): 9.3, 9.7; Barrau (1965): 9.4,
13.9 ; Conn (1995): 5.11 right; Danielsson & Danielsson (1983): 12.1 ; Evans (1999): 11.1
right, 11.3 (labels only); French & Bridle (1978): 9.1, 9.2, 9.5 ; French (1986): 7.3, 11.7;
Gilman & Watson (1993): 7.7, left A ; Henderson & Hancock (1988): 5.2, 5.7, 5.9, 5.12,
5.14, 6.2, 7.6, 7.5 right, 7.7 right, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11 , 8.1, 8.3 , 9.8, 10.1 , 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 10.6,
11.1left, 11.2, 11.4, 11 .5, 11 .8, 11.9, 11.10, 11.11 , 13.1 , 13 .3, 13 .6, 13 .10left; Henty(1969,
drawn by Damaris Pearce): 8.5 (left and right) ; Hopkins & Menzies (1995): 5.1 left, 5.6,
5.13 , 5.15; Jebb (1992, drawn by Rosemary Wise): 11.3 (drawing only) ; Johns (1976): 6.6,
7.1 , 7.2, 7.4, 7.5.left B & C, 7.7, left B & C, 7.8; Laycock (2003): 12.2 ; Merrill (1946): 5.1
right, 5.4, 5.5, 5.8, 5.11 right, 6.4, 8.2, 13 .8, 13.10 right; J. Parham (1972): 6.5, 8.4.
     The following figures are from internet sources accessed in December 2007: 8.5 (middle)
(http://www.weblio.jp/), 12.3 (http://waynesword.palomar.edu/terminfl .htrn), 13.4 B (http://
www.ntbg.org/), 13.2 (http://membres.lycos.fr/verdammi/), 13.4 C & D (http://www. nation-
aalherbarium.nl/, drawn by Anna Walsmit Sachs), 13.5 (http://www.desert-tropicals. com/).
One figure is from an internet source accessed in August 2008: 10.2 (http://www. tropilab.com/
amaranth.htrnl).
                                                                   Acknowledgments      xxv



   I drew the maps, and the figures in chapters 1 and 3 and figures 5.3 (after a drawing in
Peekel1984: 193), 6.1, 6.3, 7.5, left A (after a photograph in Thomson 2006a), 11.6 (after a
drawing in French 1986: 210), 13.7. The source of figure 5.10 is unknown.
   The cover photograph, by R. Michael Bourke, shows men in a garden of giant taro
(Cyrtosperma merkusii) and banana plants at Tinputz in northeast Bougainville.

Malcolm Ross
Canberra, 4th September 2008
                                         JAPAN




                                                                                                                                                       .•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20°
                                                                                                                                                            Hawaii



                                                                Federated States·
                                                                 of Micronesia...
                                                                                                    ··:Marshall
                                                                                                        Islands




                                                                                           Nauru·
                                                                                                         Kiribati
                                                                                                                                       0 C ·E A N                                        c                              Equator cP




                                                                             ,., , s;lomon Is
                                                                                                        TuvalU :       Tokelau                                                         ··.·. Marquesas
                                                                 .·.·.,. .
                                                                                      "'             Rotuma · & Wallis
                                                                                                                Futuna           Samoa
                                                                                                                                '0,.
                                                                                                                                                <;;                     FRENCH POLYNESIA
                                                                                                                                                      .,_                 ··.·.
                                                                                                                                                                          :: :·....·.: · ·       Tuamotu
      also                                                                            nuatu . •           Fiji                         Niue                      Tahitf · .., <'.            .. · Ar.chipelaga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20°
                                     AUSTRALIA                                                                              . Tonga       Rarotonga ·
                                                                                   Caledonw
                                                                                                                                                                       Rapa ·.                                           Easter·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Island




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4cf'
                                                        '   "
• Non-Austronesian languages in areas shown as AustronesiS?                                                                '·
        100°                120°                 140°                                                               180°                              160°                             140°                      120°




                                       Map 1       The Austronesian language family and major subgroups
                            JAPAN


   CHINA

             Ora·i.;an
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ·"
                                                                                                                                                                                                          '"{)                                                              20°
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hawaii
                                                         arian as

             D\-                           Guam



           1!\              Palau   J.                                                                           · ., Marsh all
                                                                                                                     · Isla nds

                                                               Fede.ra ted States
                                                                 of Micronesia                                                  Kiribati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Eq uato r 0°
                                            _                                           .,          Nauru ·
                                                -;:__1              .                 . '
                                                     )' . . . . ..... ,... "D' So·1oman •1s:-._.'\'                          Tu valu ·
                                                                                                                                         . .
                                                                                                                                                      To kela u· · .                                                               · •. •f:'1arquesas
                                                           &    •   -,
                                                                         '                            ·-' ,
                                                                                                                '\                             .....--F -- -----
                                                                                                                                                            Samoa . i
                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRENO-I POLYNESIA
                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                             \                                            Rotuma ·
                                                                                 \                                    ' .. _................       utuna        "0....:..            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ""<>_,            . ;;·;_:;;.-::<·.:       Tuamotu
                                                                                                                                          0 ,; ·.·:
                                                                                     ·,"
                                                                                      .,: anua tu          "                      F' ..- ·""'-:                                 1I
                                                                                         '\ .                  ': .                 ljl ·,. :. ··i                 /' .          NIUe                ""                                    A!chipe/ago
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20°
                                                                                               '\     "q        •                                          •   Ton ga                    Rarotonga ·
                         AUSTRALIA                                                                     .. .
                                                                                        CaledQn ia _._________ ....... ..
                                                                                                                          ;,-"


                                                                                                                               ""' Known limit of Lapita sites                                                     Rapa · •                                        Easter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Island




                                                                                                                                                    Limit of Oceanic languages " '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 0°

                                                 \j
            120°                         140°                                        16o 0 '                                                    180°                                              160°                              140°                 120°




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   :><

Map 2      Geographic limits of historically known Oceanic speakers and of presently documented Lap ita sites (after Kirch 1997: 17, 54)


1 Introduction


1.1 Aims

This is the third in a series of volumes bringing together the results of recent work on the
lexicon ofthe Proto Oceanic (POe) language.[1] POe is the immediate ancestor ofthe Oceanic
subgroup of the Austronesian language family (see Map 1). This subgroup consists of all
the Austronesian languages of Melanesia east of 136° E, together with those of Polynesia
and (with two exceptions) those of Micronesia-more than 450 languages in all. 2 Extensive
arguments for the existence of Oceanic as a clearly demarcated branch of Austronesian were
first put forward by Otto Dempwolff in the 1920s, and the validity of the subgroup is now
recognised by virtually all scholars working in Austronesian historical linguistics.

     The development and break-up of the POe language and speech community were stages in
a truly remarkable chapter in human prehistory-the colonisation by Austronesian speakers
of the Indo-Pacific region in the period after about 2000 BC. The outcome was the largest
of the world's well-established language families and (until the expansion oflndo-European
after Columbus) the most widespread. The Austronesian family comprises more than 1,000
distinct languages. Its eastern and western outliers, Madagascar and Easter Island, are two-
thirds of a world apart, and its northernmost extensions, Hawaii and Taiwan, are separated
by 70 degrees of latitude from its southernmost outpost, Stewart Island in New Zealand.

     It is likely that the divergence of Oceanic from its nearest relatives, which are the Austro-
nesian languages spoken around Cenderawasih Bay and in South Halmahera (Blust 1978a),
began when Austronesian speakers from the Cenderawasih Bay area moved eastwards along
the north coast ofNew Guinea and into the Bismarck Archipelago. There is a strong school of
opinion that associates the subsequent break-up of POe with the rapid colonisation of Island
Melanesia and the central Pacific by bearers of the Lapita culture between about 1200 and
900 BC (see Map 2 and volume 2, chapter 2).

[1] The project has been jointly directed by Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross, with research assistance from
Meredith Osmond, in the Department of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies at the
Australian National University. Bethwyn Evans, who has contributed to the present volume, was employed
as a Research Associate under a grant to the project from the Australian Research Council. Originally, five
volumes were planned, but the large amount of           on plants and animals has led to the splitting of the
planned volume 3 into two.

[2] The listing in Tryon (1995) contains 466 Oceanic languages, many of which are subdivisible into dialects.

2     Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    The present project aims to bring together a large corpus of lexical reconstructions for
POe, with supporting cognate sets, organised according to semantic fields and using a stan-
dard orthography for POe. We hope that this thesaurus will be a useful resource for culture
historians, archaeologists and others interested in the prehistory of the Pacific region. The
comparative lexical material should also be a rich source of data for various kinds of purely
linguistic research, e.g. on semantic change and subgrouping in the more than 400 daughter
languages.

    Volume 1 of The lexicon of Proto Oceanic dealt with material culture. Volumes 2, 3 and 4
examine relevant sets of cognate terms in order to gain insights into how POe speakers viewed
and exploited their environment. Volume 2 deallt with the geophysical or inanimate environ-
ment, the present volume treats plants and volume 4 animals. Volume 5, as it is planned at
the time of writing, will deal with terminologies centring on people and society, including
the body and human conditions and activities, and social organisation, belief systems, rituals,
recreation and other elements of non-material culture. Volume 6 will treat closed categories
including adjectives, pronouns, and number. It will also include a review of the main findings
of the project, especially comparing the evidence from archaeology and historical linguistics
concerning the culture and dispersal of Austronesian speakers into and across the Pacific Is-
lands. Volume 6 will also provide an index to lthe POe and other reconstructions presented
in the whole work, as well as an English-to-POe finderlist and a list of all languages cited,
together with their subgroups. 3

    The organisation of the present volume is as follows. Chapter 2 is an introduction to the
present volume, discussing plant classifications and plant names. It also provides a rationale
for the organisation of this volume. Chapter 3 reconstructs major categories of POe ethnob-
otanical classification. Chapter 4 deals with POe terms for the parts of trees and other plants.
Chapters 5-8 present reconstructed names for wild trees and plants of the bush. They are or-
ganised according to vegetation habitat. Chapter 5 treats plants of the coastal strand, chapter
6 plants ofthe mangrove swamp, chapter 7 primary lowland rain forest plants and chapter 8
plants that are found mainly in secondary lowland rain forest and grassland. Chapters 9-12
present reconstructed names for cultivated food plants. 4 Chapter 9 deals with staple foods,
chapter 10 with green vegetables, chapter 11 with nut- and fruit-bearing trees and plants and
chapter 12 with the coconut palm and its products. Finally, chapter 13 treats trees and plants
that are cultivated for purposes other than food production.


1.2 The relation of the current project to previous work

Reconstructions of POe phonology and lexicon began with Dempwolff' s pioneering work in
the 1920s and 1930s. Dempwolff's dictionary of reconstructions attributed to Proto Austro-
nesian (PAn) (1938)- but equivalent in modem terms to Proto Malaya-Polynesian (PMP)
- contains some 600 reconstructions with reflexes in Oceanic languages.

[3] This Introduction incorporates much of the material in the Introductions to Volume 1 and 2. We replicate this

material here in order that each volume can be used ind,ependently . There are, however, some changes in the
sub grouping of Oceanic languages.

[4] Terms associated with horticultural practices are presented in chapter 5 of volume 1.

                                                                                       Introduction     3


     Since the 1950s, POe and other early Oceanic interstage languages have been the sub-
ject of a considerable body of research. However, relatively few new reconstructions safely
attributable to POe were added to Dempwolff's material until the 1970s. In 1969 George
Grace made available as a working paper a compilation of reconstructions from various
sources amounting to some 700 distinct items, attributed either to POe or to early Oceanic
interstages. These materials were presented in a new orthography for POe, based largely on
Biggs' (1965) orthography for an interstage he called Proto Eastern Oceanic. Updated com-
pilations of Oceanic cognate sets were produced at the University of Hawaii in the period
1977-1983 as part of a project directed by Grace and Pawley. These compilations and the
supporting data are problematic in various respects and we have made only limited use of
them.

     Comparative lexical studies have been carried out for several lower-order subgroups
of Oceanic: for Proto Polynesian by Biggs (resulting in Walsh & Biggs 1966, Biggs et al.
1970 and subsequent versions ofthe POLLEX file, including Biggs & Clark (1993) and Clark
& Biggs (2006); 5 for Proto Micronesian by scholars at the University of Hawaii (Bender
et al. 1983, Bender et al. 2003); for Proto North-Central Vanuatu by Clark (1996, 2008); 6
for Proto Southern Vanuatu by Lynch (1978, 1996, 2001); for New Caledonia by Ozanne-
Rivierre (1992), Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre (1982) and Geraghty (1989); for Proto SE
Solomonic by Levy (1980) and Frantisek Lichtenberk (1988); for Proto Central Pacific by
Hockett (1976), Geraghty (1983, 1986, 1996 together with a number of unpublished papers);
for Proto Eastern Oceanic by Biggs (1965), Cashmore (1969), Levy & Smith (1970), and
Geraghty (1990); and for Proto Central Papuan by Pawley (1975), Lynch (1978, 1980), and
Ross (1994b).

     Robert Blust of the University of Hawaii has, in a series of papers (1970, 1980, 1983-
84, 1986, 1989) published extensive, alphabetically ordered, lexical reconstructions (with
supporting cognate sets) for interstages earlier than POe, especially for Proto Austronesian,
Proto Malaya-Polynesian and Proto Eastern Malaya-Polynesian. He has also written several
papers investigating specific semantic fields (1980, 1982, 1987, 1994). At the time of writing,
Blust has a major work in progress, the Austronesian Comparative Dictionary (ACD ), which
will bring together all his reconstructions for Proto Austronesian and lower-order stages. This
is stored in electronic form at the University of Hawaii. The version to which we refer dates
from 1998.

     Several papers predating our project systematically investigated particular semantic do-
mains in the lexicon ofPOc, e.g. Milke (1958), French-Wright (1983), Pawley (1982, 1985),
Pawley & Green (1985), Frantisek Lichtenberk (1986), R. Walter (1989), and the various
papers in Pawley & Ross (1994). Ross (1988) contains a substantial number of new POe
lexical reconstructions, as well as proposed modifications to the reconstructed POe sound
system and the orthography.

     These earlier works have provided valuable points of reference, both inside and outside
the Oceanic group, and we are indebted particularly to Biggs and Clark ( 1993 ), Clark ( 1996a),
Lynch (200 1c) and Blust (ACD ). However, pnevious Oceanic lexical studies were limited both
by large gaps in the data, with a distinct bias in favour of 'Eastern Oceanic' languages, and
by the technical problems of collating large quantities of data. Although most languages in
Melanesia remain poorly described, there are now many more dictionaries and extended word
lists, particularly for Papua New Guinea, than there were in the 1980s. And developments in
computing hardware and software now permit much faster and more precise handling of data
than was possible then. A list of sources and a summary of the Project' s collation procedures
is found in Appendix 1.

[5] We have mostly referred to Biggs & Clark (1993) in our work, as Clark & Biggs (2006) became available
only late in the preparation of this volume. We have referred to the latter in just a few cases.

[6] The manuscript of Clark (2008) became available only after this volume was nearing completion, and is not
otherwise referred to here.

4   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     As the present project proceeded, we came to realise that the form in which prelimi-
nary publications were presented-namely as essays, each discussing cognate sets for a par-
ticular semantic field at some length-would also be the best form for the presentation of
our final synthesis. A discursive treatment of individual terminologies, as opposed, say, to
a dictionary-type listing of reconstructions with supporting cognate sets, makes it easier to
relate the linguistic comparisons to relevant issues of culture history, language change, and
methodology. Hence each of the present volumes has as its core a collection of analytic es-
says. Some of these have been published or presented elsewhere, but are printed here in
revised form. In some cases we have updated the earlier versions in the light of subsequent
research, and, where appropriate, have inserted cross-references between contributions. Au-
thorship is in some cases something of a problem, as a number of people have had a hand
in collating the data, doing the reconstructions, and (re)writing for publication here. In most
chapters, however, one person did the research which determined the structure ofthe termi-
nology, and that person appears as the first or only author, and where another or others had
a substantial part in putting together the paper itself, they appear as the second and further
authors.


1.3 Reconstructing the lexicon

The lexical reconstructions presented in these volumes are arrived at using the standard meth-
ods of comparative linguistics, which require as preliminaries a theory of sub grouping (§3.2)
and the working out of systematic sound correspondences among cognate vocabulary in con-
temporary languages (§3 .3). As well as cognate: sets clearly attributable to POe, we have in-
cluded some cognate sets which at this stage are attributable to various interstage languages,
particularly Proto Western and Proto Eastern Oceanic (but see §3.2 for definitions). We have
set out to pay more careful attention to reconstmcting the semantics of POe forms than has
generally been done in earlier work, treating words not as isolates but as parts of terminolo-
gies.


1.3.1 Terminological reconstruction

Our method of doing 'terminological reconstruction' is as follows. First, the terminologies
of present-day speakers of Oceanic languages are used as the basis for constructing a hy-
pothesis about the semantic structure of a corresponding POe terminology, taking account of
(i) ethnographic evidence, i.e. descriptions of the lifestyles of Oceanic communities and (ii)
the geographical and physical resources of particular regions of Oceania. For example, by
comparing terms in several languages for parts of an outrigger canoe, or for growth stages
of a coconut, one can see which concepts recur and so are likely to have been present in
POe. Secondly, a search is made for cognate sets from which forms can be reconstructed to
match each meaning in this hypothesised terminology. The search is not restricted to mem-
bers of the Oceanic subgroup; if a term found in an Oceanic language proves to have exter-
nal (non-Oceanic) cognates, the POe antiquity ofthat term will be confirmed and additional
evidence concerning its meaning will be provided. Thirdly, the hypothesised terminology is
re-examined to see if it needs modification in the light of the reconstructions. There are cases,
highlighted in the various contributions to these volumes, where we were able to reconstruct
a term where we did not expect to do so and conversely, often more significantly, where we
were unable to reconstruct a term where we had believed we should be able to. In each case,
we have discussed the reasons why our expectations were not met and what this may mean
for Oceanic culture history.

                                                                               Introduction    5


    Blust (1987: 81) distinguishes between conventional 'semantic reconstruction', which
asks, "What was the probable meaning of protomorpheme X?", and Dyen and Aberle's
( 1974) 'lexical reconstruction', where one asks, "What was the protomorpheme which prob-
ably meant 'X'?" At first sight, it might appear that terminological reconstruction is aver-
sion of lexical reconstruction. However, there are sharp differences. Lexical reconstruction
applies a formal procedure: likely protomeanings are selected from among the glosses of
words in available cognate sets, then an algorithm is applied to determine which meaning
should be attributed to each set. This procedure may have unsatisfactory results, as Blust
points out. Several reconstructions may end up with the same meaning; or no meaning may
be reconstructed for a form because none of the glosses of its reflexes is its protomeaning.

    Terminological reconstruction is instead similar to the semantic reconstruction approach.
In terminological reconstruction the meanings ofprotomorphemes are not determined in ad-
vance. Instead, cognate sets are collected and their meanings are compared with regard to:
    • their specific denotations, where these are known;
    • the geographic and genetic distribution of these denotations (i.e. are the glosses from
      which the protogloss is reconstructed well distributed?);
    • any derivational relationships to other reconstructions;
    • their place within a working hypothesis of the relevant POe terminology (e.g., are terms
      complementary -'bow' implies 'arrow'; 'seine net' implies 'floats' and 'weights'?
      Are there different levels of classification-generic, specific, and so on?).

For example, it proved possible to reconstruct the following POe terms for tying with cords
(vol.l, ch.9, §10):
POe *buku 'tie (a knot); fasten'
POe *pwita 'tie by encircling'
POe *paqu(s), *paqus-i- 'bind, lash; construct (canoe +)by lashing together'
POe *pisi 'bind up, tie up, wind round, wrap'
POe *kiti 'tie, bind'

    In each of the supporting cognate sets from contemporary languages there are a number of
items whose glosses in the dictionaries or word lists are too vague to tell the analyst anything
about the specific denotation of the item, and in the case of* kiti this prevents the assignment
of a more specific meaning. The verb *buku can be identified as the generic term for tying
a knot because of its derivational relationship (by zero derivation) with a noun whose deno-
tation is clearly generic, *buku 'node (as in bamboo or sugarcane); joint; knuckle; knot in
wood, string or rope' (vol.1, ch.4, §3.2). Reconstruction of the meaning of*pwita as 'tie by en-
circling' is supported by the meanings of the Lukep, Takia and Longgu reflexes, respectively
'tie by encircling', 'tie on (as grass-skirt)', and 'trap an animal' s leg; tie s.t. around ankle or
wrist' : Lukep and Takia are North New Guinea languages, whilst Longgu is SE Solomonic.
Reconstruction of the meaning of *paqu(s), *paqus-i- as 'bind, lash; construct (canoe +)
by tying together' is supported by the meanings of the Takia, Kiribati and Samoan reflexes,
respectively 'tie, bind; construct (a canoe)' , 'construct (canoe, house)' , and 'make, construct
(wooden objects, canoes + )': Takia is a North New Guinea language, Kiribati is Microne-
sian, and Samoan is Polynesian. The meaning of*pisi is similarly reconstructed by reference
to the meanings of its Mono-Alu, Mota, Port Sandwich, Nguna and Fijian reflexes.

6   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     Often, however, the contributors have often been less fortunate in the information avail-
able to them. For example, Osmond (vol.1 , ch.8, §9) reconstructs six POe terms broadly
glossed as 'spear'. Multiple terms for implements within one language imply that these items
were used extensively and possibly in specialised ways. Can we throw light on these spe-
cialised ways? Unfortunately, some of the word lists and dictionaries available give minimal
glosses, e.g. 'spear' , for reflexes of the six reconstructions. What we need to know for each
reflex is: what is the level of reference? Is it a term for all spears, or perhaps all pointed pro-
jectiles including arrows and darts? Or does it refer to a particular kind of spear? Is it noun or
verb or both? If a noun, does it refer to both the instrument and the activity? Most word lists
are frustratingly short on detail. For this kind of detail, ethnographies have proved a more
fruitful source of information than many word lists.

     Another problem is inherent in the dangers of sampling from over 450 languages. The
greater the number of languages, the greater are the possible variations in meaning of any
given term, and the greater the chances of two languages making the same semantic leaps
quite independently. Does our (sometimes quite limited) cognate set provide us with a clear
unambiguous gloss, or have we picked up an accidental bias, a secondary or distantly related
meaning? Did etymon x refer to fishhook or the material from which the fishhook was made?
Did etymon y refer to the slingshot or to the action of turning round and round?

1.3.2 Sub grouping and reconstruction

1.3.2.1 Subgrouping

Although the subgrouping of Austronesian languages and questions about which protolan-
guage was spoken where remain in some cases somewhat controversial, it is impossible to
proceed without making some assumptions about these matters. Figures 1.1 and 1.2 are ap-
proximate renderings of our subgrouping assumptions. The upper part of the tree, shown
in Figure 1.1 , is due to Blust, originally presented in Blust (1977 b) and repeated with ad-
ditional supporting evidence in subsequent publications (1978, 1982, 1983-84, 1993).7 The
diagram of the lower (Oceanic) part of the tree in Figure 1.2 shows nine primary subgroups of
Oceanic. Its rake-like structure indicates that no convincing body of shared innovations has
been found to allow any of the nine subgroups to be combined into higher-order groupings.
Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.3, and 3.2.4 offer some commentary on our subgrouping, and in §3.2.3
we explain how we handle the rake-like structure in making reconstructions.

[7] For commentaries on Austronesian subgrouping, see Ross (1995) and Adelaar (2005).

                                                                                        Introduction   7


              Proto Austronesian
                    (PAn)

                          I
                                    Proto
    Formosan
                              Malayo-Polynesian
    languages
                                   (PMP)

                                                     I
                Western Malaya-              Central/ Eastern
                  Polynesian                Malaya--Polynesian
                   languages                 linkage (CEMP)


                               Central Malaya-                Proto Eastern
                                 Polynesian                 Malaya-Polynesian
                                  languages                     (PEMP)


                                                Proto South
                                                                              Proto Oceanic
                                              Halmahera/West
                                                                                  (POe)
                                               New Guinea

     Figure 1.1      Schematic diagram showing higher-order subgroups of Austronesian
                                         languages.




1.3.2.2 Kinds of subgroup

In Figures 1.1 and 1.2 each node is either a single language, 8 usually a reconstructed pro-
to language, or, in italics, a group of languag1es.

     Where a node is a proto language, its            form a proper subgroup (in the technical
sense in which historical linguists use the term 'subgroup' ). A proper subgroup is identified
by innovations shared by its member languages, i.e. it is 'innovation-defined' in the terminol-
ogy ofPawley & Ross (1995). These innovations are assumed to have occurred just once in
the subgroup' s protolanguage, i.e. the exclusively shared ancestor of its members. Thus lan-
guages of the large Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian share a set of innovations relative to
the earlier Austronesian stages shown in Figure 1.1 (Dempwolff 1934). 9 By inference these
innovations occurred in their common ancestor, POe, and the claim that they are innovations
is based on a comparison of reconstructed POe with reconstructed PMP. The innovations
may be phonological (e.g. PMP *e, pronounced [g], and PMP *aw both became POe *o),
morphological (e.g. POe acquired a morphological distinction between three kinds of pos-
sessive relationship: food, drink and default), or lexical (e.g. PMP *limaw 'citrus fruit' was
replaced by POe *molis).

[8] The two very closely related languages Mussau and Tench form a minor exception.

[9] Chapter 4 of Lynch et al. (2002) gives a recent account of these innovations.

                                                                   Proto Oceanic


                                                                                  I

                                           I            Western        p                  Proto           Southern           p
                                                                                                                                  I                  Proto
                      Proto           Mussau,                 .            roto                                 .                roto
          Yapese                                        Oceantc                         Southeast         Oceantc                                   Central
                    Admiralty          Tench            l" k           Temotu           S       .          l" k           Micronesian               p .fi
                                                         m age                           o1omomc            m age                                     act c
 :;::
  <:::>


C3                                                                                ___ j ___ _
...::;                            l'-1 elv Guinea                                                                                       \A/estern             Eastern Fijian/
                                                                             / North  '               Nuclear Southern
                                    Oceanic               Melanesian          Vanuatu                                                     Fijian                Polynesian
 :...                                                                                                 Oceanic linkage
                                    linkage                linkage                linkage                                                linkage                 linkage

 :;::
                                                                                            ,                        I
                              I                                                                                                                               l ___ ,
 <:j


s3:                North New Guinea            Proto
                                                    I                                I i
                                                                                  Central :      Proto
                                                                                                              Loyalties
                                                                                                              and New               1
                                                                                                                                         F. ..
                                                                                                                                               ern  Eastern
                                                                                                                                                     F...    :   Proto
                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                          I

                                                                                  Vanuatu   i    South        Caledonia     Rotuman:      ytan        ytan 1
                        linkage              Papuan Tip                                                                             1                        1 Polynesian

 3:                                                                           , _linkage        Vanuatu                             \ ,languages   languages)
                                                                                                                                        ________________
                                                                                                              languages                                           /




 :;::
                      Figure 1.2        Schematic diagram showing the subgrouping of Oceanic Austronesian languages.
  <:::>
c.::
.§
]
 <:j




00
                                                                                               Introduction     9


    Italics are used in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 to indicate a group of languages which is not a
proper subgroup, i.e. has no identifiable exclusively shared parent. Thus Formosan languages
in Figure 1.1 indicates a collection of languages descended (along with PMP) from PAn.
They are spoken in Taiwan, but do not form a subgroup. There was no 'Proto Formosan', as
Formosan languages and language groups are all descended directly from PAn.

    Some of the italicised labels in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 include the term linkage. A linkage
(an 'innovation-linked group ' in the terminology of Pawley & Ross 1995) is a collection
of usually quite closely related languages or dialects, 10 speakers of which were in sufficient
contact at one time or another during their history for innovations to pass from one language
to the next, often resulting in a pattern such 1chat the domains of various innovations overlap
but are not coterminous. 11 A number of Oceanic linkages were recognised during the 1980s
(Geraghty 1983, Pawley & Green 1984, Ross 1988). 12 A linkage may arise in at least three
ways, but distinguishing between them is often impossible.

    First, what would otherwise be a proper subgroup may happen to lack exclusively shared
innovations, perhaps because the parent did not exist as a unit for long enough to undergo
any innovations of its own. 13

    Second, a linkage may consist of some but not all of the languages descended from a sin-
gle parent. The Western Oceanic linkage reflects the innovations of POe, but no innovation
is common to the whole of Western Oceanic (although the merger of POe *rand *R comes
close). However, the languages of its three component linkages-North New Guinea, Papuan
Tip and Meso-Melanesian-display complex patterns of overlapping innovations. The West-
em Oceanic linkage appears to be descended from the dialects of POe that were left behind in
the Bismarck Archipelago after speakers of the languages ancestral to the other eight primary
subgroups in Figure 1.2 had moved away to the north or east. After these departures various
innovations occurred. Each arose somewhere in the Western Oceanic dialect network and
spread to neighbouring dialects without reaching every dialect in the network.

    The third type of linkage is the result of contact among languages descended from more
than one immediate parent. An example is the Fijian linkage, which represents a reintegration
of parts of earlier Western and Eastern Fijian linkages (Geraghty & Pawley 1981 , Geraghty
1983, Pawley 1996b). 14 Geraghty reconstructed the history of the Fijian linkage by painstak-
ing analysis of innovations from at least two stages in its history. From the earlier period
Western Fijian languages share innovations with Rotuman and Eastern Fijian with Polynes-
ian. From a more recent period Western Fijian and Eastern Fijian languages share innovations
with each other, reflecting their reintegration into a single linkage, within which the present
Western/Eastern boundary has shifted relative to the (fuzzy) boundary ofthe earlier period.

[10] In what follows, ' language ' is used to mean ' language or dialect' .

[11] One or more innovations may spread right across the languages of the linkage. In this case it becomes virtually
impossible to distinguish it from a proper subgroup.

[12] Recent work in Indo-European appeals to the concept of linkage: Garrett (2006) suggests that the dialects
ancestral to Greek were not dialects of 'Proto Greek' but a collection ofN uclear Indo-European dialects drawn
together by relations between the communities ancestral to the Greek city states, across which spread the
innovations which characterise Ancient Greek.

[13] A situation in which a subgroup is both proper (i.e. defined by exclusive innovations) and a linkage (displaying
overlapping patterns of innovations) is of course possible, the exclusively shared innovations having occurred
in the parent, the others after the break-up of the parent. It so happens that we have no need of this construct
here.

[14] 'Eastern Fijian linkage' in Figure 1.2 is our label for Geraghty's (1983) 'Tokalau Fijian'.

10    Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     For most of the linkages noted in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 this kind of analysis is not avail-
able. For example, Blust (1993) indicates that CEMP was a linkage. But its history is far from
clear. Was there perhaps a PCEMP that was so shortlived that it underwent no innovations of
its own? Or does CEMP perhaps include some languages that share history with languages to
their west and others that share history with those to their north? The North/Central Vanuatu
linkage, long assumed to be some sort of genealogical unit, appears to reflect the partial rein-
tegration of at least two dialect networks, North Vanuatu and Central Vanuatu, that probably
never diverged greatly from each other, but the details of this history are difficult to elucidate
(Lynch 2000a). 15

     The languages of a linkage have no identifiable exclusively shared parent. Yet we have
found many instances in which a cognate set is limited to one of the linkages in Figures 1.1
and 1.2: CEMP, Western Oceanic, New Guinea Oceanic, Southern Oceanic or the reinte-
grated North and Central Vanuatu linkage. As with PEOc and PROc (§3.2.3), we think it is
preferable to attribute these reconstructions to a hypothetical protolanguage rather than to a
higher node in the tree. Hence there are reconstructions labelled PCEMP, PWOc and so on.
Again these apparent lexical innovations offer only the weakest evidence for the protolan-
guage to which they are attributed. In addition to the explanations of the kinds offered for
PEOc and PROc etyma in §3.2.3 it is possible, for example, that an innovatory 'PWOc' ety-
mon arose when the Western Oceanic dialect network was still close-knit, and spread from
dialect to dialect before the network broke into the two networks ancestral to its present-day
first-order subgroups.

1.3.2.3 Criteria for reconstruction

The strength of a lexical reconstruction rests crucially on the distribution of the supporting
cognate set across subgroups. The distribution of cognate forms and agreements in their
meanings is much more important than the number of cognates. It is enough to make a secure
reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in just two languages in a family, with agreement in
meaning, provided that the two languages belong to different primary subgroups and provided
that there is no reason to suspect that the resemblances are due to borrowing or chance. The
PMP term *apij 'twins' is reflected in several western Malaya-Polynesian languages (e.g.
Batak apid 'twins, double (fused) banana') but only a single Oceanic reflex is known, namely
Roviana avisi 'twins of the same sex'. Because Roviana belongs to a different first-order
branch of Malaya-Polynesian from the western Malaya-Polynesian witnesses and because
there is virtually no chance that the agreement is due to borrowing or chance similarity, this
distribution is enough to justify the reconstruction ofPMP *apij, POe *apic 'twins'.

    The rake-like form of Figure 1.2 almost certainly reflects the very rapid settlement of
Oceania out of the Bismarcks, 16 but it confronts us with a methodological question. If we
follow the rubric that we make a reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in languages of just
two primary subgroups, then reflexes of an etymon in, say, a SE Solomonic language and a
Micronesian language would be sufficient evidence for a POe reconstruction and the absence
of reflexes in Admiralty and Western Oceanic would be irrelevant. Given what we know
about the location of the POe homeland (in the Bismarcks; vol.2, ch.2) and the early eastward
spread of Oceanic speakers, this is too loose a criterion. Instead, we assume two hypothetical
nodes not shown in the tree in Figure 1.2. 17 These are
    • Remote Oceanic, comprising Southern Oceanic, Micronesian and Central Pacific;
    • Eastern Oceanic, comprising SE Solomonic and Remote Oceanic. 18

[15] For a history of scholarly views of the subgrouping of North and Central Vanuatu languages see Clark
(2008 : § 1.3). For arguments supporting a NCV grouping, see Clark (2008 : ch.4).

[16] Approximate dates are as follows . The Bismarcks themselves were settled by around 1400 BC. Archaeology
has the Lapita culture in the Temotu Archipelago by about 1200 BC, in New Caledonia by 1100 BC, in Fiji
and Tonga by 1000 BC and in Samoa by 900 BC (Green 2003).

                                                                                                           ."
                                                                                                                    '"o                                                                 20°
                                 NUCLEAR                                                                            Hawaii
                   Marianas:
                               MICRONESIAN
                     r;uam ·
            Yap.               Caroline Islands
    Palau                                                 ·.,Marshall
                                                              Islands


                                                                Kiribati
                                                                                                                                                                             Equator 0°


=
                                                              Tuvalu:
                                                                             Tokelau·                                                            ·. ·1y1arquesas

                                                                                    Samoa          <;:;                               FRENCH POLYNESIA
                                                                                     "-              '}
                                                               FIJIAN
                                                                                                                                                         Tuamotu
                                                                F,1, o·
                                                                        -
                                                                        .·              . Niue
                                                                                             Rarotonga ·        .
                                                                                                                             Tahiti                     A!chipelago
                                                                                                                                                                                    20°
AUSTRALIA
                                                                SOUTH
                                                                VANUATU
                                                                                                                                      Rapa · .                                 Easter
                                                                                                                                                                               Island


                                                                                PO LYNES                                                            A N

                          't]
                                                                                                                                                                                        40°

                                                                                                                                                                                              ........
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;::;;
                                                                               "·                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                              <:::>
                   140°                           160°.                 180°                              160°                                   140°                 120°
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;;:::
                                                                                                                                                                                              r,
                                                                                                                                                                                              ......
                                                                                                                                                                                              <s·
                                                                                                                                                                                              ;::;;

                                                  Map 3   Groups of Oceanic languages used in cognate sets                                                                                    ......
                                                                                                                                                                                              ......
12   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


If a cognate set occurs in two or all three of the groups in Remote Oceanic, the reconstruction
is attributed to Proto Remote Oceanic (PROc ). If a cognate set occurs in one or more of the
groups in Remote Oceanic and in SE Solomonic, it is attributed to Proto Eastern Oceanic
(PEOc ). In this way we acknowledge that such reconstructions may represent an innovation
that postdates the spread of the early Oceanic speech community. There are enough PROc and
PEOc reconstructions to suggest that such lexical innovations indeed occurred. This in tum
provides weak evidence for Remote Oceanic and Eastern Oceanic subgroups, but evidence
that is too weak to be relied on, for at least two reasons. First, it is quite possible that some of
our PROc and PEOc reconstructions will be promoted to POe as more Admiralty and Western
Oceanic data become available. Second, it is reasonable to assume that some of our PROc
and PEOc etyma are of POe antiquity but happen to have been lost in Proto Admiralty and
Proto Western Oceanic. Without supporting phonological or morphological evidence we are
unwilling to treat PROc or PEOc as anything other than convenient hypotheses which allow
us to retain rigorous criteria for a POe reconstmction.

     In volumes 1 and 2 a reconstruction here labelled 'PROc' would have been labelled
'PEOc', but the absence of SE Solomonic reflexes from among its reflexes indicates that it
has the same status as a PROc reconstruction in the present volume. Two factors have led to
the distinction between PEOc and PROc here. One is that, because the primary biogeographic
divide in Oceania is between Near and Remote Oceania (see vol. 2, Map 5), i.e. between the
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, the question of whether or not a plant name includes a SE
Solomonic reflex is significant, and there are many plant names that do not (and are thus
attributed to PROc ). The other is that the historical separateness of SE Solomonic from both
Western Oceanic and the groups treated as Remote Oceanic has become increasingly clear
through recent research (Pawley 2007).

     Our criterion for recognising a reconstruction as POe is that the cognate set must occur
in at least two out of four criteria! groupings: Admiralties (or Yapese or Mussau), Western
Oceanic, Temotu and our hypothetical Eastern Oceanic. Both here and at the hypothetical
interstages defined above, no reconstruction is made if there are grounds to infer borrowing
from one of these groupings to another. 19 We also reconstruct an etymon to POe if it is re-
flected in just one of the four criteria! groupings and in a non-Oceanic Austronesian language
(a member of one of the subgroups on the left branches in Figure 1.1 ), as illustrated above
by the reconstruction of POe *apic 'twins'.

[17] We included these nodes in the corresponding tree in Figure 1 of volumes 1 and 2, but this was too easily
interpreted as a statement of our views on subgrouping, so we abandon it here and in Appendix 2.

[18] The term 'Eastern Oceanic' and the search for evidence of an Eastern Oceanic subgroup has a relatively
long pedigree in Oceanic linguistics (Biggs 1965, Pawley 1972, Pawley 1977, Lynch & Tryon 1985, Geraghty
1990). However, by the time volume 1 of the present work was published in 1998 it was already evident that
innovations supporting the existence of an Eastern Oceanic subgroup were not forthcoming, as Pawley & Ross
(1995: 79) had mentioned in a footnote. Our use of the term here is more inclusive than most, resembling more
closely the 'Central/Eastern Oceanic' of Lynch & Tryon (1983) (the published version of which, Lynch &
Tryon 1985, presents a less inclusive version of Central/Eastern Oceanic) and of Lynch et al. (2002: 94--96),
who also express reservations about its status.

                                                                                        Introduction      13


    These criteria are identical to those appli1ed in volumes 1 and 2 except for the addition of
Temotu (which figures in very few cognate sets). The establishment ofTemotu as a primary
subgroup (Ross & Ncess 2007) postdates the: publication of volumes 1 and 2. Temotu com-
prises the languages of the Reeflslands, Santa Cruz, Utupua and Vanikoro, located 400 km
east of the main Solomons archipelago and to the north of Vanuatu (Map 3).

    There are indications that Yapese (a single-language subgroup) and Mussau and Tench (a
subgroup with two closely related languages) may be more closely related to Admiralty than
to any other Oceanic subgroup, 20 and for this reason they are treated as Admiralty languages
for the purposes of reconstruction. That is, the presence of a reflex in one or more of these
languages and in Admiralty does not support a POe reconstruction, but the presence of of a
reflex in one or more of these languages and one of Western Oceanic, Temotu and Eastern
Oceanic does support one.

    In chapter 2 (§4) ofvolume 2 Pawley discusses Blust's (1998) proposal that the primary
split in Oceanic divides Admiralty from a subgroup embracing all other Oceanic languages.
Pawley dubs the latter 'Nuclear Oceanic'. If Blust's subgrouping were accepted, then an
etymon which lacked cognates outside Oceanic would need to be reflected both in an Ad-
miralties language and in a non-Admiralties language for a POe reconstruction to be made.
Etyma with reflexes in both Western and Eastern Oceanic, but not in the Admiralties, would
be reconstructed as Proto Nuclear Oceanic. Under the criteria outlined above, however, we
attribute these reconstructions to POe. These criteria were used in volumes 1 and 2, and
we have thought it wise to maintain them throughout the volumes of this work. The reader
who wishes to single out reconstructions attributable to a putative Proto Nuclear Oceanic
(rather than to POe) can easily recognise them, however. They are those POe reconstructions
for which (i) there are no Admiralties reflexes, and (ii) there is no higher-order reconstruc-
tion (i.e. PEMP, PCEMP, PMP or PAn), since the latter would be based on cognates outside
Oceanic.

1.3.2.4 Further notes on subgroups

This section brings together brief notes on the subgroups in Figure 1.2 beyond those men-
tioned in the discussion in §§3.2.3-3.2.2.
    Admiralty is a proper subgroup (Ross 1988: ch.9).
    Western Oceanic consists of the North New Guinea (NNG), Papuan Tip (PT), Meso-
Melanesian (MM) linkages and the Sarmi/Jayapura (SJ) group (see Map 4). The last-named
may belong to the NNG linkage, but this is uncertain (Ross 1996b). It is not shown in Fig-
ure 1.2 and its languages do not play a crucial role in reconstruction. It is likely that the

[19] Cases where such an inference can be made occur mostly at the boundary (in the Solomon Islands) between
Western and Eastern Oceanic. Borrowing is likely (and is often reflected in unexpected sound correspondences)
where an etymon occurs (i) in Western Oceanic and only in SE Solomonic languages or (ii) in SE Solomonic
languages and only in the NW Solomonic languages (a subgroup within the Meso-Melanesian linkage of West-
ern Oceanic).

[20] On the positions ofYapese and Mussau, see respectively Ross (1996a) and Ross (1988: 315-316, 331).

             Sarmi/Jayapura                                                                                              Approximate boundaries of
                                                                                                                         subgroups of Western Oceanic
                                                        Admiralties
                                                                                                                         Approximate boundaries of
                                                          family                                                         putative first-order Oceanic groups




                                                                                             ()     linkage

                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                                        o•




                                                                                                                                                         5'
'1;j
   :;::
   <:::>


                         (
                         \
-s
   <:<:>




'1;j
   :;::
   <:j



                                   oo
                                                                                      Papuan Tip linkage
d:                                 0

   3:                                                                                             ..,
   <:<:>
                                                        0             250 km
{j
   :;::
               140°                              145°                          150°                               155°



   <:::>
c.::
.§           Map 4           Oceanic language groups in northwest Melanesia: the Admiralties and St Matthias groups and the
]                                                       subgroups of Western Oceanic
   <:j




""'......"
                                                                                   Introduction     15


NNG and PT groups form a super-group, the New Guinea Oceanic linkage, and so etyma re-
flected only in NNG and PT languages are attributed to a putative Proto New Guinea Oceanic
(Milke 1958, Pawley 1978), and etyma reflected in either NNG or PT (or both) and in MM
are labelled PWOc.

    SE Solomonic was established as a proper subgroup by Pawley (1972: 98-110). Further
support was provided by Levy (1979, 1980, n.d.), Tryon & Hackman (1983) and Frantisek
Lichtenberk ( 1988).

    The Southern Oceanic linkage as proposed by Lynch ( 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004) is charac-
terised by complex overlapping innovations, but by none that are reflected in all its mem-
ber languages and would qualify it as a proper subgroup (see discussion in Lynch et al.
2002: 112-114). 21

    Micronesian is a proper subgroup (Jackson 1983, 1986, Bender et al. 2003).
    Central Pacific is a proper subgroup, bult one defined by only a handful of shared inno-
vations, indicating that the period of unity was short (Geraghty 1996). The high-order sub-
grouping of Central Pacific is due to Geraghty (1983), except for the position of Rotuman,
due to Pawley (1996b). Within Central Pacific is another long recognised proper subgroup,
Polynesian, for which Pawley (1996a) lists diagnostic innovations.


1.3.3 Sound correspondences

As we noted above, reconstruction depends on working out the systematic sound correspon-
dences among cognate vocabulary in contemporary languages and on having a working hy-
pothesis about how the sounds of POe have: changed and are reflected in modem Oceanic
languages. Working out sound correspondences even for twenty languages is a large task,
and so we have relied heavily on our own previous work and the work of others. The sound
correspondences we have used are those given by Ross (1988) for Western Oceanic and Ad-
miralties; by Levy (1979, 1980) and Frantisek Lichtenberk (1988) for Cristobal-Malaitan, by
Pawley (1972) and Tryon & Hackman (1983) for SE Solomonic; by Ross & Ncess (2007) for
Temotu; by Tryon (1976) and Clark (1996, 2008) for North and Central Vanuatu; by Lynch
(1978, 2001) for Southern Vanuatu; by Geraghty (1989) and Ozanne-Rivierre (1992) for
New Caledonia; by Jackson (1986) and Ross (1996a) for Nuclear Micronesian; by Geraghty
(1986) for Central Pacific; by Biggs (1978) for Polynesian; by Ross (1996a) for Yapese; and
by Ross (1996b) for Oceanic languages of Irian Jaya.

    For non-Oceanic languages we have referred to sound correspondences given by Tsuchida
(1976) for Formosan languages; by Zorc (1977, 1986) and Reid (1982) for the Philippines;
by Adelaar (1992) and Nothofer (1975) for Malay and Javanese; by Sneddon (1984) for Su-
lawesi; by Collins (1983) for Central Maluku; and by Blust (1978a) for South Halmahera
and Irian Jaya.

    We are well aware that regular sound correspondences can be interfered with in various
ways: by phonetic conditioning that the analyst has not identified (see, e.g., Blust 1996a), by
borrowing (for an extreme Oceanic case, see Grace 1996), or, as recent research suggests, by
the frequency of an item's use (Bybee 1994). We have tried at least to note, and sometimes
to account for, irregularities in cognate sets.

[21] Because it has only been recently proposed, Southern Oceanic does not appear in Figure 1 of volumes 1
and 2.

16   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


                   Table 1.1       Reconstructed paradigm of POe phonemes

                                   *pw      *p       *t         *c       *k    *q
                                   *bw      *b       *d         *j       *g
                                                     *s
                                   *mw      *m       *n         *fi      *I)
                                                     *r                        *R
                                                     *dr
                                                     *l
                                   *w                           *y
                                            *i                  *u
                                            *e                  *o
                                                     *a



1.3.4 POe phonology and orthography

Work based on the sound correspondences of both Oceanic and non-Oceanic languages has
resulted in the reconstructed paradigm of POe phonemes shown in Table 1.1. The orthog-
raphy used here and in the POe reconstructions in this work is from Ross (1988), with the
addition of *pw. POe phonology and its relationship to PMP is discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 2 (§2) of volume 1. Since the publication of volume 1, articles by John Lynch have
appeared on POe stress (2000) and POe labiovelar phonemes (2002).

    Table 1.2 shows two POe orthographies. The first was established by Biggs (1965), for
PEOc, and Grace (1969), who applied it to POe. It has been used with a number of variants,
separated by a slash in Table 1.2. The second, introduced by Ross (1988), is the one generally
used in this work. The terms 'oral grade ' and 'nasal grade ' were used by Grace (1969) and
have become conventional among Oceanic linguists to refer to the outcomes of certain sound
changes that occurred between PMP and POe (vol.1 , ch.2, §2.4).

__pre__
             Table 1.2      POe orthographies after Grace (1969) and Ross (1988)
     Grace    oral grade      *p           *pw            *t          *d/ *r   *s          *j   *k
     Ross                     *p           *pw            *t            *r     *s          *c   *k
     Grace    nasal grade    *mp        *l)pl *mpw        *nt    *ndl *nr            *nj        *l)k
     Ross                     *b             *bw          *d       *dr                *j         *g
     Grace                    *m        *l)ml *mw         *n           *fi     *I)     *w       *y     *l   *q   *R
     Ross                     *m           *mw            *n           *fi     *I)     *w       *y     *l   *q   *R
     Grace                    *i           *o             *e           *a      *u
     Ross                     *i           *o             *e           *a      *u

                                                                             Introduction    17


1.4 Conventions common to the series

1.4.1 Chapter format

Each of the contributions to these volumes concerns a particular POe 'terminology'. Gener-
ally, each contribution begins with an introduction to the issues raised by the reconstruction
of its particular terminology, and the bulk of each contribution consists of reconstructed et-
yma with supporting data and a commentary on matters of meaning and form.

    The reconstruction of POc *kayu 'tree' below, adapted from Chapter 3, §4.2, shows how
reconstructions and supporting cognate sets are presented. Above it is Dempwolff's earlier
superordinate (PMP) reconstruction. Below it are supporting reflexes. Contributors vary in
the degree to which they insert lower-order reconstructions like PPn *kau below. Lower-
order reconstructions are sometimes given to clarify the relationship of reflexes to the higher-
order reconstruction: Southern Vanuatu languages, for example, have undergone so much
phonological change that a Proto Southern Vanuatu reconstruction helps explicate the rela-
tionship between Southern Vanuatu reflexes and the POe reconstruction. In the set below the
Proto Polynesian (PPn) reconstruction shows an extension in its meaning.

PMP *kayu 'tree, wood, timber' (Dempwolflf 1938)
POe *kayu 'tree or shrub: generic name for plants with woody stems and branches,
  probably not including palms or tree-ferns ; wood, stick'
  Adm: Loniu             ke           'tree, wood '
  Adm: Titan             kei          'firewood'
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) kai               'tree, wood '
  NNG: Takia             ai           'tree (generic), wood, firewood , plant'
  PT:    Iduna           ai           'tree, plant, wood, fire , light'
  PT:    Motu            au           'tree, firewood '
  MM: Patpatar           ai-          'tree species, followed by name of species'
  MM: Mono               au           'tree '
  SES: Bugotu            yai-         'tree, shaft of spear'
  SES: Kwaio             ?ai          'branch, tree, stick; woody plant (shrub, tree)'
  NCV: NE Ambae          kai          'tree, wood '
  NCV: Nguna             na-kau       'tree '
  SV:    Anejom          in-yai       'tree, wood, often used for relatively small bushes'
  NCal: Xaracuu                       'wood, tree (general term)'
  Mic: Kiribati          kai          'wood (in general), tree, plant, stick'
  Mic: Ulithian          -Xa?Y        'counting classifier for trees'
  Fij:   Kadavu          kaou         'tree, piece ofwood, stick'
  Fij:   Wayan           kai          'wood; generic for trees and shrubs, and
                                      occasionally also low bushy plants; used in certain
                                      compounds as generic for all plants; piece of wood,
                                      stick'
PPn *kau 'wood, timber, stalk, stem, handle" (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan          kau          'stalk, stem'
  Pn:    Hawaiian        ?au          'handle, staff, stem, bone of lower arm or leg'

18   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    Because our supporting data are drawn from such a wide range oflanguages, the conven-
tion is adopted of prefixing each language name with the abbreviation for the genealogical or
geographic group to which the language belongs, so that the distribution of a cognate set is
more immediately obvious. Table 1.3 is a key to the labels. Figure § 1.2 shows the positions
of these groups in the Oceanic tree. We have sought to be consistent in always listing these
groups in the same order, but contributors vary in the ordering of languages within groups.

    Lynch' s recent research on Southern Oceanic (§3 .2.4) renders the NCV group mildly
anomalous, although there is no doubt that it is an integrated dialect network. There are a
number of etyma whose reflexes are confined to North and Central Vanuatu, and so we con-
tinue to make 'Proto North/Central Vanuatu' reconstructions, even though these perhaps rep-
resent a Southern Oceanic term that has been lost in southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia.
Where the distribution of reflexes requires it, the chapters in this volume include reconstruc-
tions for PROc and for PSOc. Etyma with these distributions were attributed to PEOc in
volumes 1 and 2, but the distributions are transparent, thanks to the presence of the group
labels in cognate sets.

    In the interests of space we have not given the history of the reconstructions themselves,
as this would often require commentary on the modifications made by others and by us, and on
why we have made them. Where a reconstruction is not new, we have tried to give its earliest
source, e.g. 'Dempwolff 1938' above, but this is difficult when earlier reconstructions differ
in form and meaning.

    In general, the contributions to these volumes are concerned with items reconstructable in
POe, PWOc, PEOc, PROc and occasionally Prolto New Guinea Oceanic (PNGOc). Etyma for
PWOc, PNGOc and PEOc are reconstructed because these may well also be POe etyma for
which known reflexes are not well distributed (see discussion in §3.2.3). The contributors
vary in the degree to which they reconstruct etyma for interstages further down the tree.

__pre__
             Table 1.3   Abbreviations for the                  or geographic groups
     Yap:    Yapese (one language)
     Adm:    Admiralty and Mussau/Tench
     SJ:     Sarmi/Jayapura
     NNG:    North New Guinea
     PT:     Papuan Tip
     MM:     Meso-Melanesian
     SES:    Southeast Solomonic
     TM:     Temotu
     NCV:    North/Central Vanuatu, i.e. the reintegrated network formed by the North and
             Central Vanuatu linkages
     SV:     Southern Vanuatu
     NCal:   Loyalty and New Caledonia
     Mic:    Micronesian
     Fij :   Fijian, i.e. the reintegrated network formed by Western and Eastern Fijian dialects
     Pn:     Polynesian

                                                                                                       Introduction            19


Reconstructions for lower-order interstages are decreasingly likely to reflect POe etyma and
may be the results of cultural change as Oceanic speakers moved further out into the Pacific.

    Contributors have usually not sought to make fresh reconstructions at interstages super-
ordinate to POe. What they have done, however, is to cite other scholars' reconstructions
for higher-order interstages, as these             a summary of the non-Oceanic evidence in
support of a given POe reconstruction. These interstages are shown in Figure 1.1, together
with their abbreviations.

    Sometimes non-Oceanic evidence has been found to support a POe reconstruction where
no reconstruction at a higher-level interstag1;: has previously been made. In this case a new
higher-order reconstruction is made, and the non-Oceanic evidence is given in a footnote.

    Whilst we have tried to use the internal organisation of the lexicons of Oceanic languages
themselves as a guide in setting the boundaries of each terminology, we have inevitably taken
decisions which differ from those that others might have made. There are, obviously, overlaps
and connections between various semantic domains and therefore between the contributions
here. We have done our best to provide cross-references, but we have sometimes duplicated
information rather than ask the reader repeatedly to look elsewhere in the book. Indexes at the
end of each volume and in the final volume are intended to make it easier to use the volumes
collectively as a work of reference.

1.4.2 Data

Data sources are listed in Appendix 1.

     For some reconstructed etyma only a representative sample of reflexes is given. We have
endeavoured to ensure, however, that in each case this sample not only is geographically and
genetically representative, but also provides evidence to justify the shape of the reconstruc-
tion. Where only a few reflexes are known to us, this is usually noted.

     Although there are accepted or standard orthographies for a number of the languages
from which data are cited here, all data are transcribed into a standard orthography based on
that used by Ross (1988: 3-4) in order to facilitate comparison. 22 This means, for example,
that the j of the German-based orthographies of Yabem and Gedaged becomes y, Yabem c
becomes?, Gedaged z becomes 1: and so on; the ng of English-based orthographies becomes
                                                       o
!J; and Fijian g, q and c become IJ, g and respectively.
     Unless otherwise indicated, the following symbols have their usual phonetic values: g,                               o,
c, y, h, k, I, 1:, tC, m, n, IJ, fi,p, q,x, r, r, s, t, w, x, z, ?, a,<£, e, c, CJ, i, i, o, ce, :J, t1., u, w. The voiced stops
b, d, g and the voiced bilabial trill B are prenasalised in some languages, but prenasalisation
is not written unless it is phonemically distinctive. Other orthographic symbols (with values
in IPA) are:
               f      [<jl, f]       voiceless bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
               v            v]       voiced bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
               c      [ts], [til     voiceless alveolar or palatal affricate
               j      [ d>:], [cB]   voiced alveolar or palatal affricate
               y      [j]            palatal glide
               dr     ['T]           prenasalised voiced alveolar trill (as in Fijian)
           0    [!Zl]       rounded mid front vowel
           u    [y]         rounded high front vowel

[22] The main reason for retaining Ross' orthography was that the electronic files initially used in this project
were drawn in large part from those used in the research reported in Ross (1988).

20   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


Other superscripts and diacritics are as follows:
     • contrastive long vowels are represented by a macron, e.g. a;
     • contrastive vowel nasalisation in New Caledonian languages is represented by a cir-
       cumflex, e.g. a;
     • labialisation is marked by a superscript w, e.g. pw;
     • velarisation is marked by a superscript UL, e.g. pw;
     • contrastive aspiration is marked by a              h, e.g. ph;
     • apicolabials are represented by the corresponding apical symbol and the linguolabial
       diacritic (the 'seagull' ), e.g.];
     • retroflexes are represented by the corresponding apical symbol with a dot beneath,
       e.g. r.

    Except for inflexional morphemes, non-cognate portions of reflexes, i.e. derivational mor-
phemes and non-cognate parts of compounds, are shown in parentheses( .. . ). Where an in-
flexional morpheme is an affix or clitic and can readily be omitted, its omission is indicated
by a hyphen at the beginning or end of the base. This applies particularly to possessor suf-
fixes on directly possessed nouns (vol.l , ch.2, §3.2). Where an inflexional morpheme cannot
readily be omitted, then it is separated from its base by a hyphen. This may happen because
of complicated morphophonemics or because the morpheme is always present, like the ad-
jectival -n in some NNG and Admiralties languages and prefixed reflexes ofthe POe article
*na in scattered languages. When a reflex is itsellfpolymorphemic (i.e. the morphemes reflect
morphemes present in the reconstructed etymon) or contains a reduplication, the morphemes
or reduplicates are also separated by a hyphen.

    Languages from which data are cited in this volume are listed in Appendix B in their
subgroups, together with an index allowing the reader to find the subgroup to which a given
language belongs. Appendix B also includes alternative language names. The difficulty of
deciding where the borderline between dialect and language lies, combined with the fact that
these volumes contain work by a number of contributors, has resulted in some inconsistency
in the naming of dialects in the cognate sets (cfthe cognate set supporting POe *kayu on ch.3,
§4.2). Some occur in the form 'Kara (E)', i.e. the East dialect of the Kara language, or 'Lukep
(Po no)' , i.e. the Pono dialect ofthe Lukep language, whilst others are represented simply by
the dialect name, e.g. Iduna, noted in Appendix B as 'Iduna ( = dialect of Bwaidoga)' .


1.4.3 Conventions used in representing reconstructions

Reconstructions are marked with an asterisk, e.g. *kayu 'tree ', in keeping with the standard
convention in historical linguistics. POe reconstructions, and also PWOc, PEOc and PNGOc
reconstructions, are given in the orthography of §3.4. For reconstructions at higher-order in-
terstages the orthographies are those used by Blust in his various publications and the ACD.
Reconstructions at lower-order interstages are given in the standard orthography adopted for
data (§4.2). Geraghty' s (1986) PCP orthography, for example, is based on Standard Fijian
spelling, and is converted into our standard orthography in the same way as Fijian spelling is.
In practice, this means that the orthographies for PROc and PCP are the same as for POe, ex-
cept that a distinction between *p and *vis recognised and *R is absent. Biggs and Clark' s PPn
reconstructions are in any case written in an orthography identical to our standard. Bracketing
and segmentation conventions in protoforms are shown in Table 1.4.

                                                                                      Introduction      21



             Table 1.4      Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms

            (x)       it cannot be determined whether x was present
             (x,y)    either x or y was present
             [x]      the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with and one without x
             [ x,y]   the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with x and one withy
             x- y     x and y are separate morphemes
             x-       x takes an enclitic or a suffix
             <X>      x is an infix




     PMP final consonants are usually retained in POe. However, it happens fairly often that
the final consonant in a higher-order reconstmcted etymon (e.g. *-R in PMP *kamaliR 'men's
house') is not evidenced in any Oceanic refllex because POe final consonants are regularly
lost in all the daughter languages from which reflexes are drawn, and we therefore have no
evidence as to whether or not the final consonant was retained in the POe etymon in question.
In such cases the consonant is reconstructed in brackets (e.g. POe *kamali(R)).

     In presenting words that display anomalies of form, it is often necessary to posit an ex-
pected form. For example, in ch.2, §5, the Gela form ao is presented in support of PEOc
*wao 'forest'. Given the reconstruction, however, we would expect the Gela form to be wao.
In this volume we use a less widely employed convention and mark expected forms with a
dagger, e.g. twao, to distinguish them both from reconstructions and real data. 23

     There are occasions on which we need to posit a hypothetical form in a reconstructed
protolanguage. In such cases the dagger and asterisk conventions are used together. For ex-
ample in ch.4, §2.4, POe *lali(c,t) 'buttress roots' is reconstructed. This is a reflex ofPMP
*dalij, but the first consonant has undergone assimilation to the second in POe: the expected
(but unattested) POe form would be t*ralic.

     When historical linguists compile cognate sets they commonly retain word for word the
glosses given in the sources from which the items are taken. However, again in the interests
of standardisation, we have often reworded (and sometimes abbreviated) the glosses of our
sources, while preserving the meaning. Where glosses were in a language other than English
we have translated them. In the interests of space and legibility, and because data often have
multiple sources, we have given the source of a reflex only when it is not included in the
listings in Appendix A.

     In glosses we use the conventional                    'k.o.' (as in 'k.o. yam') for 'kind of,
's.o.' for 'someone', 's.t.' for 'something', 'sp.' for a species and 'spp.' for more than one
species.

     In putting together cognate sets we have quite often found apparent reflexes which do
not quite 'fit' the set: either they display an unexplained phonological irregularity or their
meaning is just a little too different from the rest of the set for us to assume cognacy. Rather
than eliminate them our authors often include them below the cognate set under the rubric
'cf. also'.


[23] Another convention sometimes used for this purpose is a double asterisk, e.g. **wao: we prefer the dagger
on aesthetic grounds.

22    Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

1.5 Data sources and conventions specific to this volume

1.5.1 Cognate sets and reconstructions

As explained in §4.1, a cognate set is almost always headed by a reconstruction for the
highest-order Oceanic protolanguage that the set allows us to infer. In this volume these re-
constructions are mostly for Proto Oceanic, Proto Western Oceanic, Proto Eastern Oceanic
or Proto Remote Oceanic, and less often for Proto Southern Oceanic or Proto Central Pacific.
Since Oceanic speakers spread across the Pacific from the Bismarck Archipelago to Fiji with
remarkable speed, reconstructions at any of these interstages are likely to be early. Proto
Admiralty, Proto New Guinea Oceanic and Proto Meso-Melanesian reconstructions are also
listed in the few cases where they occur, as there is a fair probability that they are also of early
Oceanic antiquity. 'Proto North/Central Vanuatu' reconstructions are given where reflexes
are restricted to North/Central Vanuatu, even though it is improbable that these languages
form an exclusive subgroup (§3.2.2). A PNCV reconstruction is more likely to represent a
PSOc term that has not survived in southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia.

     Proto Polynesian and Proto Micronesian terms that are not reconstructable to an earlier
interstage are not given here, partly because they are likely to represent significantly later
developments than the interstages enumerated in the previous paragraph, and partly because
they are available elsewhere (Proto Polynesian in POLLEX and Proto Micronesian in Bender
et al. 2003).

     Lower-order reconstructions are also given within a cognate set in certain circumstances.
If a term has undergone formal change or has been reapplied to a different plant at a par-
ticular point in its history, then a reconstruction is given for the relevant interstage. Also
often included are Proto Southern Vanuatu reconstructions from Lynch (200lc, 2004a), as
the phonological histories of Southern Vanuatu languages are far from transparent and the
reconstruction often helps to illuminate the cognacy of SV items.


1.5.2 Botanical and ethnographic information and vernacular names

Sources ofthe Oceanic plant-name data used to make the reconstructions in this volume are
listed in Appendix 1 after general data sources. Four works which provide Austronesian plant
names in non-Oceanic languages have been of particular use in the search for cognates which
allow the reconstruction of higher-order (PCEMP and PMP) plant names. These works are:
     • A dictionary of Philippine plant names by Domingo A. Madulid ( = Madulid 2001a,
       Madulid 2001b);
     • De nuttige plan ten van I ndonesiif [The useful plants of Indonesia] by K. Heyne ( =
       Heyne 1950): this is a catalogue of the us1;:ful plants oflndonesia, and includes indige-
       nous plant names from various Indonesian languages of Indonesia;
     • Dictionary of M anggarai plant names by Jilis A.J. Verheijen ( = Verheijen 1982);
     • Dictionary of plant names in the Lesser Sunda Islands by Jilis A.J. Verheijen ( = Ver-
       heijen 1990).

                                                                           Introduction    23


Certain works which catalogue plants and give information about their forms, habitats and
uses have been consulted over and over again, as will be obvious from the recurrence of
certain references. They are:
    • Flora of the Bismarck Archipelago for naturalists by P.G. Peekel ( = Peekel 1984),
      translated by E.E. Henty from the unpublished German manuscript Illustrierte Flora
      des Bismarck-Archipelsfiir Natuifreunde, compiled by Peekel in New Ireland during
      the 1930s and completed at Vunapope (Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain) in 1947.
    • A guide to the useful plants of Solomon Islands by C.P. Henderson and I.R. Hancock
      ( = Henderson & Hancock 1988)
    • Na masu'u 'i Kwara'ae-Our forestofKwara'ae by Michael Kwa'ioloa and Ben Burt
      ( = Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001)
    • K iladi oro vivineidi ria tingitonga pa idere oro pa goana paMarovo-Reef and rainfor-
      est: An environmental encyclopaedia of M arovo Lagoon, Solomon I stands by Edvard
      Hviding ( = Hviding 2005)
    • Some common trees of theN ew Hebrides and their vernacular names by Sheila Gowers
      ( = Gowers 1976)
    • A guide to the common trees of Vanuatu: With lists of their traditional uses and ni-
      Vanuatu names by J.I. Wheatley ( = Wheatley 1992)
All six works contain vernacular plant names. Since the Bismarck Archipelago is central to
the study ofPOc plant names, it is a pity that there is no modem work dealing with the plants
of the region parallel to, say Henderson & Hancock (1988) for the Solomons or Wheatley
(1992) for Vanuatu. The Guide to the trees of Papua New Guinea website (Conn & Damas
2006) has been helpful, but still has many gaps in its coverage of the Bismarck Archipelago.
Peekel's coverage is excellent and includes all plants (even seagrasses). Indeed his coverage
is considerably better than that of either Henderson & Hancock ( 1988), which covers 'useful
plants', or Wheatley (1992), which is restricted to trees. The ethnobotanical works on the
Solomons, Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001) and Hviding (2005), also provide good coverage, but
this is balanced by rather thin information about many plants.

    Pacific food plants have a literature of their own, and here three works were extensively
consulted in addition to those listed above:
    • Les plantes alimentaires de I' Oceanie: origines, distribution et usages [Food plants of
       Oceania: origins, distribution and uses] by Jacques Barrau ( = Barrau 1962)
    • Food plants of Papua New Guinea by Bruce R. French ( = French 1986)
    • Fruits of Oceania by Annie Walter and Chanel Sam ( = Walter & Sam 2002)
Of these only the last provides vernacular terms, with a strong bias towards Vanuatu.


1.5.3 Scientific plant names

The scientific names of plants are a minefield for the non-botanist, as there are often syn-
onyms and the accepted name for a plant may change over time. In order to keep track of
synonyms frequent use was made of the International plant names index (IPNI = IPNI 2004)
and the Australian plant names index (APNI = APNI 1991).

    Linnaean families have undergone recent changes. For present purposes the most im-
portant is that Leguminosae are subdivided into Cisalpiniaceae (formerly Cisalpinioideae),
Fabaceae (formerly Papilionatae) and Mimosaceae (formerly Mimosoideae). Other changes
relevant here are that Gramineae (grasses) are now Poaceae, and Palmae are now Arecaceae.

24   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


1.5.4 English and Pacific pidgin plant names

Wherever plant names in English and/or one of the three major Pacific pidgins are available,
they are included in the section titles in chapters 5 to 13. Names in the three pidgins are
marked with an abbreviation. Together with major sources of names, these are:
TP: Tok Pisin (New Guinea pidgin), Mihalic (1971), French (1986)
P: Pijin (Solomons pidgin), Jourdan (2002)
B: Bislama (Vanuatu pidgin), Gowers (1976), Wheatley (1992), T. Crowley (1995)
The pidgin names are given to help some readers to recognise the plant under discussion. In
Papua New Guinea it is common for both indig1;:nous people and expatriates to know a plant
by its Tok Pisin name but to know neither an English nor a scientific name. The situation is
presumably similar in the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.


1.5.5 Indexes

The volume has four indexes. The first, as in previous volumes, is an index of reconstructions
arranged by their protolanguages. The second is an alphabetical list of reconstructions, the
third an index of plants by genus and species, the fourth by botanical family.



2 Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names

2.1 Floristic regions

The western Pacific is divided by botanists into two floristic regions, northwest Melanesia
and southeast Melanesia. NW Melanesia includes New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago
(New Britain, New Ireland and the Admiralties) and the Solomons archipelago including
Buka and Bougainville but excluding the Reef and Santa Cruz Islands. SE Melanesia includes
the Reef and Santa Cruz Islands, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and the Loyalties, and Fiji. The
boundary between NW and SE Melanesia thus corresponds with the boundary between Near
and Remote Oceania (vol.2, ch.2, §2).

     Within NW Melanesia there is a gradual reduction in the number of genera and species as
one moves east- and southeastward through the islands, but there are no major new genera.
In SE Melanesia, on the other hand, we encounter genera that are not represented or hardly
represented in the islands of NW Melanesia, for example the genus Agathis, to which the
kauri species of SE Melanesia belong.

     In this chapter, indeed in this volume, we are mainly concerned with NW Island Melanesia
(i.e. NW Melanesia other than New Guinea), and particularly with the Bismarck Archipelago,
as this is where the POe homeland was located (vol.2, ch.2).


2.2 Ways of classifying plants

There are a number of ways in which one might classify plants as a basis for dividing this
book into chapters. Ideally the classification should be one which has some basis in POe
terminologies, since the reconstruction of these terminologies is what we are about. Some
obvious ways of classifying Oceanic plants are:
   a. by use;
   b. by ethnobotanical category;
   c. by vegetation habitat;
   d. by whether the plant is wild, tended or cultivated.

26   Malcolm Ross


2.2.1 Classification by use

Although use forms the basis of an important work on the plants of the Solomon Islands
(Henderson & Hancock 1988), so many named plants have multiple uses that this criterion
is not a suitable basis for classification. Plants may provide food (starch, greens, fruit or
nuts), construction materials (housing timber, canoe components, cordage), firewood, caulk-
ing, adornment, perfume, medicines, fish poison, parcelling, baskets and mats and more. The
extent of multiple usages is highlighted by Thaman (1994), who analyses the uses of 140
plant species commonly found in the habitats of the Oceanic-speaking Pacific. 1 He finds that
the 140 species have a mean of 7.3 uses each, the coconut palm having the maximum of
125 uses and just two species having no uses. The most frequently reported use was medici-
nal, with 113 species out of 140 being used medicinally. Sixty species provided construction
timber (including 54 out of 62 tree species). Thirty-four species were used in canoe- or boat-
building (including 30 tree species). Fifty-one species were used as firewood (including 43
tree species). Thirty species provided dyes. Twenty-eight were used in making fishing equip-
ment. And so on. The picture presented by Powell (1976) for New Guinea is similar.

    There is a vast literature on the medicinal uses of plants in Oceanic societies, but no at-
tempt is made to review it in the pages of this book. Many plants have many different medic-
inal uses, often varying from place to place, and, conversely, similar maladies are treated
with preparations from many different plants in different places. This means that there is
no real likelihood of reconstructing the medicinal uses to which early Oceanic speakers put
individual plants. In chapters 5-8 medicinal uses of plants are mentioned for those Island
NW Melanesian and niVanuatu societies for which a substantial body of ethnobotanical in-
formation is available (sources are listed inch 2, §5.2), but this is intended as a sample, not
a survey.


2.2.2 Classification by ethnobotanical categocy

The second possibility is ethnobotanical classification. In chapter 3 Evans reconstructs five
major first-order categories of plant distinguished by POe speakers: *kayu 'tree, shrub' ,
*waroc 'vine', *pali[s,j]i 'grass' , *tali!Ja 'mushroom' and *limut or *lumut 'moss, algae' .
A classification on this basis is certainly possible, but, as Evans points out, there are residual
categories like palms (ch.3, §4.3), 'clumps', bamboos, ferns and pandanus (ch.3, §4.8) which
may or may not have been counted as *kayu by POe speakers. Thus there were quite possibly
a number of fairly small first-order categories in addition to the five for which Evans is able
to reconstruct labels above. Candidates are *qauR, generic for bamboos (ch. 13, §3 .1), and
*padran, generic for pandanus species as well as denoting the coastal pandanus, Pandanus
tectorius (ch.ll , §2.5.1).

    The largest problem with using ethnobotanical classification as a basis for categorising
the reconstructions in this book, however, is practical: *kayu is a huge category, in need of
subdivisions for which Evans finds no linguistic warrant.

[1] A number of the species listed by Thaman do not appear to occur in NW Island Melanesia, but species selected
from this floristic region would produce similar results.

                                                   Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names         27


2.2.3 Classification by vegetation habitat and cultivation status

The third and fourth classificatory approaches form the basis of the chapter divisions from
chapter 5 onward. Vegetation habitats, described in §3, §4 and §5 are the basis for chapters
on wild plants, while plants that are generally tended or cultivated occur in separate chapters
which have as a partial basis the ingredients of a typical Oceanic meal, described in §6.

    This mixed classification reflects the primary POe land use division between *qutan
'bushland, hinterland ; inland', where wild plants grow, and *quma 'garden, plantation', where
plants are cultivated.

    Wild plants are then divided primarily by vegetation habitat: coastal strand vegetation,
mangrove swamp, primary lowland rain forest, and secondary lowland rain forest and grass-
land. This has the virtue of placing plants in their environments and in relationship to one
another within the environment. Oceanic languages have names for types of location (even
though the reconstruction of POe names for them is somewhat problematic, partly because
the best described Oceanic environments are rather different from one another: see vol.2,
ch.3 , §1), and we can assume that this arrangement is at least not radically at odds with POe
speakers' conceptualisations of their environment,

    Food plants are divided first into the two major categories of the POe menu: *kana!J
'starchy food, staples' and *tamaji 'additional ingredients to accompany starchy food '. The
latter is included in three chapters, on green vegetables, nut and fruit trees, and the coconut
palm. The last is treated in a separate chaplter because of the complexity of its associated
terminology. A further chapter treats plants that are cultivated, but not primarily for food.

    The two chapters following this one, chapters 3 and 4, are by Bethwyn Evans, who treats
the POe primary ethnobotanical classification and POe terms for parts of plants. The remain-
ing chapters follow the outline just provided:
   5. plants ofthe coastal strand
   6. plants of the mangrove swamp
   7. plants of primary lowland rain forest
   8. plants of secondary lowland rain forest and grassland
   9. staple food sources
  10. green vegetables
  11 . nut and fruit trees
  12. the coconut palm
  13. other cultivated plants

    The placing of plants in the first four of these chapters is at times a little arbitrary, as the
same plant may occur in more than one habitat type. Crossreferences are provided to take
account of this.

    The agronomic boundary between bush and garden is fuzzy in Oceanic food production
and was almost certainly just as fuzzy in POe agriculture (§4). The distinction between trees
that are tended or transplanted and those which aren' t is somewhat clearer, and the presence
of a chapter on nut and fruit trees is a response to this fact, as most of these are trees that are
at least tended in some Oceanic societies and likely to have been tended by POe speakers.
This chapter is placed after the chapters on cultivated plants in recognition of the fact these
trees form part of the overall agroforestry systems ofNW Island Melanesian societies.

28    Malcolm Ross


2.3 Vegetation habitats in NW Island Melanesia

Five natural vegetation habitats are recognised by botanists in NW Island Melanesia. The
types and their descriptions are drawn mainly from Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg ( 1998: 50--72). 2
Four ofthese are:
     1. coastal strand vegetation:
          a) herbaceous zone
          b) beach scrub
          c) littoral forest
     2. mangrove forest
     3. freshwater swamp forest
     4. primary lowland rain forest
The fifth is the montane rain forest of New Britain, New Ireland and Bougainville, but this
probably played little role, if any, in the lives ofPOc speakers and is not discussed further in
this volume.
    In addition there are three anthropogenic vegetation habitats:
     1. garden vegetation
     2. secondary lowland rain forest
     3. grassland
    These vegetation habitats are briefly described below, each with a listing of the species
of which it is typically composed.


2.3.1 Natural vegetation habitats

2.3.1.1 Coastal strand vegetation

Coastal strand vegetation falls into three zones, a herbaceous zone, beach scrub, and littoral
forest.

2.3.1.1.1 Herbaceous zone

On sandy beaches and beach ridges, 3 vegetation begins at the high-water mark on the seaward
slope with a herbaceous cover of creeping plants such as Ipomoea pes-caprae, Canavalia
rosea (syn. C. maritima) (no reconstruction) and Wedelia biflora, as well as grasses and
sedges, including Thuarea involuta.

[2] Descriptions of regional vegetation habitats are common in the botanical literature on the Pacific islands. One
of the earliest (and surprisingly comprehensive) is Warburg (1899). Others include Barrau (1955), Paijmans
(1976) and Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg (1998 : 59). I have mostly followed the last, as it treats NW Island
Melanesia as a separate floristic region and subdivides it into the Bismarcks, Bougainville and the Solomons.
Paijmans (1976) sometimes provides significant additional detail, but he writes about ' New Guinea' without
distinguishing between the mainland as a whole and the Bismarcks and Bougainville.

[3] Where the coast is being built up outwards by sand, a succession of ridges develops, parallel to the beach.
Ridges are typically about 2m high closer to the beach. On their inland side they merge into gently undulating
fiats (Paijmans 1976: 27- 28).

                                                Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names       29


2.3.1.1.2 Beachscrub

Next to or overlapping the herbaceous zone comes bush scrub with shrubs such as Pemphis
acidula and Scaevola taccada and low-growing bushy-crowned trees like Hibiscus tiliaceus
Thespesia populnea and Tournefortia argentea often densely tangled by climbers like Flag-
ellaria indica. There is a ground layer of fems, grasses, gingers and herbs including Crinum
asiaticum.

2.3.1.1.3 Littoral forest

On its landward side beach scrub borders, gradually or abruptly, on littoral or coastal strand
forest. This is often dominated by evergreen broadleaftrees like Barringtonia asiatica, T ermi-
nalia catappa, Heritiera littoralis and Calophyllum inophyllum (and in the Solomons archi-
pelago Cerbera manghas) or the screwpine Pandanus tectorius, (on coral P. dubius) or some-
times Casuarina equisetifolia. On beaches where the ridge formation has been eroded, the
littoral forest borders immediately on the beach, and Barringtonia asiatica predominates.
On coral islands where mixed littoral forest covers the whole island, the forest may in-
clude Diospyros, Myristica and Rhus              In the Solomons the lower storey includes
Diospyros species, Ficus austrina, Hibiscus tiliaceus, Kleinhovia hospita, Morinda citrifolia
and Premna corymbosa (Paijmans 1976:29-20, Henderson & Hancock 1988:321 , Mueller-
Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 50, 59, 70).

     As Barrau (1955: 17) notes, in many areas the littoral forest has been replaced by coconut
palms.

2.3.1.2 Mangroveforest

Mangrove forests occur on stretches of coastline sheltered from wave action or along estu-
aries or even on protected coral reefs, and especially in areas where there is regular rainfall
which washes salt out of the soil. The mangrove forest may extend from seawater salinity
on the seaward side to almost freshwater conditions on the landward side, where there is
usually an abrupt transition to freshwater swamp forest. Mangrove forests are located in the
intertidal zone, so the seaward margin undergoes much deeper twice-daily inundation than
the landward margin. On the seaward margin species include A vicennia marina, Sonneratia
caseolaris, S. alba and occasionally Ceriops tagal. Further landward Rhizophora and then
Bruguiera species take over and the canopy assumes a forest stature. Towards its landward
border the mangrove forest becomes more diverse, forming a canopy up to 25 m in height,
and in the Bismarcks includes Lumnitzera littorea, Xylocarpus granatum, Excoecaria agal-
locha, Camptostemon schultzii, Heritiera littoralis, Intsia bijuga and Inocarpusfagifer. Intsia
bijuga and Inocarpus fagifer are also common lowland rain forest and swamp forest trees.
The more landward mangrove forest is more open and has an undergrowth of shrubs and
low-stature trees including Dolichandrone .spathacea and Myristica hollrungii. The Nypa
fruticans palm also grows on the landward side of estuarine swamps (Paijmans 1976: 31-34,
Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998:50--5 1).

    In the Solomons Lumnitzera littorea, Ceriops tagal and Dolichandrone spathacea occur
towards the landward border of the mangrove forest. Inland of these are Sonneratia species
and Xylocarpus granatum and as the ground becomes less saline Calophyllum inophyllum,
Fagraea racemosa, Heritiera littoralis,Intsia bijuga and Pandanus species, with an under-
storey of fems and the shrub Acanthus ebracteatus (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 319).

30    Malcolm Ross


2.3.1.3 Freshwater swamp forest

Freshwater swamp forests occur on larger islands in areas where the water table, often brack-
ish, is near the surface and during high-rainfall seasons sometimes above it. These locations
are typically fiat areas near the coast with poorly drained soils. In NW Island Melanesia, all
large tracts of freshwater swamp forest are found in Bougainville and the Solomons. They
are few and small in the Bismarcks: there are patches on the north coast of New Britain, two
deltas in the south of New Ireland, and a small amount (about 7%) on Manus Island and Los
Negros (Paijmans 1976:37-48, Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998:51-52,60,71, Freyne &
Belll982). Since the homeland ofPOc speakers was quite clearly in the Bismarcks, no chap-
ter in the present volume is devoted to freshwater swamp forest. The trees characteristic of
this habitat are in any case all found elsewhere, usually in lowland rain forests.

2.3.1.4 Primary lowland rain forest

 The most widely distributed natural vegetation habitat in NW Island Melanesia is lowland
 tropical rain forest. Its most important species belong to the genera Calophyllum, Camp-
 nosperma, Canarium, Cryptocarya, Dracontomelon, Ficus, I ntsia, Octomeles, Pometia, Pte-
 rocymbium and T erminalia, along with Eucalyptus deglupta.

     In Bougainville Pometia pinnata and Vitex cofassus form a forest with a tall canopy up to
 35 m, and other genera include Alstonia, Celtis, Cryptocarpus, Dysoxylum Elaeocarpus and
 Sterculia. The understorey in Bougainville includes trees of the genera Diospyros, Garcinia,
 Gnetum, Myristica, Syzygium and palms of the genera Areca, Caryota and Licuala, as well
 as bamboos, tree ferns (Cyathea) and Pandanus (Paijmans 1976:64-65, Mueller-Dombois
 & Fosberg 1998: 60--61).

     Lowland tropical rain forests are more species-rich than other kinds of vegetation but
 nonetheless grow poorer as one moves southeastward. In the Solomons there are twelve
 species of big (canopy) trees: Calophyllum kajewskii, Calophyllum pseudovitiense, Camp-
 nosperma brevipetiolatum, Dillenia salomonensis, Elaeocarpus sphaericus, Endospermum
 medullosum, Gmelina moluccana, Maranthes corymbosa, Parinari salomonensis, Pometia
pinnata, Schizomeria serrata and T erminalia calamansanai. Where forests have been bro-
ken by cyclones or man, colonising species include Canarium species and Vitex cofassus.
 Lower tree and shrub layers consist of Barringtonia and Boerlagiodendron species, Leea in-
 dica and Areca catechu. The herb layer is patchy, but where gaps occur in the canopy, species
 of Calamus, bamboos and gingers predominate (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 320)

     In the few locations in NW Island Melanesia where there is a marked dry season Garuga
floribunda occurs alongside Terminalia and Ficus species (Paijmans 1976: 52).


2.3.2 Anthropogenic vegetation habitats

Much of the vegetation in NW Island Melanesia today is anthropogenic. It falls into three
categories: garden vegetation, secondary lowland rain forest and grasslands.

2.3.2.1 Garden vegetation


                                                  Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names         31


Lapita villages were apparently typically located on or immediately behind the beach, as
many modem villages in the Bismarcks still are. When a contemporary village is on the beach,
however, the gardens often lie a distance away in the rainforest, sometimes in the submontane
foothills. Villagers in rain forest areas of NW Island Melanesia typically follow a system
which has been labelled 'bush fallowing rotaltion' . The forest is cleared, the garden is planted
and harvested for about a year, then left fallow for 10--15 years. During the first two years of
the fallow period, some crops continue to be harvested from the garden. Typically a family is
entitled to use a number of garden plots which have been cleared by earlier generations and
which are at different stages of fallowing rotation. Children are taught which plots the family
may use, which places are good for taro, which for yams, and so on, across the whole fallow
area used by the family as well as in current gardens (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 30). If a family
has enough garden plots, then there is no need to create new plots by clearing primary forest.
If not, then either plots will be used more frequently (not an ideal choice) or a new plot will
be created by clearing forest. If the fallow period is long enough and rainfall is sufficient, then
primary regrowth occurs and the garden plot more or less merges back into the primary forest.
If the land is reused too early, then eventually secondary forest replaces primary regrowth.
In drier areas it is replaced by grassland (Barrau 1955: 17, 31 , 1962: 45--47).

     Garden vegetation today includes planted trees and sometimes wild trees that were present
when the forest was cleared and are tended in situ (chapter 11 ), as well as the various sta-
ples (chapter 9) and plants grown as green vegetables (chapter 10). Trees vary from place
to place but include breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), mango (Mangifera indica), Malay apple
(Syzygium malaccense), golden apples (Spondias cytherea), dragon plums (Dracontomelon
dao and D. vitiense), canarium almonds (Canarium indicum and C. salomonense), Barring-
tonia edulis, Citrus (mostly recent introducltions), guava (another recent introduction) and
coconut palms (chapter 12).

2.3.2.2 Secondary lowland rain forest

Henderson & Hancock (1988: 323) give an account of the regrowth sequence in the Solomons.
 Secondary rain forest trees tend to be more light-demanding species, which include Acalypha
grandis, Alphitonia incana, Hibiscus tiliaceus, Macaranga species, Melochia umbellata, Pip-
turus argenteus and Schleinitzia novo-guineensis, alongside planted species of M usa and He-
liconia. As the fallow progresses, they lose their dominance to species typical of older re-
growth such as Fa/cataria moluccana, Cananga odorata, Ficus species, Kleinhovia hospita,
Rhus taitensis and Trichospermum psilocladum, along with the breadfruit and the mango and
treefems like Cyathea brackenridgei and C. lunulata . Gingers occur in the shrub layer, along
with the palms Areca catechu and Caryota rumphiana . Finally, some of the large tree species
of primary forest return, especially Pometia pinnata and Vitex cofassus.

    Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg (1998: 63) describe forest regrowth in Bougainville, but
their stages are less clearly delineated than Henderson & Hancock' s. Regrowth vegetation
includes wild varieties of cultivated plants, along with Heliconia indica, gingers, Caryota
palms, grasses (Imperata cylindrica, Paspalum, Pennisetum macrostachium), Kleinhovia
hospita, Hibiscus tiliaceus, and species of Macaranga and Ficus (Mueller-Dombois & Fos-
berg 1998: 63). Important secondary growth is dominated by species of Glochidion, Mac-
aranga and Mallotus, along with species of Trema , Alphitonia, Casuarina, Trichospermum
and Hibiscus, and the species Leucaena leucocephala, Kleinhovia hospita, Paraserianthes
fa/cataria , M elanolepis multiglandulosa and Burckella obovata. There are also primary for-
est trees that have not been removed: Canarium and Barringtonia species, breadfruit and
Pangium edule. In older secondary forest Cananga, Endospermum, Canarium, Euodia, La-
portea and Sterculia occur (Paijmans 1976: 59).

32      Malcolm Ross


2.3.2.3 Grassland

Grasslands are quite rare in most of NW Island Melanesia, but occupy extensive areas of
north Guadalcanal. They are dominated by kangaroo grass (Themeda australis), sword grass
(I mperata cylindrica) and Pennisetum polystachion. They are usually maintained by regular
burning. In less frequently burned areas Saccharum spontaneum and Miscanthusj/.oridulus
also occur. Phragmites karka and Cyperus species appear in more poorly drained areas (Hen-
derson & Hancock 1988:318-319, Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1988: 56-57).


2.4 The relationship between garden and bush in Proto Oceanic society

The division of vegetation habitats into natural and anthropogenic reminds us that human be-
ings have brought substantial changes to their NW Melanesian island habitats. Recent schol-
arly work on the agriculture of the region has emphasised that there is no clearcut agronomic
boundary between garden and bush. As noted above, gardens sometimes include fruit- or
nut-bearing trees that survive from the earlier primary forest, or forest tree species that have
been planted in the garden. Sometimes fruit or nut trees are planted near the village as well.
Some species are tended in their natural forest habitat.

    Kennedy & Clarke (2004) argue that there is no sensible line to be drawn between crops
grown in gardens and crops acquired from the bush, because they together constitute an in-
tegrated system of resource management. They examine the literature on sago, canarium,
pandanus, breadfruit and bananas, and show that all five have long been tended and trans-
planted in ways that have fundamentally altere:d the landscape. They list other plants with
similarly long-term relationships with human beings: Gnetum gnemon, Inocarpus fagifer ,
Pangium edule and Pometia pinnata. We can add to this list at least Barringtonia edulis, B.
novae-hiberniae, B. procera, Burckella obovata, Dracontomelon species, Spondias cytherea,
Syzygium malaccense, S. aqueum, Terminalia catappa and T . kaernbachii (A. Walter 1994).

    Breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) and canarium almond (C. indicum and C. salomonense)
trees are usually individually owned and tended where they have grown in the forest, either
naturally or from planted suckers. Forest growth is cleared away from around the base of
the breadfruit tree, and it may be fenced. Breadfruit seedlings are often also transplanted to
village areas and older plants may be propagated by planting-depending on location-seeds,
root cuttings or suckers.4 In the Solomons most canarium trees are planted near villages, but
some grow wild. T erminalia catappa and T. kaernbachii are also often planted, whilst other
Terminalia species with edible kernels (T. copelandii, T . impediens) are harvested from the
forest. Several Syzygium species have edible fruit (S. malaccense, S. aqueum) and are either
tended within the forest or planted. Barringtonia edulis is commonly planted as a village fruit
tree in the Solomons (Paijmans 1976: 123-124, Evans 1999: 1).

    The importance of tree crops to Pacific Islanders was first stressed by Barrau ( 1955, 1963)
and reinforced by Yen ( 197 4a ). They pointed out that fruits and nuts that were reported sim-
ply to be gathered were in fact tended in varying degrees as part of the agricultural system.
This has been reaffirmed by other scholars, e.g . Thaman (1989), Flavelle (1991), A. Walter
( 1994), McEldowney ( 1995), Hviding & Bayliss-Smith (2000: 23), Chowning (200 1: 77-78),
Walter & Sam (2002: 76--77) and McClatchey e:t al. (2006a) . For example, on Baluan Island
(Admiralties) McEldowney found 23 tree crops, 17 of which were fruit- or nut-bearing. All
occurred in three different types of location: near villages, in orchards, and scattered across
gardened land. Kennedy & Clarke (2004) point out that the situation is sometimes even more
complicated, as the status of a crop can range from wild through tended to cultivated, i.e.
planted and cloned, and wild varieties are often used alongside domesticated plants, i.e. prop-
agated vegetatively by cuttings or by planting suckers.

[4] Kennedy & Clarke (2004) give a summary of locations and cite sources.

                                                         Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names               33


     Before the introduction of steel implements tree crops are known to have had greater nu-
tritional significance on the islands off the north coasts of New Guinea and New Britain and
on the Mussau Islands than they have today, and it is likely that this is true at least of small
islands throughout NW Island Melanesia. For example on Karkar Island, very important food
sources included coconut, canarium almonds, breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), Tahitian chest-
nut(/ nocarpus fagifer) , Indian chestnut (Terminalia catappa ), dragon plum (Dracontomelon
dao) and the fruit of Pouteria maclayana. Arable agriculture has increased in significance
since the introduction of metal tools 80 or so years ago (Bourke 1996, Allen et al. 1994), but
from my own observation it is clear that these nuts and fruits retain traditional significance.

     Because agriculture is centred on what are conventionally called 'gardens' in English,
the distinction between the English terms 'horticulture' and 'agriculture' is largely irrelevant
in a Pacific context (Brookfield 2001:6, Kennedy & Clarke 2004). However, recent liter-
ature calls the use of either term into question because of the absence of a clear boundary
between garden and forest in Pacific agriculture. Pinning down exactly whether a particular
crop should be regarded as wild or cultivated in a particular location is extremely difficult. In
consequence Kennedy & Clarke (2004) adopt the term 'agroforestry' from Clarke & Thaman
(1993 ). 5 Whilst the reason for this decision is clear, however, there is still reason to retain
'horticulture ' for activities in food gardens, as Meredith Osmond does in chapter 5 of volume
1, and to use 'arboriculture ' for tree-tending activities in the forest.

     The extent of agriculture in the Bismarck Archipelago before the arrival of POe speak-
ers, i.e. Lapita people, is unknown, but there is reason to believe that the tending of bush
trees and the planting of trees at convenient locations had been practised there long before
the Lapita period. Before the arrival of Austronesian speakers, NW Island Melanesia was
populated by groups who may or may not have cultivated a staple crop. However, as early
as 20,000 years ago Allen (1993) and Gosd1en (1995) detect a gradual change in pattern in
New Ireland, whereby people had started to move scarce resources to the locations where
they lived instead of themselves moving from resource to resource. A species of Phalanger
(possum) was imported into New Ireland, canarium trees were transplanted there from else-
where, and obsidian (for making blades) was imported from the Willaumez Peninsula ofNew
Britain. There was thus a move away from mobile hunting and gathering in the direction of
what Spriggs (1997: 61) calls 'wild food production' and others label 'foraging sedentism' .
Bringing resources to people (rather than people moving from resource to resource) allowed
a community a degree of sedentariness not available to hunters and gatherers. In pre-Lapita
NW Island Melanesia, foraging sedentism evidently included activities like tending trees and
transplanting seedlings.


[5] The term is older, but is used, e.g., by (Flavelle 1991) principally to designate the cultivation of a village
orchard rather than the whole system of plant cultivation including garden, orchard and tending forest trees.

34    Malcolm Ross


     LeBlanc (2002) argues that for a population to adopt agriculture, it is necessary for it al-
ready to be sedentary. IfNW Island Melanesian populations encountered by arriving Austro-
nesian speakers in New Britain, New Ireland, Manus, Buka and Bougainville did not al-
ready practise agriculture, they were almost certainly sedentary and would probably have
shifted fairly rapidly to agriculture. The language map of New Britain, New Ireland and the
Solomons offers circumstantial support for a hypothesis that these populations either did
not have agriculture or were agriculturally inferior to the new arrivals. There are today tiny
scattered groups each speaking its own Papuan language, surrounded by numerous Oceanic
languages, a number of which show signs of Papuan influence in their phonology or gram-
mar. 6 The implication of this linguistic geography is that there were once far more Papuan
languages in NW Island Melanesia, but as their populations adopted agricultural practices
from their Austronesian-speaking neighbours they also adopted their languages.

    This does not mean that these populations simply shifted mode of subsistence. Foraging
sedentism also seems to be a necessary precursor of agriculture (Cohen 2002), and we have
no reason to suppose that populations acquiring agriculture simply abandoned their previous
practices. Rather it is a reasonable inference that they retained their hunting and tree-tending
practices and combined these with newly acquired cultivation practices. It is thus possible
that the hunting and tree-tending practices of early Lapita culture reflect at least in part an
inheritance from pre-Lapita inhabitants of the Bismacks. What is certain is that about 1.3 kg
of Canarium indicum and about 130 grams of Terminalia have been found in Lapita archae-
ological contexts in the Arawe Islands (off the southwest coast of New Britain) (Matthews
& Gosden 1997). This is of course not direct                 of Lapita tree-tending, but it is di-
rect evidence that canarium nuts in particular w1;:re an important item of consumption among
POe speakers. Kirch (1989) found circumstantial evidence for arboriculture in a Lapita as-
semblage on Mussau Island which included shells of Aleurites moluccana, Burckella, Can-
arium, coconut, Spondias cytherea, and T erminalia, peri carp of I nocarpus fagifer and seeds
of Pometia pinnata.

    We cannot take it for granted that agriculture: in the POe period was the same as it is today,
but there is reasonable evidence that it was not very different. Presumably the area of forest
that had been turned into gardens was less than it is today, and the areas of anthropogenic
vegetation habitats were therefore also less extensive. But linguistic evidence (§5) indicates
that bush fallowing was already well established in NW Island Melanesia by the time POe
broke up into daughter-languages.

[5] Proto Oceanic terms for types of vegetation and land use
POe had terms denoting the contrast between land with natural primary vegetation and land
cleared for gardening:
     • *qutan 'bushland, hinterland; inland' (vol.l , ch.5, §3.3; vol.2, ch.3 , §5.1 and ch.8,
       §2.2.1)
     • *quma 'garden; to clear land for a garden' (vol.l, ch.5, §3.1)

[6] Madak (New Ireland) shares phonological features with its Papuan neighbour Kuot that are largely not shared
by neighbouring Oceanic languages (Ross 1994a).                    of western and southwest New Britain
(Bebeli, Sengseng, Kaulong) mark human gender in certain ways that are otherwise unknown in Oceanic lan-
guages.

                                                           Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names                35


In a few languages the reflex of *qutan means 'garden' (Mussau utana, Banoni yitana, Tolo
uta, Nese na-ut), a seemingly odd reversal of meaning-odd until one recognises that a sec-
ondary sense of *qutan was 'inland ' (vol.2, ch.8, §2.2.1), itself a natural outcome of the fact
that the bush is always inland in relation to a coastal village. Since gardens were also inland
from a coastal village, and sometimes quite a distance inland, the inference that *qutan is a
metonymous term for 'garden' entails only a small jump.

    Contrasting with *quma along the bush fallowing cycle was POe *talu(n) 'old garden,
fallow land, land returning to secondary growth' (vol.l, ch.5, §3.1; vol.2, ch.3, §5.1).

    The term *qutan appears to have denoted uncultivated land in general, whether it was
*talu(n ), land returning to secondary growth after cultivation, or bushland that had never been
brought under cultivation. The term for the latter appears to have been POe *[waRu]waRu-
'appears' because there are phonological problems in the data. On one hand Misima, Proto
Malaita-Makira and PPn all reflect the reconstructed form regularly, assuming that final *-o
of PPn *wao reflects assimilation. On the other hand PMic medial *-/- reflects POe *-!- , not
*-R- . This irregularity is unexplained, but cannot be dismissed too lightly, as Proto Malaita-
Makira *[walu]walu could also reflect a form with POe*-!-. I reconstruct POe *[waRu]waRu
because this explains a larger range of reflexes, but further data might lead to a revision.[7]

<
POe *[waRu]waRu (?)'primary forest' (French-Wright 1983: *wao)[8]
  PT:    Misima       walu-walu     'the bush'
Proto Malaita-Makira *[walu]walu 'the world; uncultivated bush
  SES: Kwaio          kwazu         'unusable bush'
  SES: Sa' a          walu(malau) 'the world, all the islands '
  SES: Arosi          waru-waru 'the inhabited world generally, all the known islands '
PPn *wao 'forest'
  Pn:    Tongan       vao           'forest, bushland, scrub, land in its natural uncultivated state'
  Pn:    Tahitian     vao           'wilds, wilderness'
  Pn:    Maori        wao           'forest'
cf. also:
  SES: Gela           ao              'forest, land never brought under cultivation'
PMic *walu 'vegetation, forest ' (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Pohnpeian wal                   'jungl1;:, forest '
 Mic: Mortlockese wali-wel            'forest'
 Mic: Chuukese        wani-wan        'vegetation, bush'
 Mic: Puluwatese wal                  'forest, jungle'
 Mic: Carolinian wali-wal             'forest, jungle'
                      wal(lap)        'dense: forest, thickly forested area'
 Fij:   Rotuman       vao             'forest, large number of trees or big plants growing
                                      together'
>

[7] Gela ao may not be cognate, as the expected Gela form is t walu .

[8] This set is repeated in part from vol.l , ch.5, §3 .3 and vol.2, ch.3, §5 .1, where PEOc *wao 'forest' was recon-
structed, following French-Wright (1983).

36    Malcolm Ross


    In volumes 1 and 2 a number of other POe terms for landscape features were reconstructed
which correspond very roughly to the vegetation habitats listed in §3 . The correspondence
is rough because the POe terms denote landscape features, not vegetation habitats in the
botanical sense. Such terms are POe *b(w)iker 'beach, esp. sandy beach' (vol.2, ch.3, §3.1) 9
and the three terms reconstructed in vol.2, ch.3, §5 .2, denoting swamps. As we note there, we
have no principled way of determining which te:rm(s) denoted mangrove swamps and which
freshwater swamps.
       POe *[dr,r]ano 'lake, swamp '
       POe *pwaca 'swamp'
       POe *[g,k]opu 'pond, lagoon, swamp'
    A minor piece of evidence that POe speakers recognised a division between wild and
cultivated varieties of plants is that wild plant names are sometimes fully reduplicated forms
of a cultivated variety or a similar cultivated plant species (§7.2).


2.6 The ingredients of an Oceanic meal

People in traditional Oceanic-speaking villages ate one cooked meal a day, usually after the
day' s work. The meal typically consisted of starchy staples, made more appetising by the
addition of coconut milk ( ch.12, §4.2), leafy vegetables (ch.10) and sometimes some meat or
fish. Today the meal is most often boiled. Traditionally, boiling would have been common in
communities which had clay pots. Will McClatchey (pers. comm.) points out that it was also
possible in communities without clay pots: a stone was heated in the fire and dropped into
a container of water. Such containers might be (watertight) leaf baskets, a wooden bowl, a
ground out rock or a large shell. Since boiling with such utensils can still be observed in parts
ofNW Island Melanesia, there is good reason to think that it occurred traditionally. Food was
presumably also roasted in the fire or baked over it or-on special occasions-steamed in an
earth oven (for food preparation methods, see vol.l , ch.6).
     The lexicons of Oceanic languages usually distinguish two main categories of ingredient:

     • starchy staples, including yams, taro, sweet potatoes and other root crops, cooking
       bananas and breadfruit;
     • the additional ingredients: coconut milk, leafy vegetables and protein foods (meat,
       fish, shellfish).

Barrau (1955: 44) remarks on the existence ofthis division in New Caledonia, and translates
the terms for the categories as 'food' and 'condiments'.

    Dictionary definitions do not always mention all three components of the 'additional in-
gredients' category, and it is difficult to know whether the definitions are sometimes deficient
or whether the composition of the additional ingredients varies from one place to another.
Among Takia speakers living inland on Karkar Island, for example, the additional ingredients
often lack a protein food if no one has been hunting, as domestic animals (pigs and chickens)
are slaughtered only for feasts.

[9] POe *qone 'sand, sandy beach' (vol.2, ch.3, §7.5) appears primarily to denote the sand rather than the location
as part of an island.

                                                         Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names               37


    The encoding of the two categories of ingredient in the lexicon varies from language to
language, as is shown by the terms below from widely dispersed languages. Oceanic lan-
guages have quite complex terminologies to do with eating, and the terms listed below are
limited to generic terms for eating and food and to terms which presuppose the distinction
between staples and additions as categories of meal ingredient. I have omitted, for example,
terms for 'meat' where these have the wider meaning 'flesh'.

Mapos Buang (NNG) (Hooley n.d.)
VERBS  -ya   'eat' (POe *kani)
       -r:Jm 'eat mixed food including meat'
v&N    tmul 'mix various kinds offood together and cook them' (v); 'a mixed stew' (N)
NOUNS  nos   'food (generic), but not including meat or greens'
       ryu   'meat food '


Iduna (PT) (Huckett n.d.)
VERBS   -a               'eat' (POe *kani)
        -a-kwayakwaya 'eat meat alone ' (kwayakwaya- 'white ')
        -kuda-ta?ula     'eat starchy vegetables and meat together' 10
v & N [- ]onanaga        'crave for meat' (v) ; 'craving for meat' (N)
NOUNS   a?a              'food (generic), cultivated crops '
        kevakeva         'meat and fish, protein food '


Patpatar (MM) (Condra n.d.)
VERBS   ian       'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
        gama      'mix meat with starchy food '
        bite, bui 'crave for meat'
NOUNS   ni-an     'food ' (ni- NOMINALISER)
        g<in>ama 'meat mixed with starchy food ' (<in> NOMINALISER)


Sursurunga (MM) (Hutchisson n.d.)
VERBS  ani, !Jani 'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
NOUNS  namnam 'food'
       gemnai     'eat (s.t.) as an accompaniment to starchy food '
       balbal     'starchy food, root vegetables'
       gem gem 'meat, meat animals '


Ramoaaina (MM) (Fritzell & Davies n.d.)
VERBS  an     'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
       wa!Jan 'eat' (v1) (POe *pa!Jan)
       na!Jin 'eat starch and meat together'
       bet    'eat meat alone '
10
 -kuda chew, ta?ula 'banana leaf under food ', the latter presumably a reference to the fact that vegetables and
meat are eaten together at features where food is laid out on banana leaves.
38   Malcolm Ross


          odo        'eat greens alone '
NOUNS     ni-an      'food' (ni- NOMINALISER)


Arosi (SES) (Fox 1978)
VERBS IJaU                      'eat' (vT) (POe *!Jau 'gnaw, chew' )
        ma!Ja                   'eat' (vi) (POe *pmyan)
        IJaU- ko !Jari          'eat one thing without relish ' (ko!Jari 'empty' )
        ?onari                  'eat only fish '
        !Jau-bwara-bwara        'eat one thing with relish'(b'vara-bwara 'fern sp.' )
        mamu                    'eat two kinds offood together'
        !Jau-kokona             'eat only greens' (kokona 'smooth, slippery')
NOUNS hina!Ja                   'starchy foods '


Anejofu (SV) (Lynch 2001a)
VERBS yifi          'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
        ha!J        'eat' (vi) (POe *pa!Jan)
        topw-ha!J   'eat starch without additions ' (topw'just, merely, only' )
        leyley      'eat meat or fish without starch'
N& v    a8epyafi    'eat meat or fish with taro ' (vi, vT) ; 'meat or fish eaten with taro' (N)
NOUNS in-ha!J       'food, meal' (POe *pa!Jan)
        ni-tai-yifi 'food (generic)' (lit. ART-thing-eat) (POe *kani)
        ni-tai-ha!J 'food (generic)' (lit. ART-thing-eat) (POe *pa!Jan)


Sye (SV) (T. Crowley 2000)
VERBS -eni          'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
        -Va!J       'eat' (vi) (POe *pa!Jan)
        -elat       'eat meat or fish '
        -a!Jot      'hungry for meat' (lit. 'itch' )
        -etki       'eat meat or fish with starchy food ' 11
NOUNS n-va!J        'food ' (POe *pa!Jan)
        potninva!J 'staples, including yam and banana' ( < poti-n n-va!J 'base of food ' )


Kosraean (Mic) (Lee 197 6)
VERBS kim is     'eat'
       ktlja     'eat'
       kiy:Jy:Ji 'eat one kind of food without side dish'
       koknck 'eat main dish without side dish '
V&N    mOIJO     'eat' (v) ; 'food' (N) (PMic *mwa!Jau 'eat (staple food)' (v); 'staple food '
                     (N))
          cnM        'eat a side dish of (s.t.)' (v) ; 'side dish' (N)
NOUNS     kiy:Jy:J   'one kind of food eaten without side dish; naked '
          cnte       'side-dish'

[11] T. Crowley (2000) glosses -etki 'eat something with something else ', but his example suggests the gloss
given here.

                                                        Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names              39


Wayan (Fij) (Pawley & Sayaba 2003)
VERBS  kani         'eat' (vT) (POe *kani)
       tovi         'crave for meat or fish' (vT)
NOUNS  ma!Jiti      'food, something to eat; staples (root crops, bananas, breadfruit)'
       ilava        'savoury food, preferably fish or meat, eaten with staples'
       vzdagwana 'protein food, especially seafood, and leafy vegetables eaten with staples'


Proto Polynesian (POLLEX)
VERBS   *kai         'eat' (POe *kani)
        *samu        'eat only protein food '
NOUNS   *kina, *kiki 'food eaten as a relish with other food ' [12]

    Aside from POe *kani and *pa!Jan, 13 which are widely reflected, the sets of semantically
similar forms above contain no cognate sets that justify POe reconstructions. Other cognate
sets are decidedly localised but similar meanings recur:

 1      (v)   'eat starchy food ; eat (generic)'              (all)
       (N)   'starchy vegetables', also used                 Mapos Buang, Sursurunga, Arosi,
             hypemymously for 'food (generic)'               Wayan
 2      (v)   'eat food consisting of starch and              Mapos Buang, Ramoaaina, Arosi,
             additional ingredients (coconut milk,           Anejom
             leafy vegetables, fish or meat)'
       (v)   'mix and/or cook food consisting of             Mapos Buang, Iduna, Patpatar
             starch and additional ingredients'
       (N)   'food consisting of starch and                  Patpatar
             additional ingredients'
 3      (v)   'eat (s.t.) as an addition to starch'           Sursurunga, Anejom, Sye, Kosraean
       (N)   'fish or meat and leafy vegetables as an        Anejom, Kosraean, Wayan, PPn
             addition to starch'
 4      (v)   'eat fish or meat without starch'               Iduna, Ramoaaina, Arosi, Anejom,
                                                             Sye, Kosraean, PPn
       (v)   'crave fish or meat'                            Iduna, Patpatar, Sye, Wayan
       (N)   'fish and meat as food '                        Mapos Buang, Iduna, Sursurunga
 5      (v)   'eat greens alone '                             Ramoaaina, Arosi

    The meanings above are categorised into those referring to ( 1) starchy vegetables and
hypemymously to food in general; (2) food consisting of starch and additional ingredients
(coconut milk, leafy vegetables, fish or meat) ; (3) the additions; (4) fish and meat without
starch; (5) leafy vegetables.


[12] Presumably with starchy food.

[13] This is to my knowledge the only reconstructable POe verb pair to preserve an intransitive form reflecting
PMP *paN- (vol.l , ch.2, §3 .1.3). *paYJan evidently also served as a (lexically causative) transitive meaning
' feed (animals)', to judge from its reflexes in Arosi and in Central Pacific languages .

40   Malcolm Ross


    In the languages above, only two verbs mean something like 'eat starchy foods ' . They
are Arosi !Jau-ko!Jari 'eat one thing without relish' and Anejom topw-ha!J 'eat starch without
additions'. Their literal meanings are instructive: Arosi 'eat empty', Anejom 'just eat'. They
imply that the basic meaning of the verb 'eat' is 'eat starchy foods', and this appears to be
true in other Oceanic languages too. All the verbs meaning 'eat' except Arosi !Jau ( < POe
*!Jau 'gnaw') are reflexes ofPMP *kaen/POc *kani 'eat', and all apparently refer primarily
to eating starchy foods (although few dictionaries mention the fact). They have the generic
meaning 'eat' by hypemymy. This inference is supported by the facts that (i) other verbs of
eating never have this meaning; (ii) the form for 'starchy foods' in many Oceanic languages is
or reflects a nominalisation of the reflex of this etymon; and (iii) reflexes in New Caledonian
languages, e.g. Voh-Kone cani, Xaracuu kiJ, still mean 'eat carbohydrates, eat tubers'.

    A verb with the meaning 'crave fish or meat' is often found in Oceanic languages, re-
flecting the fact that in Oceanic speaking communities the main meal is often eaten without
fish or meat.

    Fewer languages appear to have terms referring to eating leafy vegetables alone. Ramoaa-
ina odo and Arosi !Jau-kokona are the only instances found in a survey of Oceanic dictionary
sources. In Ross (1996c) I distinguished two categories of meal ingredient, starchy staples
and leafy greens. With more dictionary data, it has become clear that the primary categori-
sation of meal ingredients is into starch and additional ingredients, and that leafy vegetables
are a subcategory of 'additional ingredients'.

    The ubiquitousness of verbs and nouns which presuppose the 'starchy food' (§6.1) and
'additional ingredients' (§6.2) categories suggests strongly that these categories were already
present in POe.


2.6.1 Starchy food

Staple food sources are easily grown starchy foods ofvegetable origin that are high in food
energy. Dictionary definitions of terms for 'staple food' or 'starchy food' in Oceanic lan-
guages are rarely exhaustive, sometimes referring to yams, sometimes to taro, sometimes to
root crops in general. This is, of course, often due to variations in the staples consumed from
one area to another: taro is grown in wetter regions, yams in drier areas, and breadfruit on
atolls. For New Guinea Bourke (in preparation) lists Colocasia taro, yams (Dioscorea escu-
lenta and D. alata ), banana and sago as the most important staple foods before the arrival
of the sweet potato. An early botanical account suggests that taro, some yam species, ba-
nanas and breadfruit probably formed the traditional staple foods of Pacific islanders (Guppy
1906: 412-415). Pawley & Sayaba (2003) define Wayan ma!Jiti as including the staples ba-
nanas and breadfruit as well as root crops, and knowledge of Oceanic eating habits justifies
assuming definitions of this kind of breadth for the corresponding terms in many Oceanic
languages. The sago palm is included with oth1;:r staples in chapter 9 because it serves as a
staple in some Oceanic societies and as a famine food in others.

    Two POe forms are reconstructed with the probable meaning 'starchy food' and hyper-
nymously 'food in general': *kana!J and *kuta.

    POe *kana!J and its variant *kanan, both 'staple food, food in general', reflect PMP *kan-
an 'dish, plate, meal'. This was a nominalisation of PMP *kaen 'eat', or *kan in the context
of certain affixes. PMP had several nominalising affixes, among them *-en and *-an. PMP
*-en was reflected in POe only in a few fossilised contexts like *kano!J 'flesh, meat, coconut
flesh' (ch.12, §4.2), from PMP *kan-en 'something to be eaten, food'. PMP *-an 'locative
nominaliser', on the other hand, became POe *-anl*-a!J, a productive nominalising affix with
wider functions than in PMP. Because of this productivity, as the nominalising forms and
strategies of Oceanic daughter-languages changed in various ways (vol.l, ch.2, §3.2.1), so
lexical items formed by nominalisation sometimes retained their old forms and sometimes
changed in accordance with the changes in nominalising morphology. Forms which reflect
such changes are listed below under 'cf. also '. [14]

[14] In Ross (1996c) these forms were shown under POe *kani ('eat') + NOMINALISER . I have changed their
presentation here in recognition of the fact that they all in a sense reflect POe *kanaYJ , even though they also
reflect changes in the nominalisation process.

                                                         Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names                41

<
PMP *kan-an 'dish, plate, meal'
POe *kanmJ, *kanan 'staple food ; food in general'
PAdm *kanana 'food' (Blust 1996b)
     Adm:   Wuvulu      an ana                     'food ' (Blust 1996b)
     Adm:   Mondropolon kanna                      'food ' (Blust 1996b)
     Adm:   Drehet      kana                       'food '
     NNG:   Takia       anmJ                       'food '
                        amJ-analJ                  'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
     NNG: Lukep (Po no) kana-                      'share of food, provisions'
     NNG: Matukar       an an                      'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
     NNG: Manam         kana-                      'food '
     NNG: Mari          gana!J                     'taro'
     NNG: Adz era       gana!J                     'banana plant'
     MM: Bulu           ( yani )yana               'coconut flesh '
     SES: Gel a         yana                       'food '
     Fij: Bauan         kana                       'rneal'
                        ka-kana                    'food '
cf. also:
PAdm *kani-an 'staple food '
  Adm: Nyindrou         kani-a             's1caple food '
Proto North New Guinea *kani-!Ja 'food'
  NNG: Sengseng         kini-IJ            'food in general; animal protein in particular' (A.
                                           Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG: Bariai           an-!Ja             'food '
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) kani-IJ               'yam'
  NNG: Bing             ani-IJ             'banana'
  NNG: Manam            ani-!Ja            'food '
  NNG: Mangseng         ani-IJ             'food '
  NNG: Poeng            kani-IJ            'food '
  NNG: Hote             ani-IJ             'taro'
Proto Papuan Tip *kani-kani 'staple food '
  PT:    Misima         an-an              'yams; root crops, nuts and fruit ; food '
  PT:    Taboro         yani-yani          'food '
                        yani               'short cooking banana'
  PT:   Hula            ani                          'banana'
  PT:   Motu            ani-ani                      'food'
  PT:   Mekeo           ani-ani                      'food'
PMM *k<in>ani 'staple food '
  MM: Nakanai           it-ali                       'food' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  MM: Patpatar          ni-an                        'food' 15
  MM: Ramoaaina         ni-an                        'k.o. yam; food '
  MM: Tolai             ni-an                        'food'
  MM: Nehan             ni-eini                      'food'
  MM: Roviana           y<in>ani                     'food'
PNCV *k<in>ani-ana 'staple food '
  NCV: Raga             y<in>a-yani-ana              'food'
  NCV: Paamese          ani-ene                      'staple food, as opposed to meat and greens'
  NCV: Lewo             k<in>ani-ena                 'staple food, as opposed to meat and greens'
>

42     Malcolm Ross


     A further twist is reflected in the forms under 'cf. also ' above. The base ofPMP *kan-an
was *kan. The base of the forms under 'cf. also ' is POe *kani. This reflects PMP *kan-i, where
*-i is a reflex ofthe PAn suffix *-i 'location focus, atemporal', reinterpreted as a transitiviser
in POe (Pawley & Reid 1980; vol.l , ch.2, §§3 .1.2-3) but lexicalised as part ofthe POe base
when the erstwhile base, e.g. *kan, was a monosyllable. As a result, the forms under 'cf. also '
have the base *kani, which never co-occurred with a nominalising affix in PAn and PMP.

     Several reflexes of POe *kuta denote a major staple in the language concerned, either
banana or yam, suggesting that the POe term denoted 'staple food ' . However, it is also pos-
sible that *kuta was originally a specialised verb of eating, as the Gumawana, Iduna, Gela
and Tolo glosses imply.

<
POe *kuta 'staple food ' or 'eat' ?
     NNG:   Lukep (Pono) kuta                    'banana cultivar'
     NNG:   Bing         (ani!J) kuta            'sweet banana cultivar'
     PT:    Gumawana     kuta                    'chew sugar cane '
     PT:    Molima       ?uta                    'chew'
                               ?uta?uta          'Dioscorea pentaphylla'
     PT:    Iduna              kuda              'chew' (-d- for t-t-)
     PT:    Ubir               ut                'greater yam'
     PT:    Gapapaiwa          uta               'yam type '
     SES:   Gel a              kut-i             'feed ' (used as causative of va!Ja 'eat' ; Fox 1955)
     SES:   Tolo               kuta              'eat'
     SV:    Kwamera            kd-kata-n         'baked food '
>

[15] The productive infix <in>, of PAn antiquity, is infixed after the initial consonant of a base if there is one, but
becomes ni- with a vowel-initial base. In Patpatar, Ramoaaina, Tolai and Nehan the *k- of *kani is lost, giving
a vowel-initial base.

                                                             Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names                 43


2.6.2 Additional ingredients

The term POe *tamaji 'additional ingredients to accompany starchy food ' is presented here
only because it supports the claim that POe speakers divided meal ingredients into 'starchy
food ' and 'additional ingredients' (§6).

    Reflexes of *tamaji with meanings supporting the reconstructed meaning are found in
Mapos Buang (NNG), Gela, Longgu and Bauro 16 (all SES) and perhaps Teop (MM). A
larger number of reflexes support another meaning, 'provisions for a journey' : they are found
in Bariai, Takia (both NNG), Dawawa (PT) and Sursurunga (MM). However, these are all
Western Oceanic reflexes, implying that this meaning may have developed in the west after
Oceanic speakers had begun to spread out across Oceania.

<
POe *tamaji 'additional ingredients to accompany starchy food'
  NNG: Bariai            tamad         'food for a journey'
  NNG: Mangap            temen         'small meal prepared as expression of gratitude '
  NNG: Takia             (la)tamad     'food for journey' (Ia 'move away from speaker; go
                                       around the island '; cf. vol.2, ch.8, §3.4.5)
  NNG: Mapos Buang tmul                'mix various kinds of food together and cook them;
                                       stew, soup '
  PT:   Dawawa           tamasi-na     'food for travel'
  MM: Sursurunga         t<in>mas      'picnic lunch, food taken and eaten away from the
                                       house or on a journey'
  MM: Teop               tamari        'prepared food '
  SES: Gel a             tamadi        'relish with vegetable food '
                         tamadi        'eat together different sorts of food '
  SES: Longgu            amadi-a       'eat something as an accompaniment to something
                                       else '
                         amadi-na      'food that is eaten as an accompaniment to
                                       something else'
  SES: Bauro             amasi         'eat two things together; use a relish, use
                                       betelpepper'
  SES: Arosi             amadi         'betelpepper'
  NCV: Lonwolwol         tamsi-        'small pieces of
>

   The concept of 'additional ingredients' was also lexicalised in PMic *ta(l,n)ia 'side dish
of meat, fish, or sauce ' (Bender et al. 2003: 89).


2.7 Apparent encodings of plant categorisations in Oceanic plant names

A number of Oceanic languages appear to use prefixes or reduplication in plant names as a
means of categorising the plant thus named. However, this categorisation is more apparent
than real. The prefixes described in §7 .1.1 and §7.1.4 and the reduplication described in
§7.2 reflect strategies for creating new plant names rather than direct reference to categories
of plant. The prefixes described in §7 .1.3 are part of the debris left by an earlier numeral
classifier system.

[16] The Bauro gloss provides a clue as to why the Arosi cognate means ' betelpepper ': it is an additive to betelnut.

44    Malcolm Ross


2.7.1 Prefixes

Three kinds of prefix stand out in the history of some Oceanic plant names reconstructed in
this book:
     • prefixes reflecting POe *kayu 'tree, shrub' (§§7.1.1-7.1.2);
     • prefixes reflecting POe *puqu(n) 'base of1ree; source, origin' and *raun 'leaf (§7.1.3);
     • the POe prefix *mala- 'resembling' (§7.1.4);
The first two categories appear at first sight to be rather similar, but the evidence suggests
that they are derived from different POe constmctions and have different uses.

2.7.1.1 Reflexes of POe '·'kayu 'tree, shrub'

In several Western Oceanic languages some plant names begin with a prefix that means 'tree
or shrub'. Examples from three languages are given below, together with the protoforms
which they reflect. The three prefixes are Yabem ka-, Muyuw a- and Patpatar i-, each of
which is assumed to reflect POe *kayu 'tree'.Yabem ka- occurs on most tree names, Muyuw
a- on many, and Patpatar i- on just a few. 17

 NNG: Yabem ka-:
  ka-to?                     'mangrove'                 POe       *tOf)OR                 ch.6, § 3.1
  ka-dada                    'k.o. grassland shrub'     POe       *jajal                  ch.l3, §6.4
  ka-bwcf]                   'ironwood'                 PWOc      *bwana                  ch.7, §4.9
  ka-ma?                     'Cordyline sp.'            PWOc      *mwa(r,R)ep             ch.l3, §6.2
  ka-b:J?                    'k.o. mangrove tree'       PWOc      *haul                   ch.6, §2.1
 PT: Muyuw a-:
  a-mwakot                   'Dysoxylum spp.'           POe       *maqota                 ch.7, §4.5
  a-yayak                    'Myristica schleintzii'    POe       *(d,r )aRa(q,k )(a,i)   ch.7, §5.9
  a-gi-gaway                 'Ficus tinctoria'          POe       *qayawan                ch.10, §4
  a-nag                      'Cordia sp.'               PWOc      *nagi                   ch.5, §4.1.1
  a-simwal(gayas)            'Glochidion sp.'           PWOc      *''
                                                                   Jlm (w)(a,1')R         ch.8, §2.4
  a-kobwow                   'Macaranga tanarius'       PWOc      *kobo                   ch.7, §2.5

 MM: Patpatar i-:
  i-nas-nas                  'Tournefortia aegentea'    POe       *na[su]-nasu            ch.5, §4.1.5
  i-walas                    'Semecarpus forstenii'     POe       *[wa]lasi               ch.7, §6.1.6
  i-kon                      'H eritiera littoralis'    POe       *kayu (ni) qone         ch.6, §4.4

    A simple preliminary hypothesis is that these prefixes label their denotata as members of
the POe *kayu taxon, 'trees and shrubs' (ch.3, §4.2). But ifthis were so, we would expect to
find the prefix on every tree name in these languages and we would also expect to find prefixes
reflecting the other primary plant taxa, *waroc 'vine', *pali[s,j ]i 'grass', *talif}a 'mushroom'
and *l[i,u]mut 'moss, algae. Neither expectation is fulfilled.

[17] Other NNG languages show fragmentary evidence of :such a prefix, e.g. Mangap kaiwos 'edible greens' ( <
POe *wasa 'Abelmoschus manihot; green vegetables', ch.lO, §2.1) and Atui kamutuk 'ripe coconut' ( < POe
*matuqu 'ripe, brown coconut', ch.l2, §3.4). A number ofPT languages have similar prefixes, but apparently
not on all tree names, e.g. Molima ai-, Tawala ke-, Saliba kai-.

                                                   Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names         45


     Data from other Oceanic languages sugge:st an alternative hypothesis, namely that a reflex
of *kayu occurs in cases where the following root is in some way descriptive of the tree, i.e.
cases parallel to English 'flame tree ', 'rain tree ', 'coral tree ', 'bead tree' and 'canoe tree ',
all coinages naming trees of the Pacific. Among the data above Patpatar i-kon 'Heritiera
littoralis' is a strikingly obvious example of this. The cognate set below is presented in ch.6,
§4.4, and it is argued there that it reflects POe *kayu qone, which can be glossed 'beach tree'
(*qone 'beach' ).

<
POe *kayu qone 'H eritiera littoralis'
     MM: Patpatar        i-kon           'H eritiera littoralis'
     MM: Tolai           ka-kono         'H eritiera littoralis' (Record 1945)
     NCal: NyeHlyu       khon            'H eritiera littoralis'
>

    The two Oceanic languages for which the best information about plant names is avail-
able are theSE Solomonic language Kwara' ae and Wayan Fijian. 18 . Only a small number of
Wayan tree names begin with a reflex of POe *kayu. Pawley & Sayaba (2003) list the seven
entries below.
kaidam           'wild nutmeg, Myristica chartacea'        dam           'tum reddish '
kaidrisi         'wild nutmeg, Myristica chartacea'        drisi         'be reddish'
kailalalau       'thorny shrubs, Caesalpinia spp.'         !au           'be pricked, wounded'
kailo            'small trees, Diospyros spp. "            to            'be dark, secretive '
kaimooemooe      'mimosoid tree taxon '                    mooemooe      'have a short sleep'
kaimoku          'creeper, Mimosa pudica'
kaivula          'tree, probably Endospermum               vula          'moon'
                 macrophyllum'

    Significantly, for six out of seven the dictionary independently lists a meaning for the
root. For four the descriptive meaning is clear. Myristica chartacea has red sap: dam and drisi
mean respectively 'tum reddish' and 'be reddish' . The term kaimooemooe denotes Albizia
saman and Serianthes vitiensis, the leaflets of which fold together at night: mooemooe means
'have a sleep' . Endospermum macrophyllumEuphorbiaceae is a timber tree with pale yellow
wood, which perhaps accounts for the name kai-vula, literally 'moon tree ' .
    Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001) list thirty-six names of trees, big and not so big, beginning
with ?ai-. Most of these are explicitly descriptive, according to Kwa' ioloa and Burt. The first
eleven are listed below, and nine out of          are descriptive.

?aibu        'tree, Diospyros ebenum'
?aisarufi    'tree, Eugenia if.fusa'                       sarufi    'big tree, Litsea alba'
?aisali!Ja   'big tree, Aporosa papuana'                   ali!Ja    'ear'
?aisubu      'big tree, Pimeleodendron amboinicum'
?aiuluulu    'big tree, Vitex cofassus'                    uluulu    'bushy'
?aikame      'big tree, Putranjiva roxburgii               kame      'monitor lizard '
?aikusi      'big tree, Cryptocarya alleniana"             kusi      'greybird '

[18] For Kwara'ae see Henderson & Hancock (1988) and Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001), as well as Deck's 1934
grammar. For Wayan Fijian see Pawley & Sayaba (2003) and Gardner & Pawley (2006).

46    Malcolm Ross


?aika?o         'big tree, Xylopia papuana'                    ka?o      'bamboo '
?ailali         'Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer'          !ali      'kidney'
?airade         'trees, Dysoxylum' spp.                        rade      'stink'
?aininiu        'big tree, Horifieldia irya'                   niniu     'palm, Gulubia
                                                                         macrospadix'

    In two cases, ?aisarufi and ?aininiu, the tree is named for a resemblance to another plant.
The tree ?aisali!Ja, literally 'ear tree ', is so named because the leaf has 'ears' at its base. Two
reasons are given for the name 'monitor lizard tree', ?aikame: its bark is said to be like the
skin of a monitor lizard, and the monitor lizard is said to take refuge in this tree when it is
chased by a dog. The 'greybird tree ', ?aikusi, is so named because its leaf bloom is like the
feathers of a kusi bird.

    The most striking feature ofKwara' ae ?ai- is its distribution: it is never prefixed to a reflex
of a POe tree name. This implies that it is used productively for descriptive coinages and that
it does not cooccur with roots that are felt to be tree names in their own right.

    The inference to be drawn from these observations is that POe had a construction [*kayu
DESCRIPTOR] which was used for coining tree names. Kwara' ae and Fijian evidence suggests
that [*waRoc DESCRIPTOR] also occurred (*waRoc 'vine, creeper' > Wayan wa, Kwara' ae
kwalo), e.g. Wayan wa bitubitu 'creeper taxon of strong-stemmed vines', literally 'bamboo
creeper' ; Kwara' ae kwazo kakali 'wild passionfruit, Passiflorafoetida' , literally 'Hornstedtia
vine' , because its seeds resemble those of the plant Hornstedtia lycostoma. Like Kwara' ae
?ai-, Kwara' ae kwazo is used productively for new coinages like the name of the introduced
passionfruit.

2.7.1.2 POe '·'ka- in trisyllabic tree names

Among POe plant names trisyllables are rarer than disyllables, reflecting a pattern in POe
stems generally. The first syllable of a number of trisyllables is reconstructed as *ka- , with
perhaps greater than chance frequency, and it seems probable that at least some of these also
reflect the construction with *kayu posited above. Examples are:

POe         *kanawa(n)          'Cordia subcordata'      ch.5, §4.1.1
POe         *katita             'the putty nut'          ch.7, §5.10
POe         *kasiala            'a palm, Caryota sp. '   ch.7, §5.11.1
POe         *kalaka             'Planchonella sp. '      ch.7, §4.10
POe         *kapika             'Malay apple '           ch.11 , §3.7
PWOc        *kasuwai            'mango'                  ch.11 , §3.4
PWOc        *kapu(r,R)ik        'k.o. wild melon'        ch. l3 , §7.4
POe         *[ka]1JaRi          'canarium almond '       ch.11 , §2.1
POe         *[ka]timun          'cucurbit (generic)'     ch. l3 , §7.4

    The inference that *ka- was indeed a prefix is strengthened by the fact that in the last two
cases there are reflexes of forms with and without *ka-, i.e. *ka!JaRi vs *!JaRi, *katimun vs
*timun, implying either that *ka- was an omissible prefix, or that *ka- was part of the stem
but was reanalysed as an exemplar of the prefix and hence deleted.

                                                            Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names            47


    The Bola (MM) reflex of POe *[ka]!JaRi is ta!Jari, implying either replacement of one
(perceived) prefix by another or some form of wordplay. The Kairiru (NNG) reflex of *kalaka
is lalak, apparently a reduplication of suffixless *!aka. POe *[ja ]lato!J 'nettle tree ' has reflexes
with and without POe *ja-, and *ja- is replaced in PNCV by *ga- (ch.7, §6.3.2). Again this
implies prefix replacement or wordplay.

2.7.1.3 Reflexes of POe '·jJuqu(n) 'tree, shrub' and '"raun 'leaf'

In certain NCV languages tree names occur with one of two prefixes. In Tamambo, stems
naming trees and large bushes (but not other plant types) are regularly prefixed with vu-
'tree ', e.g. vu-mambue 'chestnut tree ', vu-niu 'coconut palm', vu-!Jai-!Jai 'canarium nut tree '
(Jauncey 1997). Vines, ferns , tubers and grasses are not prefixed with vu-, but Jauncey ob-
serves that 'some large kinds of bushes are marked as trees, but only if they do have a main
central trunk' . This supports her inference that vu- reflects POe *puqu(n) 'base of tree; source,
origin' (ch. 4, §2.1).

    Contrasting with vu- is the prefix ra- 'le:af of (ROOT)' , reflecting POe *raun 'leaf (ch.
4, §2.5), e.g. ra-yaviya 'leaf of Malay apple' , ra-yatabola 'leaf of Dracontomelon vitiense',
ra-moli 'leaf of citrus tree '.

    Both prefixes derive countable units. Thus [vu- ROOT] means 'a tree of the kind denoted by
ROOT' and [ra-ROOT] means 'a leaf of the kind of tree denoted by ROOT '. This interpretation
receives support from the fact that the prefixes also occur with xai 'tree, wood ' : vu-xai is 'a
tree ' , i.e. vu- denotes the unit and xai the nature of the unit. POe *puqu(n) meant 'base of
tree ' , but by metonymy acquired the sense 'a tree-like unit' .          (2002: 50) reports that
the Araki prefixes vi- and da- have similar functions to Tamambo vu- and ra- respectively.

    The corresponding forms in Fijian languages preserve largely unchanged the POe con-
struction from which Tamambo vu- and ra- are derived. In Wayan Fijian we find the con-
struction [NOUN ni NOUN]. In the broadest t1;:rms, the second noun serves as an attribute of
the first. Thus in a phrase like rau ni kulu 'a breadfruit leaf , kulu 'breadfruit' specifies the
type of rau 'leaf . For example:
    • vu 'base, bottom' in vu ni niu 'a coconut palm', vu ni kulu 'a breadfruit tree ', vu ni
       koka 'a Bischofia javanica tree ';
    • rau 'leaf in rau ni niu 'a coconut frond ', rau ni kulu 'a breadfruit leaf , rau ni koka 'a
       Bischofia javanica leaf ;
    • vua 'fruit' in vua ni kulu 'fruit of breadfruit tree' (i.e. 'a breadfruit' ).
Like Tamambo vu-, Wayan vu 'base, bottom' is used metonymically to refer to whole trees.
As a result, like Tamambo xai, Wayan kai '1tree, shrub' can serve as the second noun: vu ni
kai 'a tree/shrub ', rau ni kai 'a leaf , vua ni kai 'fruit of tree ' (i.e. 'a fruit ' ), tiki ni kai 'piece
ofwood, stick' (tiki 'part, piece ' ).

    Wayan, like other Fijian languages, here preserves a POe noun phrase construction which
had a variety offunctions. Sometimes called the 'associative ' construction in the literature of
Oceanic linguistics, this construction allowed one noun to be used as an attribute modifying
another. It had two forms, the choice between them depending on whether the first (head)
noun was a zero-valency noun or a monovalent noun. 19

[19] See vol.l, ch.2, §3 .2. A monovalent noun is one which may be directly possessed (Frantisek Lichtenberk
1985), i.e. may take possessor suffixes, e.g. *a qaqe-gu 'my leg'. Such nouns are usually semantically inalien-
able. All other nouns are zero-valency nouns and are indirectly possessed, i.e. the possessor suffix is attached
to a separate morpheme, e.g. *a na-gu Rumaq ' my house' (Lynch et al. 2002: 76-77).

48    Malcolm Ross

__pre__
            Table 2.1    Classifiers in SE Solomonic languages and Proto Polynesian
                         Kwara'ae    Kwaio      Lau      PPn       POe
     compact objects fa?i            fe?e                *foqi     *puaq qi          'fruit'
     people                                              *toko     *tau +? (ni)      'person, body'
     wooden objects                             ?ai                *kayu (ni)        'tree'
     'head'            gwa?i         gwe?e                         *pwatu qi         'head'
     flat objects      ?aha
     vertical objects ba?e
     containers        ta?e
     pieces of         afu            me?e
     units of class    ma?e           ma?e                         *mata qi?         'eye'
     leaves            ra?i           (ga?e)                       *raun qi          'leaf
     clumps           fi?i           fu?i       fi,fui   *fu(h)i   PEOc *pu qi (?)   'clump'



     In the first variant of the construction, the h1ead noun is a zero-valency noun:
      *a     polo   ni    niuR
      ART   juice of coconut
      'coconut water' (Lynch et al. 2002: 77)
   The second noun is a generic (non-specific) possessor, and thus an attribute, of the first
(head) noun.
   In the second variant the head noun was monovalent and in consequence ni was replaced
by *qi:
      *a     qaqe   qi   boRok
      ART    leg     of pig
      'a pig's leg' (Lynch et al. 2002: 76)
    In Fijian languages reflexes of *ni and *qi have been redistributed but the construction
otherwise survives unchanged. This construction has a complex history in Oceanic languages
(Hooper 1985, Ross 1998, 2001).

    We can infer, for example, that a particular fruit tree of the species Syzygium malaccense,
the Malay apple, would have been referred to as *(a) puqu(n) ni kapika (*a ARTICLE; kapika
Syzygium malaccense, ch.11, § 3. 7), that a leaf and a fruit of the species would have been
referred to respectively as *(a) raun ni kapika and *(a) puaq ni kapika or, if the head nouns
were directly possessed in POe, as *(a) raun qi kapika and *(a) puaq qi kapika. We can
also infer that Tamambo vu- and ra- and their cognates in other NCV languages reflect a
grammaticisation of this construction with considerable phonological attrition.

    This POe construction is also reflected in Kwara'ae plant naming, but in a rather different
way from NCV. Henderson & Hancock (1988:: 277) report that the name of a small tree is
optionally preceded by fa?i and the name of a plant that grows straight without branching
(and some that do branch) by fi?i, e.g.fa?i keto or keto 'Macaranga spp. ',fi?i arakai or arakai
'yam sp., Dioscorea pentaphylla'. Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001) translate.fi?i as 'clump', which
is probably more accurate than Henderson and Hancock's characterisation.

                                                            Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names              49


     The morphemesfa?i andfi?i belong to a set of classifiers described in Deck' s grammar
and used principally for counting ( 1934: 7-1 0). These are listed in Table 2.1 along with cor-
responding forms in closely related Kwaio and Lau, the Proto Polynesian classifiers recon-
structed in POLLEX, and the POe nouns from which they are derived.

     Several ofthe Kwara' ae classifiers share the form monosyllable + -?i or -?e. Their com-
mon form reflects their shared origin in the POe construction [MONOVALENT NOUN *qi NOUN]
described above.20 The likely POe usage from which the classifiers in Table 2.1 are derived
is illustrated below: 21
        *i-tolu     puaq qi pudi
        3sG-three fruit of banana
        'three bananas' ( = '(there are) three fruit of banana') (Lynch et al. 2002: 74)
        *i-tolu     puqun ni pudi
        3sG-three trunk       of banana
        'three banana trees' ( = '(there are) three trees of banana')

     Some classifiers did not combine with *qi, either because they remained disyllabic or be-
cause they were derived from zero-valency nouns which instead headed the POe construction
[ZERO-VALENCY NOUN *ni NOUN] .

     The classifier fa?i is described by Deck as being used to count round, compacted or heaped
units, but it seems to me that, like reflexes ofPMP *buaq/POc *puaq 'fruit' (ch.4, §2.8) in a
number of Austronesian languages, it is the default classifier for countable inanimate objects,
i.e. it is used when no other classifier is more appropriate.22

2.7.1.4 POe '·'mala- 'resembling'

Plant names which begin with the POe prefix *mala- 'resembling' occur quite frequently
in Oceanic languages. 23 This has evidently been an important means of forming new plant
names, most often by exploiting the resemblance of one tree to another. 24 As in the redu-
plicative process described below (§7.2), the tree denoted by a name with *mala- is generally
inferior in some way to the one denoted by the plain root.

    Examples from Nakanai (MM) are: mala-savula 'a plant, Ficus sp.' ( < savula 'the fruit
of a tree, candlenut, Aleurites moluccana' ); mala-sesege 'a plant, Acrostichum aureum' ( <
e-sesege 'small black crablike shellfish (PLURAL)') ; mala-viva-viva 'a wild shrub, Cleron-
dendron paniculatum, considered to be related toe-viva 'cultivated shrub with edible leaves,

[20] The grammaticisation of [MONOVALENT NOUN *qi] to form numeral classifiers had perhaps already occurred
in PEOc (Pawley 1972: 35- 36, 59), but it is possible that SE Solomonic and Polynesian forms represent inde-
pendent grammaticisations.

[21] The numeral was apparently a verb in this construction.

[22] Henderson & Hancock (1988 : 277) write thatfa?i means ' small tree' . This is not correct: it is used with small
trees because no other classifier is more appropriate.

[23] The matters discussed in this section and the next are treated in greater detail in Ross (2005).

[24] On SE Solomonic evidence *mala- is probably a grammaticisation of a verb *mala 'resemble' . For Kwaio
Keesing (1975) records mala- 'prefix of resemblanc(:' , mala- 'resemble '. For Arosi Fox (1978) records mara
' like, as; imitate ' (mara ia ' like him'). In these languages, the reflex of *mala- evidently remains productive,
but I have also found limited evidence of productivity in some languages outside the SE Solomonic group.

50   Malcolm Ross


Abelmoschus manihot'. Similar examples are found in other Meso-Melanesian languages:
Kara and Patpatar ofNew Ireland and Nehan ofNissan Island (Ross 2005).
   In Kwara'ae (SES), Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001) note the following instances:
     mala-l)ali     'Canarium asperum'                 I) ali   'canarium nut, C. indicum'
     mala-?ado?a    'Canarium harveyi'                 ?ado?a   'C. salomonense'
     mala-?afi?o    'Syzygium aqueum                   ?afi?o   'Malay apple, S. malaccense'
     mala-rufa      'Metrosideros parviflora'          rufa     'Syzygium lauterbachii'
     mala-?asai     'wild mango tree,                  ?asai    'mango tree, M. indica'
                      Mangifera mucronulata'
     mala-kona      'Burckella sorei'                  kona     'B. obovata'
     mala-dili      'a shrub, Dracaena angustifolia'   dili     'a shrub, Cordyline fruticosa'
     In Raga (NCV), Walsh (2004) notes mal-buliva 'unidentified Ficus sp.' ( < buliva 'Ficus
aspera'), mal-yaviya 'unidentified tree sp.' ( < yaviya 'Malay apple, Syzygium malaccen-
sis'), mal-walahi 'unidentified tree sp.' ( < walahi 'Semicarpus vitiensis') and mal-bei-bei
'unidentified Polyscias sp.' ( < bei 'Polyscias sp. ').
     Examples are also found in Fijian and Polynesian languages. Like reduplication as a pro-
cess in forming plant names, POe *mala- as a plant-name formative receives support from
evidence outside Oceanic which suggests that it is descended from a PMP form (Ross 2005).


2.7.2 Reduplication

A reduplicated form (usually with CVCV-) in Oceanic often encodes the perception that the
denotatum is inferior to or a diminutive of         denotatum of the unreduplicated form. In
the case of plant names, reduplication often means that the denotatum is a wild variety of
the cultivated plant denoted by the unreduplicated form. It seems likely that this reduplica-
tive derivational process occurred not only in POe, but at least as early as Proto Malaya-
Polynesian.

    Thus in Dobu (PT) Arnold (1931) cites rabia 'sago palm' vs rabi-rabia 'useless sago
palm', magi 'areca palm' vs magi-magi 'useless palm resembling areca palm', boro 'taro' vs
boro-boro 'wild taro', udi 'banana' vs udi-udi 'wild banana'.

    From closely related Kilivila (Trobriand Islands) Ralph Lawton (pers. comm.) provides
natu 'a tree with edible fruit like mango' (probably Burckella obovata- MR) vs gi-natu-natu
'a tree with inedible fruit', meku 'a hardwood tree used for carving' vs kai-meku-meku 'a
tree no good for carving' (kai 'tree'), seda 'a nut tree' vs seda-seda 'a tree without nuts'.

    The POe term ancestral to Dobu udi 'banana' was *pudi (ch.9, §3). Its reduplicated
form *pudi-pudi is a candidate for reconstruction with the meaning 'wild banana', at least in
PWOc.

<
PWOc *pudi-pudi 'wild banana' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Kove             puri-puri      'wild banana' (puri 'banana'; A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG:    Man gap   pin-pin            'wild banana' (pin 'banana')
  PT:     Dobu      udi-udi            'wild banana' (udi 'banana')
  PT:     Sud est   yudu-yudu          'wild banana seeds' (yudu 'banana')
  MM:     Ramoaaina udu-udu            'wild banana' (un 'banana')
>

                                                 Introducing Proto Oceanic plant names       51


     Other reduplicated forms in Ramoaaina are lama 'coconut tree or fruit ' vs lama-lama
'wild coconut tree or fruit ' and bara 'breadfruit' vs bara-bare 'wild breadfruit' . For nearby
Patpatar Peekel (1984) lists tuh 'sugarcane, Saccharum oificinarum' vs tuh-tuh 'wild sugar-
cane, Saccharum spontaneum', pulaka 'Polynesian arrowroot, T acca pinnatifida' vs pulaka-
pulaka 'wild varieties of Polynesian arrowroot', sier 'betelpepper vine, Piper bette' vs sier-
sier 'a vine, Piper fragile , P. singkojang or P. banksii' .

     Wayan Fijian has niu 'coconut palm' vs niu-niu 'cycad, Cycas circinalis' and vara 'ger-
minating coconut' vs vara-vara 'taxon offieshy herbs, particularly orchids' .

     Biggs (1991: 67-69) notes that reduplication was one of the devices used by the newly
arrived Eastern Polynesian ancestors of the Maori to name New Zealand plants which resem-
bled those they had known in their eastern Polynesian homeland. His examples include Proto
Polynesian *futi 'banana' vs Maori huti-huti 'sweet potato variety', Proto Polynesian *kawa
'Piper methysticum' vs Maori kawa-kawa 'Macropiper excelsum' and Proto Polynesian *koli
'tree or shrub with perfumed fruit ' vs Maori kori-kori 'a buttercup, Ranunculus insignis'.

     In Marovo (MM) several forms are found with a somewhat different semantic derivation.
Here the reduplicated base denotes a feature which somehow characterises the plant denoted
by the reduplicated form. Hence vose-vose 'a tree of the deep forest, used for making paddles
etc ' ( < vose 'paddle '), muta-muta 'a forest tree with sap the smell of which causes vomiting'
( < muta 'vomit' ), and ta-talo 'a sea plant with calcified leaves, Halimeda sp.' (apparently
 < talo 'taro ').



3 Ethnobotanical classification

3.1 Introduction

This chapter examines the ways in which Proto Oceanic (POe) speakers classified their
knowledge of plants through the reconstruction of semantic categories and their associated
labels for higher-order taxa and the hierarchical taxonomies they imply. Five POe terms
(*kayu 'tree, shrub', *waroc 'vine', *pali[s,j )'i 'grass', *tali!Ja 'mushroom' and *limut or *lu-
mut 'moss, algae') are clearly reconstructable based on reflexes in a wide range of Oceanic
languages, but the semantic scope of these 1cerms and other possible higher-order taxa that
denote types of plants not encompassed by these five taxa are more difficult to reconstruct. 1


3.2 Ethnobiological classifications

It seems to be a human universal to classify flora and fauna into what can be described as
hierarchies oflabelled taxa. For example, in Wayan Fijian bau !eke (dwarf bau), the name for
Planchonella gabari, a tree that grows in mid-altitude forests, is one offour kinds of bau, the
generic term that refers to the Burckella, Manilkara, Palaquium and Planchonella species
of the Sapotaceae family, woody trees used for making boats, chests and house posts. In
tum bau is one of200 or more kinds of kai, the generic name for trees and shrubs (Pawley &
Sayaba 2003). Thus kai, bau and bau !eke fonn part of a hierarchy of decreasing inclusiveness
of botanical terms in Wayan Fijian, schematised in Figure 3.1, and shown in more detail in
Figure 3.2 below.

     Not only is the hierarchical classification of flora and fauna an apparent human univer-
sal, but the striking similarities in ethnobiological taxonomies across different societies from
different parts of the world suggest the presence of universal or general principles of eth-
nobiological classification. Berlin (1992) argues that these general principles have a cogni-
tive explanation. He proposes that within the biological reality of a local habitat there are

[1] Thanks to Ian Scales for his help with describing the Nduke ethnobotanical classification and to Andrew
Pawley for his detailed comments on earlier versions of this chapter, including help with the description of the
Wayan Fijian system of classifying plants. Thanks also to Malcolm Ross for comments on earlier versions of
this chapter. This paper has also benefited from the comments and suggestions of various people at the Oceanic
conference in 2004 where an earlier version of the paper was presented.

54    Bethwyn Evans

__pre__
                                                      kai
                                                 tree, shrub
           doi                evo                bau                        miisei
                                                                                              (etc)
     Alphitonia spp.    Argusea argentea    Sapotaceae spp.          Pritchardia pacifica
            bau leke
                                    bau vudi                     bau som                bau levu
       Planchonella gabari
                                  'banana' bau                 'juicy' bau              'big' bau
          'dwarf bau
 Figure 3.1      The hierarchical structure of ethnobiological classifications, exemplified by
                                          Wayan Fijian


readily definable 'chunks ' that are recognised within folk taxonomies. That is, ethnobiolog-
ical taxonomies result from the human ability to recognise the single pattern of morpholog-
ical similarities within a local flora and fauna that stands out from all other patterns (Berlin
1992: 9, 13). Others, such as Diamond (1966) and Hunn (1982), argue that ethnobiological
classifications are more culturally specific and based on utilitarian principles. Perhaps more
realistically, Hays (1982: 93) proposes that ethnobiological classifications are 'products of a
number of complex interacting factors: biological discontinuities in nature, chance historical
events, 'utilitarian' human concerns, human cultural concerns in a broader sense, intellectual
curiosity, and constraints deriving from the nature of human perception and cognition' .

    One of the general principles of folk taxonomies proposed by Berlin et al. (1973), and
revised in Berlin ( 1992), is that they all comprise taxa distributed across no more than six
mutually exclusive ranks, such that the taxa within each rank show certain similarities to each
other and are separate from other taxa within the rank by perceptual gaps. The six ranks, in
order of decreasing inclusiveness are: kingdom, life-form, intermediate, generic, specific and
varietal, and it is often the case that only the life-form, generic and specific ranks within a
taxonomy will be named.

    Kingdom is a unique primary taxon, a single taxon that incorporates all taxa of lesser
rank. In terms of ethnobotanical classification such a category will tend to correspond to
the biological taxon plantae; the English term plant, in its broad sense. Life-form taxa are
not included in any taxa other than that of the kingdom and mark a small number of types
(between 5 and 10) based on the recognition of distinctive morphological structure. English
tree, grass and vine are life-form taxa. Folk generics will comprise the largest number of
taxa within a system, with some communities distinguishing as many as 500 to 600 generics.
The total will depend on how closely the community interacts with their plant environment
and on how rich the flora is in the region. These taxa denote categories that are considered
distinct on the basis of their shared morphological structure and ecological behaviour. The
majority of taxa within the generic rank are monotypic and form the lowest level within the
classification, and although most folk generics are included within a life-form rank, some are
unaffiliated, usually because of their morphological uniqueness or sometimes their economic
significance. Taxa of the specific rank are directly subordinate to the folk generics and are
usually few in number. Berlin (1992: 24) suggests that subgeneric taxa are in part motivated
by cultural considerations, and tend to refer mainly to domesticated plants and animals.

                                                                    Ethnobotanical classification         55


     Berlin (1992: 26-35) also argues that there are cross-cultural similarities in the ways in
which the taxa of each rank within a taxonomy are named. The kingdom rank, which Berlin
implies is a generally recognised one, will often be an implicit category without an overt
label. 2 If labelled it will often be with terms that are polysemous with some subordinate rank.
Life-form taxa are generally labelled by non-compound lexical units, although as with the
kingdom rank, they are sometimes covert (non-labelled) taxa. Folk generics are also labelled
by non-compound lexical units, in contrast to the subordinate specific rank which tends to
have compound labels. Berlin (1992: 29-30) notes two conditions under which taxa below the
level of folk generic may be labelled by non-compound lexical units. The first is when one
taxon of a folk generic is considered to be the prototype of the generic taxon, in which case
a primary name may be polysemous denoting both the generic and subgeneric taxa. Taxa
below the folk generic level may also be labelled with a primary name if they represent a
plant or animal of major cultural importance .

     These typical naming strategies can be demonstrated by the Wayan terms in Figure 3 .1.
The taxa kai 'tree, shrub' and bau 'Sapotacae species', apparently life-form and generic taxa
respectively, are labelled by non-compound lexical units, whereas the specific rank, for ex-
ample bau !eke 'Planchonella gabari', is labelled by a compound that incorporates the term
for the folk generic. As expected the kingdom level taxon in Wayan is not overtly labelled,
although kai 'tree, shrub ' is sometimes used to refer to all plants, most commonly in phrasal
expressions, such as vuniwai ni kai 'a doctor (i.e. scholar) of trees/plants, botanist' (Gard-
ner & Pawley 1992: 9). Wayan Fijian uvi is a non-compound term that labels a taxon below
the level of the folk generic. Most specifically uvi denotes a particular type of cultivated
yam, Dioscorea alata. However, as the most prestigious cultivar, this label also denotes the
more general taxon that encompasses the various species of Dioscorea (Gardner & Pawley
 1992: 12, 14).

     There are a number of ways in which the above description of ethnobiological taxonomies
is too simplistic. Gardner & Pawley (1992), for example, note a number of problems with
assigning taxa within the Wayan Fijian folk classification of plants to ranks within Berlin' s
(1992) model. As mentioned Wayan kai 'tree, shrub ' can be treated as a life-form category;
it denotes a highly distinctive morphotype, incorporates a large number of taxa of a lesser
rank, which are apparent folk generics with primary names, and it is named by a primary
(non-compound) lexeme. Wayan kai 'tree, shrub ' contrasts with two other major categories
i5 'grass ' and wa 'vine '. However, these two taxa behave somewhat differently from kai,
raising questions about the notion that they are of equivalent status within the system of clas-
sification. While i5 'grass' and wa 'vine' denote highly distinctive morphotypes and incor-
porate a reasonably large number of lesser ranked and heterogeneous taxa, sub taxa of these
categories often have binominallabels that include the generic labels i5 and wa (see §3). Al-
though Gardner & Pawley (1992: 13) conclude that i5 'grass' and wa 'vine ' can be analysed
as equivalent ranks to kai 'tree, shrub ', it is important to note that not all taxa representing
the same rank within a taxonomy will behave in the same way.

[2] Berlin (1992 : 190-194) presents both linguistic and behavioural evidence which can be used to determine the
presence of covert kingdom rank categories.

56   Bethwyn Evans


    Hunn (1982: 836), on the other hand, argues that the notion of taxonomic rank is 'a purely
formal distinction imposed by the analyst' and questions whether a taxonomic hierarchy
model is an appropriate way to describe and explain ethnobiological classification systems.
He presents a number of arguments against a model of folk biological classification based on
categories distinguished by general morphological characteristics and in favour of one based
more on the practical significance of the classification within the culture. Hunn presents data
that point to a cultural basis for life-form taxa in a number of languages. For example, in
Sahaptin (Columbia Plateau, United States) the boundaries of the taxa c'ic'k 'grass' and latit
'flower' are best defined in terms of cultural practices rather than morphological characteris-
tics alone. So c'ic'k 'grass ' encompasses all herbaceous plants (which are not latit 'flowers')
that are not otherwise named. All such named plants are considered useful in some way, and
so plants encompassed by c'ic'k 'grass' (or latit 'flower' ) are defined as non-useful and are
grouped together 'only by virtue of having been passed over in the process of cultural recog-
nition' (Hunn 1982: 834-5, 838). Thus Sahaptin c'ic'k 'grass' and latit 'flower' are residual
categories, a notion which is problematic within Berlin' s 1992 model of taxonomic ranks.

     Speakers of a language may also have more than one way of classifying plants. The
Wayan taxonomy described in most detail by Gardner & Pawley ( 1992) is one that conforms
to Berlin' s model of folk taxonomies based on general biological criteria. It is a taxonomy
which at each level recognises a number of apparently mutually exclusive categories based
primarily on morphological and ecological features . However, they also note the presence
of a second system of classification, based mainly on the uses and cultural status of plants,
which comprises categories that cut across those of the other taxonomy (Gardner & Paw-
ley 1992: 15, see also §3 for more details of the Wayan classification of plants). Randall
(1976) demonstrates the presence of apparently contradictory categories in folk taxonomies
in both English and Samal, a language of the Philippines. Following the expected hierarchy
of increasing inclusiveness, in Samal sagbot tahik 'seaweed' is classified as a type of sagbot
'non-woody vegetation', which in tum is a category of tumbutumbuhan 'vegetation' which
is a taxon of isi gumi 'flesh of the land'. But sagbot tahik 'seaweed' is not actually a kind of
land flesh (Randall1976: 546-547). Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001), on the other hand, describe the
higher levels of the ethnobotanical taxonomy ofKwara'ae (SE Solomonic) as a continuum
such that particular labelled folk generics or species may be referred to by different higher
level taxa under different circumstances.

    Hays (1976) goes further and notes that individual speakers of a language will not all
have the same knowledge and classification of plants, thus questioning what the description
of a folk taxonomy is really representing. Is it a description of a taxonomy comprising the
elements that are shared by the majority of speakers? Or a taxonomy comprising the com-
bination of elements from the majority of speakers? Hays demonstrates how amongst the
Ndumba speakers of the New Guinea Highlands the knowledge of plant names and classi-
fication is variably distributed. Hays has recorded 1,247 plant names in Ndumba, but only
970 items or 77.8% were known to all ten speakers within his sample. However, both these
figures are misleading in terms of the number of plant names known by individual speakers,
which are less than the combined lexicon of 1,24 7 and greater than the shared lexicon of
970 items (Hays 1976: 493-494). Interestingly, Hays found that the variation in individuals'
taxonomic models occurred in the middle of the hierarchy with the folk generic and species
ranks, while all speakers agreed on life-form and varietal ranks.

                                                             Ethnobotanical classification     57


    Nevertheless the following descriptions of ethnobotanical classifications in modem Oce-
anic languages are presented within Berlin' s ( 1992) model, as it provides a clear and con-
sistent way of presenting such classifications cross-linguistically. Also for the majority of
Oceanic languages the data is not available to me to present more realistic classifications
based on the range offactors noted by Hays (1982) as relevant, including the utilitarian fac-
tors described by Hunn (1982). The folk classification of plants for five Oceanic languages,
Wayan Fijian, Kwara' ae (SE Solomonic), Nduke (Meso-Melanesian), Arosi (SE Solomonic)
and Samoan (Polynesian), are described below. Gardner & Pawley ( 1992) present the classi-
fication of plants in Wayan following Berlin' s model and this description is closely followed
in the account of Wayan given below. For the other languages, however, the description of
a folk classification of plants within Berlin' s model is a reinterpretation of data presented
in other sources. Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001), a detailed catalogue of plant names and their
uses, also presents information on the traditional Kwara' ae classification system which is
described here in terms of the ranks within Berlin' s model. For Nduke, Arosi and Samoan
the data on ethnobotanical categories has been collated from dictionaries (Scales n.d. Fox
1978 and Milner 1966, respectively) and thus the reinterpretation ofthe data within Berlin' s
model entailed not only decisions on the rank of particular terms, but also on the hierarchy
itself and the inclusiveness of particular lexemes.

    In line with Hays' (1982: 93) range of explanations for folk taxonomies, the similar types
of categories found within ethnobotanical classifications in Oceanic languages are unsurpris-
ing for a number of reasons. First, many features of the botanical classifications in Oceanic
languages are those that would be predicted on the basis of what Berlin ( 1992) proposes
as universal tendencies. For example, the life-form taxa of many Oceanic languages distin-
guish between woody plants, climbing or creeping plants and grass-like plants, morpholog-
ical characteristics that form the basis of li£e-form taxa in many folk taxonomies (see also
Brown 1984). Further, since Oceanic languages are spoken within regions having more or
less similar flora and fauna, it is not unexpected that more specific details of ethnobotanical
classifications would be similar across Oceanic languages. Traditional Oceanic societies also
share similar foraging-horticultural lifestyles, and thus certain utilitarian aspects of botanical
folk taxonomies would also be expected to be similar. And finally, since all Oceanic lan-
guages are related, their systems of ethnobotanical classification might be expected to be
similar because they have a common origin. Cognate lexical labels across modem Oceanic
languages provide evidence for the common origin of certain taxa, and their reconstruction
for POe.

    Pawley (2000) describes differences in the stability of terms denoting different types of
taxa within ethnobiological classifications of Oceanic languages. He finds that the modifying
terms in binomial names for folk specifics ane much less stable than the terms for folk gener-
ics, and suggests that one explanation for this is that species show a wide range of distinctive
morphological and ecological characteristics from which one is picked out and named by
the modifier in a binomial label, and such modifiers are liable to be replaced by competing
labels (Pawley 2000:37). Higher-order generics (for example, life-form taxa) tend to be just
as stable in form as folk generics, but less stable in meaning. The reason for this, Pawley
(2000: 37) suggests, is that these higher-orde:r taxa form much less homogeneous categories
than lower-order taxa. They tend to consist of a disparate class of animals or plants which
are linked by relatively few distingushing characteristics, a situation which allows speakers
to extend or contract the boundaries of the class for certain purposes more easily. This can
be seen particularly with the descriptions of Kwara' ae ?ai and Wayan o below which have
both broad and narrow conventionalised meanings. 3 It is important to note that here, perhaps
more that in other semantic domains, the reconstructions represent only a part of the original
system and project a uniformity that is most likely unrealistic in a number of respects.

58   Bethwyn Evans


     Pawley (2000: 3-4) proposes that detailed reconstructions of lexical semantics are best
made using what can be called the 'terminological method of reconstruction'. Thus hypothe-
ses about the meanings of reconstructed lexical items are made within a particular semantic
field and with reference to semantic relationships between terms within a semantic domain on
the basis of the semantic field in modem Oceanic languages (see also Ross et al. 1998: 4--6).
In accord with the terminological method the following section examines the ethnobotanical
classifications found in a number of modem languages as a preliminary to reconstructing
botanical life-form taxa for POe. Section 4 presents cognate sets which suggest the recon-
struction of terms expected to have ocurred in POe. The meanings of the POe etyma recon-
structed are based on both the meanings of th1;: reflexes in daughter languages and on the
apparent contrasts within the POe systems of ethnobotanical classification.


3.3 Botanical taxonomies in modern Oceanic languages

Comparison of ethnobotanical classifications across modem Oceanic languages is rather dif-
ficult since there are few detailed descriptions of such systems. Nonetheless, from the de-
scriptions I've found and from dictionary searches it can be seen that a number of Oceanic
societies have similar, though by no means identical, types of ethnobotanical taxonomies.


3.3.1 Wayan Fijian

One of the better described Oceanic systems of ethnobotanical classification is that of Wayan
Fijian, as presented in Gardner & Pawley (1992) and Pawley & Sayaba (2003). Figure 3.2
shows schematically the major parts of the higher order botanical taxa in Wayan Fijian.

    As in many Oceanic languages, in Wayan there is no single lexical item that convention-
ally denotes all plants in contrast to non-plants. Rather this is a covert category which is occa-
sionally overtly expressed through the extension of the terms kai oro, which primarily denote
life-form categories (Gardner & Pawley 1992: 8-9). When used in a broad sense o denotes all
leafy plants including bamboos, trees, reeds and vines, but does not include mosses, lichens
and mushrooms. Wayan Fijian has general terrns tali!Ja 'generic, includes various kinds of
fungi, eg. mushrooms, bracket fungi' and lumelume 'algae, green slime which grows on reefs
and keels of boats, and in rivers and ponds'. However, there is no evidence in Wayan for a
taxon that is higher than the broad uses of kai and o which would encompass 'leafy plants' as
well as fungi, mosses and lichens (Andrew Pawley pers.comm.). The primary taxa of plants
in Wayan, and those which appear to represent Berlin's (1992) life-form rank, include three
major categories, kai, wa and o, as well as a number of smaller taxa. The taxon kai, defined

[3] Randall (1976) argues that taxonomic tree hierarchies are probably not stored directly in the memory, but
rather when necessary people can recall the perceptual characteristics of classes of flora and fauna to be used
for different purposes, including gardening, foraging, naming plants and creating classification schema. If this is
indeed the case, then a reason for changes in the meaning and scope of higher-order taxa within a classification
may also be the result of changes in speakers' views of what fits within a taxon each time it is used for a
particular purpose.

                                                                   Ethnobotanical classification       59

__pre__
                                                         kai and 6
                                                        leafy plants
                         kai                          wa                 6         diyi      balabala
                        trees                        vines             grasses    ferns      tree-ferns
                            I                                                I
                        I
          evo       bau       toutou              kori wagiri            I           I          I
                                                                      slla        6 bitu    6 tirau
       a coastal Sapotaceae Gyrocarpus          a fon:st a large
                                                                   Job's tears   bamboos tufty grass
         shrub      spp.    americanus            vint:   Iiane
         I              I              I
    bau leke        bau vudi       bau som                               bitu du         bitu gwa
   'dwarf' bau    'banana' bau    'juicy' bau                      indigenous bamboo European bamboo
                 Figure 3.2      A partial ethnobotanical taxonomy of Wayan Fijian


in the Wayan dictionary (Pawley & Sayaba 2003) as 'generic for trees and shrubs, and occa-
sionally low bushy plants', includes plants with vertical woody stems and branches. Palms
are classified as kai, but bamboos and bananas are not. The term wa is the generic for plants
which creep, scramble or climb above the ground, regardless of whether they have woody
stems or not (Gardner & Pawley 1992: 9). The term o is the generic for grasses and herbs, in-
cluding grasses and grass-like plants, as well as small flowering plants that lack woody stems
(herbs). Also classified as o are grass-like plants with woody stems such as bamboo, sugar-
cane and reeds. Wayan also has a couple of other primary taxa which cover much smaller
groups of named plants including di!Ji, generic for medium-sized terrestrial ferns and bal-
abala, generic for tree-ferns and sometimes also other large ferns . These taxa of plants in
Wayan Fijian are primarily defined by morphological and ecological characteristics of the
plants.
    kai 1. Wood 2. Generic for trees and shrubs (and occasionally low bushy plants) 3. Used in
         certain compounds as a generic for all plants.
    wa I. Generic for scrambling and climbing plants; creeper, vine. 2. Cord, rope, string.
    6 1. Generic term includes mostly non-bambusoid grasses and a few sedges and herbs. 2.
         Used as first element in compounds as a generic term for any leafy plant including
         bamboo, trees, reeds, and vines. Plants which are not o in sense 2 include mosses,
         lichens and mushrooms.
    diyi Generic for ferns, includes at least the: following two medium-sized terrestrial ferns:
         N ephrolepis biserrata (Davalliaceae) and Sphaerostephanos invisus (Thelypteridaceae).
    balabala Generic for tree ferns (Cythea species), sometimes extended to include other large
         ferns.

60   Bethwyn Evans


    Wayan kai 'tree, shrub ' encompasses about 200 named subtaxa which are again classified
on the basis of shared morphological and ecological features. It is the names of these subtaxa
which Wayan speakers tend to use when identifying particular plants (Gardner and Pawley
1992:1 0), and nearly all are folk generics. Generally the subtaxa of kai are the lowest-level of
classification and denote a particular species within a 'scientific' classification. For example,
evo, masei and toutou (defined below, Pawley & Sayaba 2003) are all subtaxa of kai which
are not further subclassified in Wayan.
     evo Argusia argentea (Boraginaceae). Large broad-leaved shrub of coastal sands, uncom-
          mon on Waya, young parts densely grey-silver hairy, small white flowers on curving
          branches, small black berries. Useful only for firewood.
     miisei Pritchardia pacifica (Arecaceae). A native fan-palm, cultivated for ornament around
           houses. The immature seeds are sometimes eaten by children.
     toutou Gyrocarpus americanus (Hernandiaceae). Tree of coastal slopes and rocky places
           inland, pale smooth bark, large oval or 5-lobed leaves with a rather strong bean-like
           odour, bunches of hanging 2-winged fruit. The soft wood is used for fires ; it is good
          for carving, and formerly was used to make ulatoka (inshore fishing raft platforms).
           A medicine of some kind is made from bark, for treating internal organs.

    There are also subtaxa of kai which are further subclassified into apparent folk specifics,
as can be seen from the dictionary entries given below for araro and doi (Pawley & Sayaba
2003).
     araro Premna sp. or spp. (P. serratifolia, P. protrusa) (Verbenaceae). Small coastal tree
          with entire leaves. Hard wood, much used for posts.
          araro alewa Premna serratifolia (Verbenaceae). Small bushy tree, occasional in scrub
               near coast. Leaves opposite, rounded-oblong to pointed and heart-shaped, flowers
               smallish, green-white, small dark fleshy fruit with a hard 4-chambered stone.
          araro taywane Premna protrusa. A larger tree than P. serratifolia, with flower parts
               more protruding, usually found inland. Hard wood, much used for posts.
     doi Generic for Alphitonia spp. (Rhamnaceae). Trees of open dryish forest.
          doi du Alphitonia zizyphoides. Tree of open dryish forest, bark and leaves smelling
               of oil-of-wintergreen when crushed, leaves white below, small white flowers,
               purplish fruit capsules.
          doi drii Alphitonia fran guloides. Uncommon tree of dryish slopes, leaves smaller and
               more pointed than those of A. zizyphoides.

    The names for folk specifics tend to be binominals which include the generic followed by
a modifier indicating some distinctive characteristic of the folk specific. For example, Wayan
distinguishes four kinds of bau 'Sapotaceae varieties' : bau !eke, literally 'dwarf bau', denotes
the smaller Planchonella garberi (Pouteria, cf.Wheatley 1992) species; bau levu, 'big bau'
which presumably denotes larger species of Sapotaceae; bau som, where som means 'to suck
or eat juicy, soluble or soft, moist foods ' , denotes the various Sapotaceae species which have
milky juice; and bau vudi, 'banana bau' which denotes varieties with elongated (i.e. banana-
like) fruit.
     bau Generic, includes species of Burckella, Manilkara, Palaquium andPlanchonella (Sapotaceae).
         Wood of some of these trees is used for boats, chests and house posts. Applied to the
         following species growing on Waya: 1. Burckella richii. large tree of low- to middle-
         altitudes, fruit green, fleshy, cylindrical, 4cm long; 2. Manilkara vitiensis, smallish
         tree, often in exposed situations on coastal slopes; 3. Palaquiumfijiense. smallish un-
         common tree of higher-altitude forest; 4. Planchonella garberi (Sapotaceae). 5. Plan-
         chonella grayana, a tree of coastal and inland forest, leaves larger and rounder than
         those of P. garberi.

                                                              Ethnobotanical classification      61


           bau leke Planchonella garberi (Sapot:aceae). Occasional in mid-altitude forest.
           bau levu One or more species of Sapotaceae, application of name not clear.
           bau som Name applied to various (perhaps most or all) members of the Sapotaceae,
                in reference to their milky juice.
           bau vudi Name applied on mainland to members of Sapotaceae (spp. of Burckella
                and Manilkara) , presumably because of their large and elongate fruits .

    The wa 'vine, creeper' taxon includes upwards of fifty subtaxa, virtually all of which oc-
cur either optionally or obligatorily with the generic wa as a classifier, for example, wa giri or
giri 'Entada phaseoloides' and wa bitubitu 'Smilaceae species ' (Gardner & Pawley 1992: 9,
12, Pawley & Sayaba 2003). Subtaxa of wa form the lowest level of classification, and the
majority denote a single species, as can be seen from the following dictionary definitions of
alu, kori and wa giri (Pawley & Sayaba 2003).
    alu Epipremnum pinnatum (Araceae). Common forest climber, the young plant with simple
          oval leaves, creeping on ground, the climbing adult with stout stems and large deeply-
          cut leaves. Leaves provide a medicine for stomach-ache.
    kori Mucuna gigantea (Leguminosae). Forest vine, broad bean-like leaves, flowers green,
          curved, broad dark pods at first with golden-brown irritant hairs, the discoid reddish
          grey seeds found in the drift.
    wii giri Entada phaseoloides (Leguminosae). Large high-climbing liane of inland forest
          with huge leathery pods, the large discoid dark red-brown seeds common in the drift.
           Stems are used to tie thatching.

   A small number of subtaxa of wa denote more than one species, but here too these sub taxa
appear to be the lowest level of named classification, as with rautolu and wa bitubitu.
    rautolu Generic, includes various wa and shrub taxa with 3-partite leaves. 1. Canavalia
           rosea . Common vine of sandy foreshore, flowers pink-purple, pods about 10 x 2 em, of-
           ten wrinkled. Leaves said to have been used after childbirth in some way. 2. Canavalia
            sericea. Local on sandy foreshore, the leaves silver-hairy. 3. Jasminum degeneri. 4.
            (obsolete) Melicope cucullata.
     wii bitubitu Generic, includes two species of strong-stemmed vines. 1. Smilax vitiensis (Smi-
            lacaceae). Forest vine, stems strong, round, sometimes with a few prickles, leaves oval
           to heart-shaped, leathery, with a pair of tendrils at the stem, red to black 1-3-seeded
           berries hanging together from a dangling stalk. Used for binding rafters and making
           fish-traps. 2. Geitonoplesium cymosum (Smilacaceae). Slender but strong vine of for-
           est understorey, small orange fruit with black glossy seeds.

    The Wayan term o is somewhat harder to describe. Typical a-type plants are non-bambus-
oid grasses and some sedges and herbs. However, o can also occur as the initial element in
names of reeds (o sina) and bamboo (o bitu), suggesting that o includes not only grasses and
herbs, but also woody-stemmed plants that are grass-like. There are about fifty subtaxa of
grasses, herbs, reeds and bamboos that are denoted by the life-form o (Gardner & Pawley
1992: 12), and most of these subtaxa appear to be the lowest level of classification, whether
denoting a single species as with o oa!JiOmJi and o tirau , or denoting several species as with
sHa.
       6 oayioayi Cymbopogon coloratus. Lemon grass. Stout tussocky uncommon grass of dry
            hill-sides. Leaves smell of lemon, and are used to make tea, and for padding under
            house mats.
62      Bethwyn Evans

__pre__
                                                  kai and 6
                                                 leafy plants
                                                         I
                                                        wa
                                                      vines
                                                    uvt 1
                                                         I.
                                               Dioscorea spp.
                kwaileni          sarau                uvi2          sarauoivi             tivoli
           D. pentaphylla      D. esculenta          D. alata       D. bulbifera       D. nummularia
                                                                             I                 uvi vurai
       yaoiyaoi                  keu                 uvi ayili         uvi balavu
                                                                                           an early-maturing
     a tasty variety       a curved variety     a round varkty        a long variety
                                                                                                variety
                                   I
            I                             I
                               damuni ni vuna                    damuni
        keudu
                               large keu with very             keu with
 the common keu
                               pronounced curve         chocolate-coloured skin
Figure 3.3          A partial plant taxonomy of Wayan Fijian, showing taxonomic depth of some
                                          cultivated food plants



       6 tirau Imperata cylindrica (Gramineae). Occasional grass of hillsides, tufts to about knee-
                height, flower heads silky, cylindrical. Used for thatching.
       slla Generic, includes two large-seeded grass,es (Gramineae). 1. Coix lacrymajobi. Job's
          tears. Coarse grass, fertile parts with tear--shaped blueish bony structures that enclose
          the true seeds. 2. Zea mays. Maize or sweet corn. Occasionally cultivated.

    As can be seen from Figure 3.2, the taxonomy of wild plants in Wayan Fijian is quite shal-
low, including four named levels. The naming of cultivated food plants, however, comprises
a deeper taxonomy. Thus while labels for particular species, and more commonly genera,
form the lowest level of classification among wild plants, for cultivated food plants there
will often be a number of named varieties below the folk species level. In fact, as shown by
Figure 3.3, if cultivated food plants are incorporated in the Wayan ethnobotanical classifi-
cation, the taxonomy includes at least six levels. Figure 3.3 shows this with a selection of
the named types ofyams. Yams are considered to be part of the wa 'vine ' taxon, one group
of which, the Dioscorea species are denoted by the generic term uvi. More specifically uvi
denotes Dioscorea a lata yams and encompasses a large number of named varieties, some of
which are themselves further subclassified. Thus keu 'a variety of uvi with a curved tuber'
has three varieites: damuni 'with chocolate-coloured skin'; damuni ni vuna 'large, with very
pronounced curve ' and keu du 'the common variety'.

                                                                   Ethnobotanical classification         63

                                         mayiti
                                       food plants



                     vuata                                         miirawa
                  tree crops                                     ground crops



                                                                       vudi                       tovu
           various trees that bear        l)iil)ii
                                                                 plantain, M usa       sugarcane, Saccharum
                edible fruit           root crops
                                                                  paradisiaca                officinale


          uvi                  doko                     kumala                     tavioka
         yam,                  taro,                   sweet potato,              cassava,
     Dioscorea spp.     Colocasia esculenta          Ipomoea batatas          Manihot esculenta

                Figure 3.4     A partial classification of foods in Wayan Fijian



   Gardner & Pawley (1992: 15) also note other categories of plants in Wayan which cut
across the taxonomy presented above. For example, while in one sense uvi 'Dioscorea species
of yams' would be categorised as wa 'vines', they can also be classified as marawa 'ground
crops, food plants other than trees'. The system of classification that includes marawa 'ground
crops' is partially shown in Figure 3.4. Marawa 'ground crops ' contrasts with vuata 'tree
crops, trees that bear edible fruit ', and encompasses not only root crops such as yam, taro
and sweet potato, but also other non-tree food crops such as melons, maize, sugarcane and
bananas (Gardner & Pawley 1992: 15), and thus is not a category that fits within the taxonomy
presented in Figure 3.2. This latter taxonomy is based primarily on the use and cultural status
of the plants, in contrast to the former taxonomy that is based mostly on the morphological
and ecological characteristics of the plants.


3.3.2 Kwara'ae

Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001) present a classification and description of ru bulao ki 'growing
things' in Kwara' ae, and this classification is shown schematically in Figure 3.5. Their clas-
sification is as much to present a catalogue ofKwara' ae plant names and uses as to describe
the Kwara' ae folk botanical taxonomy, and so descriptive names have been given to groups
of plants that are recognised as similar by Kwara' ae speakers, but that did not necessarily
form labelled taxa originally. In developing Figure 3.5 only those labels from Kwa' ioloa and
Burt which denote traditionally overt or covert categories have been included. Terms that
were traditionally used by Kwara'ae speakers are in bold and those that have been devel-
oped for Kwa'ioloa and Burt's book but appear to reflect originally covert categories are in
plain text. As can be seen the Kwara' ae folk 1caxonomy is quite shallow with only four or five
levels.

    The nominal use of bulao 'to grow' in ru bulao ki 'growing things' is a way to refer to
the kingdom category of all plants. Most growing things can also be denoted by ?ai 'tree ',
although more commonly ?ai has a narrower meaning. It is not clear if Kwara' ae speakers
traditionally recognised a category of all plants or if this category results from the need for
                                                                      ru bulao ki or 7ai 1
                                                                            plants

                                                                                       I
           niu
                                       I
                                     7ai2
                                                                      I
                                                                   laua
                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                  kwalo
                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                               niniu
                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                         .fi?i-ru
          coconut                    tree                          weeds                            vine                                                 clumps

                                       I
                    I         I                 I
                 baola     dilo              tatali          lai          ?asaka           ?ofa            ?abu        baibai          sao
                 banyan   dye tree          hibiscus     imperata         coleus           pepper     blood vine       cycad           sago




                                                                      I
                                                                   fa?u                             momole
                                                                                                           I                      I
                                                                                                                              takuma 1
                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                        ka?o
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                              flu
                                                             pandanus taxon                  Pandanus rubellus                 ferns                   bamboo                ginger

                                                                      I                                                           I
                                                         I
                                                    fa?u da?i
                                                                                   I
                                                                            fa?u tolo                kwa?e
                                                                                                           I                      I
                                                                                                                              takuma 2
                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                       gwau
                                                Pandanus sp.
                                                                                                                              rem,p.
 "':;::
 :;::
                                                                                   kwa?e bulu                     gwaea                  gwau bala             gwau bulu
-s                                                                                 dark tree fern              Cyathea alta               pale g'"au            dark g'"au
Q::)
                                                      Figure 3.5      A partial ethnobotanical taxonomy ofKwara'ae
""""
1.0
                                                                 Ethnobotanical classification       65


a way to talk of all plants when working on Kwai ' oloa and Burt' s book. Burt notes that the
classification of plants by Kwara' ae speakers is mainly for 'pragmatic and utilitarian pur-
poses' and that not all categories are mutually exclusive, but rather the categories overlap
in various ways (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 16). Kwara' ae speakers appear to classify the ma-
jority of ru bulao ki 'growing things ' into three categories: ?ai 'tree', ji?i-ru 'clumps' and
kwazo 'vines'. The distinguishing characteristics of ?ai plants are a hard trunk and a branch-
ing growth structure. Kwara' ae ?ai can also be used more broadly to denote palms, soft-cored
trees (eg. pawpaw), cordyline shrubs, gingers and ferns, which are not considered ?ai 'tree '
in the narrow sense of the word.fi?i-ru 'clumps' is the descriptive term, comprising the clas-
sifier.fi?i and the noun ru 'things', to denote plants that grow as a cluster of stems. Thusfi?i-ru
'clumps' encompasses plants like gingers, bamboos and ferns . The termfi?i-ru 'clumps' is
listed as a possible life-form taxon in Figure 3.5, although it is not entirely clear if this is a
traditional Kwara' ae taxon. However, Burt notes that this category of plants includes those
which can be indicated by the classifier fi?i , and so traditionally fi?i-ru 'clumps' may have
been a covert category. The term kwazo 'vines ' denotes plants with a climbing or creeping
growth structure, that is those plants used as cordage, a secondary meaning of kwazo. How-
ever, kwazo does not include the vines of edible tubers which are referred to as kwaza. While
they appear to form the basis of botanical classification in Kwara' ae, these three life-form
taxa are not mutually exclusive but rather se:em to be labelled groups along a continuum of
morphological characteristics, such that ?ai 'tree ' normally referring to plants with single
hard stems and branches may sometimes be used to refer to cordyline shrubs, which under
other circumstances may be referred to asji?i-ru 'clumps' .

     Palms do not fit within this three-way classification at all. As noted, palms may be referred
to as ?ai, but only in its broad sense that denotes all plants, and not in its more narrow sense.
Burt (Kwa' ioloa and Burt 2001: 17) describes palms as a covert category. K wara' ae speakers
generally refer to palms by the individual names, but recognise and readily acknowledge
the similarities amongst them. Palms may be described as ru ki gasi?i rebani 'things we tear
into fiat pieces', denoting their shared use for slatting and battens. This is a function that
characterises palms, but is not restricted to them. Kwa'ioloa and Burt (2001:186) use the
word niniu to label the category of palms, describing it as denoting kinds of trees (?ai) that
are similar in being tall and erect with leaves that emerge from a stave or mid-rib. Members of
the niniu taxon are not eaten or burnt as fuel, but are important in making platforms and walls
as well as battens for thatching, and their fronds are used for making brooms. The term niniu,
an apparent reduplication of niu 'coconut, Cocos nucifera' suggests that this category may
be based on resemblance of form and use of palms to niu 'coconut'. However, niu 'coconut'
itself is not referred to as niniu, probably bee: ause of its common occurrence and importance
(Kwa'ioloa and Burt 2001: 17).

     The other small category of plants that do1es not fit within any of the three major categories
is laua 'weeds'. It denotes small plants that 'can (and often should) be 'pulled up ' when they
grow in places like gardens ' (Kwa' ioloa and Burt 2001: 17). However, the term laua can also
be used to refer to seedlings or saplings.

66   Bethwyn Evans


     Kwara' ae ?ai 'tree ' is a large category with over 200 named types described in Kwa' ioloa
and Burt (200 1: 102-181). They classify ?ai into three groups: (i) ?ai doe ki 'big trees '; (ii) ?ai
ne?e kesi doe liu go?o ki 'trees which don' t get very big' ; and (iii) ?ai ne?e ti?iti?i go?o ki 'trees
which are just small' . These descriptive labels and the groups they represent appear to have
been established for the convenience ofKwa' ioloa and Burt' s (2001) book, and it is unclear if
they are in common usage amongst Kwara' ae speakers. Thus they are not listed in Figure 3.5.
The majority of the named types of ?ai appear to denote single scientific species and form the
lowest level of classification. However, a few are further subclassified. For example, !ami-
/ami 'archidendron, Archidendron oblongum' denotes two named varieties of Archidendron
oblongum that appear to be distinguished on the basis of morphological characteristics. The
small tree, ?ala?ala 'Codiaeum variegatum' also encompasses a number of named varieties
(Kwa' ioloa and Burt 2001:134, 175).
     lamilami A very big tree, archidendron, Archidendron oblongum .
          etana lamilami First archidendron. A big tree with brown trunk, wide leaves and a
              yellow flower that has an acute sme:ll, which grows in the lowlands and beside
              big bodies of water. Used for making canoes, cooking houses and for fuel.
          ruana lamilami Second arc hi dendron. A very big tree with buttress roots and a whiteish
              trunk that grows in swamps and mangroves. Used for building houses and for fuel.
     ?ala?ala Croton, Codiaeum variegatum species . A small tree that grows wild in the lowlands
           and by the sea and is planted around homes. Fronds used for decorating houses and
           people.
          ?ala?ala marako Green ?ala?ala, with really green leaves
          ?ala?ala sako Yellow ?ala?ala, with yellow leaves.
          ?ala?ala meo Red ?ala?ala, with red leaves
          ?ala?alafi?irodo Getting-dark ?ala?ala, with red and darkish leaves
          ?ala?ala ogamu Wants-to-break ?ala?ala, with a leaf that has breaking points.

    Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 193-219) divide . .n:?i-ru 'clumps' into a number of groups. The
groupfi?i-ru ne?e boeboena ka ofifafiafa?ina k'i 'clumps with leaf-tubes sheathing the stem'
encompasses plants like gingers, bananas and alpinas. That is, leafy plants with soft-core
stems that are sheathed with leaves. The group fi?i-ru ne?e kasiru?a ki 'clumps which are
sectioned ' is the descriptive term used for plants like bamboos and reeds that have stems
with nodes and can thus be cut into internode se:ctions. These two categories are not listed in
Figure 3.5 as they represent groups of plants that can be seen as similar in form and use, but
are apparently not categories traditionally recognised by Kwara' ae speakers. Kwa' ioloa &
Burt (200 1: 207 -213) use the term takuma to denote all ferns. Strictly speaking takuma refers
to Diplazium proliferum and other ferns are referred to by their individual names. However,
takuma would also be used to refer to a bundle of different edible ferns that included Diplaz-
ium proliferum, suggesting the traditional presence of a covert category at least. Thus takuma
as a category denotes Diplazium proliferum, an important fern, and other plants considered
similar in terms of morphological characteristics, namely a short dark bole, long curled-over
leaves and the lack of flowers or fruit. Kwa' ioloa and Burt (2001:212) also include in this
category kwa?e, the generic term for tree-ferns, which also denotes the 'proper' or important
tree-fern Cyathea lunulata. Tree-ferns are plants with leaves like ferns but trunks like trees.
The young leaf-shoots are eaten and the trunks used for building. The term kwa?e encompasses
a number of different named varieties.

    The category of fi?i-ru 'clumps' also includes a number of other plants that do not fit
into any of these three smaller categories, including the various types of named pandanus.
Within the scope of the book, Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 214) use the termfa?u for all types
of pandanus. However, it is not clear that this is a traditional Kwara' ae category, and so it is
not included in Figure 3.5.

                                                                          Ethnobotanical classification   67


    The term kwazo 'vines' appears to be a smaller taxon than either ?ai 'trees' or fi?i-ru
'clumps' , with only 38 subtaxa listed by Kwa' ioloa and Burt. A few of these are further
subclassified, but the majority are terminal taxa. It is not clear where grasses and grass-like
plants fit into the Kwara' ae classification, as they are not mentioned by Kwa' ioloa and Burt,
although one grass, lai 'I mperata conferta' is classified as laua 'weeds ' .


3.3.3 Arosi

The determination of ethnobotanical taxonomies in other modem Oceanic societies has been
based on dictionaries and lexicons and so the conclusions are less certain. However, such
dictionary searches do suggest that a number of other Oceanic languages, including Nduke
(Meso-Melanesian, Scales n.d.), Arosi (SE S:olomonic, Fox 1978) and Samoan (Polynesian,
Milner 1966), have systems of ethnobotanical classification that are not greatly different from
that ofKwara' ae and Wayan Fijian. Figure 3.6 shows schematically an Arosi taxonomy that
can be constructed from plant names in Fox' s dictionary.4

    Again, Arosi appears to have no form which denotes all plants in contrast to non-plants.
There is a general term which denotes uncultivated plants, namely hara 'a wild plant that
grows of itself, is not planted by man' . However, a contrasting term for cultivated plants was
not found. Arosi has at least four major life-fc)rm categories of plants which seem to be based
on morphological characteristics similar to those defining the life-form categories in Wayan
Fijian.
       ?ai A tree or plant having stems and branches; not used of fern, cycad, sago palm, coconut
            etc., but used of small plants, eg. balsam.
       rari Any herb or shrub which has no main stem, as flax.
       warawaro Vines.
       kaariya Mushroom, fungus .

    The important morphological characteristic of ?ai-type plants is apparently the presence
of a main stem and branching structure, but Fox (1978) notes that ?ai can also be used
'loosely' to refer to coconut palms and tree-ferns, plants which lack branching structure but
do have a distinct main stem. In contrast to Wayan, ?ai in Arosi does not in its primary mean-
ing include palms. The term rari denotes herbs and shrubs that lack a main stem, and since
'as flax ' is included in the definition, it is possible that this taxon may also include grass-like
plants. However, as I did not find an Arosi term that appeared to denote a life-form taxon en-
compassing grasses, in Figure 3.6 various names of grasses have been represented as primary
taxa. Plant types that could be labelled ferns and epiphytes in English also do not appear to be
included in any of the other four life-form categories and have been represented as primary
taxa.

    The subtaxa of the four major life-form categories generally form the lowest level within
the classification. However, of the 200 or more plant names which are encompassed by the
?ai taxa, there are at least five which are further subclassified. For example,
       hahe (mahe) A shrub, sweet-smelling and sacred, planted in hera, burial grounds, and used
            to decorate armlets; long glossy leaves, four sepals, petals and stamens in the white
            flowers, Euodia hortensis.

[4] It is not clear from the dictionary definitions which other plants would be classified as rari.

                                                                                                    (plants)

                                                                                                        I

          mwloo
          gmss sp.
                            ?ji
                           trees
                                                            rari
                                                      he.bs, rubs              __:c__
                                                                                warawaro
                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                       bwalisu
                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                      ep•phytes
                                                                                                                                        ruka1uka
                                                                                                                                       bmcken rem
                                                                                                                                                             khraalya
                                                                                                                                                         mus ooms an
                                                                                                                                                            ,--fu
                                                                                                                                                                - ng
                                                                                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                                                                                   l.._i_ _ _,



              daro         hata           hahe            kakano                                               bwarisu hau       bwarisu manu        kaarina ?ora        mataasi
            a littoral     a large        Evodia          a scen'ted         logo               hure           a small-leafed    a large-leafed     a phosphorescent      a \Vhite
                                                                           a creeper       Convolvulus sp.
               tree          tree        hortensis           herb                                                 epiphyte          epiphyte             fungus           fungus
                                             I
                     I               I                I                I
             hahe bora        hahe rei           hahe mora         boboro
             dark-leafed    small-leafed         pale-leafed       ahahe
                hahe           hahe                 hahe           variety

                                                                   Figure 3.6       Arosi ethnobotanical classification

 "':;::
 :;::

-s
Q::)

00
1.0
                                                                Ethnobotanical classification     69


          hahe bora with dark leaves
          hahe mora with pale leaves
          hahe rei with very small leaves
          boboro a species of hahe
    ?o?o A species of tree
          ?o?omaradaro variety used for gong making
          ?o?orawaraha another variety
          ?o?ori?i a variety used for making outrigger canoes
    Arosi warawaro 'vines' is another category that includes a large number of sub taxa, with
between 50 and 100 named items occurring in the dictionary. However, all ofthe subtaxa of
warawaro 'vines' form the lowest level of classification. The same is true of the sub taxa of
rari 'herbs and shrubs' and kaari!Ja 'mushrooms' .


3.3.4 Nduke

Nduke speakers distinguish seven primary taxa of plants. The term yae, primarily used to
denote 'trees' can also be used to refer to all plants (Scales n.d.).
    yae A general name for any kind of tree, bamboo, tree-ferns and other tall plants (except
        grass) that have woody stems.
    veve A general name for vines and creepers.
    heheu A general name for all kinds of grass (mostly Poaceae family) . Also used to refer to
         dicot herbs.
    lulumutu A general name for green algae that grows inside concrete tanks etc. and moss
         that grows on trees.
    roya A general name for plants which grow as brambles or thickets.
    havoro Flower, also used as the general name for flowering plants such as orchids.
    pureke A general name for mushrooms. Often refers to a kind of edible mushroom that
         grows on rotting sago palm trunks in swamps.

    The category yae 'tree' is the largest in Nduke with over 200 subtaxa. Many ofthese are
terminal taxa, but some are further subclassified. Unusually amongst Oceanic languages bam-
boos and tree-ferns are classified as yae        in Nduke. Veve 'vines and creepers' consists
of about 20 subtaxa and heheu 'grasses and dicot herbs' over 10, all of which are terminal
taxa. Roya, a 'general term for plants which grow as brambles and thickets,' refers more to
areas where the vegetation is characterised by thicket-type growth, than particular types of
plants that are characterised by thicket-type growth (Ian Scales, pers.comm.).


3.3.5 Samoan

In Samoan there appear to be at least six primary taxa of plants, as shown below with the
terms and definitions from Milner (1966). Samoan la?au , as well as being the generic term
which denotes 'trees', also appears to be used as the generic term for all plants and occurs as
the initial element in a number of plant names, including trees (la?au lopa 'red sandalwood,
Adenanthera species'), shrubs (la?aufailafa 'candelabra bush, Cassia species'), herbs (la?au
faimoti 'herb, Euphorbia species' ), and woody vines (la?au ?ie 'liane, Freycinetia species ').
    lii?au Plant, tree

70    Bethwyn Evans


     ?oli?ou General name given to large ferns
     pupuvao Tall grass, weeds
     mutia Grass
     fue General name given to creepers and lianas
     taliya Name given to several types of fungus, including Jew's-ear
     limu General name given to mosses, lichens, algae, and seaweeds


3.4 Botanical taxa in Proto Oceanic

A number of the primary botanical taxa that are: shared by many modern Oceanic languages
have cognate labels and are reconstructable for POe. Clearly reconstructable for POe are the
following five terms that denoted broad categories of plants, apparently based on particular
morphological characteristics.
     *kayu Tree or shrub -generic name for plants with woody stems and branches, probably
           not including palms or tree-ferns (§4.2).
     *waRoc Generic term for vines and creepers, plants with creeping or climbing growth struc-
           ture (§4.4).
     *pali[sj]i Generic term for grasses and other 'grass-like' plants (§4.5).
     *limut, *lumut Generic term for mosses, algae and seaweeds (§4.6).
     *taliya Generic term for mushrooms and fleshy fungi (§4.7).


3.4.1 Plant

A term denoting all plants is not reconstructable for POe. A number of modem Oceanic lan-
guages do have a general term for plants, but         terms appear to be post-POe innovations.
The list below gives the general terms for 'plant' in a number of languages, but none are
cognate. In NE Ambae and Anejom these gene:ral terms for 'plants' are nominalisations of
verbal terms. For example, NE Ambae rivurivu 'plant' is a reduplicated form of the transitive
verb rivu 'to plant s.t. ', and Anejom nita-awafi is formed from the verb awafi 'to plant' with
the instrumental prefix.

  Adm:      Lou            koe                   'plant (N)'
  NNG:      Poeng          kinkini!J             '(all) growing things; grass, tree '
  NNG:      Sissano (Arop) oraman                'plants (generic) '
  SES:      Bugotu         jou                   'to plant, a plant'
  NCV:      Ambae          rivurivu              'plant (N)'
  SV:       Anejom         nita-awafi            'plant, s.t. planted or to be planted'
  Mic:      Chuukese       patawar               'plant (general term), vegetation (uncultivated) ;
                                                 tree, bush, shrub, fern, grass '

    A Proto Micronesian form *fadoka 'planted thing, cultivated plants' is reconstructable
(Bender et al 2003:24), but appears to be restricted to meaning something that has been
planted rather than all plants. This form looks to be a nominalisation of a Proto Microne-
sian verbal *fadoki 'to plant'. 5

[5] Osmond (1998 : 132) reconstructs POe *asok ' plant in holes in the ground ', along with a Proto Western Oceanic
form *pasok-i- 'to plant sth (tubers etc)' that looks to be a form derived with the causative prefix *pa- . The
Micronesian forms below are likely cognates of Proto Western Oceanic *pasok-i- , suggesting the reconstruction
of *pasok-i- ' to plant something' for POe.

                                                                     Ethnobotanical classification          71

<
PMic *fadoka 'planted thing, cultivated plants '
  Mic:     Kiribati         aroka           'planted thing, cultivated plants'
  Mic:     Chuukese        f:Jta-           (fromj;Jto- 'planting' and a noun-forming suffix)
  Mic:     Woleaian        jato             'plant (N)'
  Mic:     Carolinian      j:Jto            'generic term for plants '
  Mic:     Ulithian        fa-faxu          'plant (N)'
>

<
PMic *fadok(-i) 'to plant (s.t.)'
  Mic:     Kosraean        yuki             'to plant (s.t.)'
  Mic:     Mokilese        p:Jtok           'to work at planting, to set in the ground (vT)'
  Mic:     Chuukese        j:Jtuki          'to plant (s.t.)'
  Mic:     Carolinian      j:Jtoxi          'to plant (s.t.)'
  Mic:     Woleaian        jatoxi           'to plant (s.t.)'
>

    If POe speakers did have a category that included all plants, then it appears to have been
covert. In this respect POe would have been like most modem Oceanic languages which
lack a general term 'plant'. Gardner and Pawley ( 1992:8-9) note that in Wayan the category
'plant' is best considered covert as no term has 'plant' as its central meaning. Wayan kai
'generic for trees and shrubs (and occasionally low bushy plants)' is sometimes used as a
generic for all plants. It is difficult to assert the presence or absence of a covert kingdom
category in POe. From meanings of reflexes in the daughter languages, it is not clear that the
general meaning of 'plants' can be reconstructed as a secondary meaning of terms denoting
other more specific categories of plants.


3.4.2 Tree

The most stable primary taxon label, in that it is reflected most widely amongst the mod-
em languages is *kayu, the general term for trees and other plants with woody stems and
branches. While some languages, like Bing, appear to have retained the original vowel-glide-
vowel sequence, the majority have simplified it in some way. These changes appear to have
occurred reasonably late in the development of this form, since there are closely related lan-
guages that show different types of changes. For example, *kayu is reflected as au in Mono,
but as yae in Nduke, two NW Solomonic languages, and as kau in Bauan and kai in Wayan,
two Fijian languages.

<
PMP *kayu 'tree, wood, timber' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *kayu 'tree or shrub: generic name for plants with woody stems and branches,
  probably not including palms or tree-ferns ; wood, stick'
  Adm: Loniu             ke           'tree, wood '
  Adm: Titan             kei          'firewood'
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) kai               'tree, wood '

     NNG:   Mangap         ke           'wood, tree (generic)'
     NNG:   Bing           ayuw         'firewood, fallen tree ready for firewood '
     NNG:   Takia          ai           'tree (generic), wood, firewood, plant'
     NNG:   Man am         ?ai          'tree, stick'
     NNG:   Sissano-Arop   ai           'tree, stick, wood '
     PT:    Motu           au           'tree, finewood '
     PT:    Iduna          ai           'tree, plant, wood, fire , light'
     PT:    Muyuw          kay          'tree '
     PT:    Misima         ai           'tree, wood'
     MM:    Patpatar       ai-          'tree species, followed by name of species'
     MM:    Mono           au           'tree '
     MM:    Nduke          yae          'general name for any kind of tree, bamboo,
                                        tree-ferns and other tall plants (except grass) that
                                        have woody stems'
     SES:   Gel a          yai          'branching plant, shrub or tree (i.e. balsam, croton
                                        and banyan are all yai, but not palm or coconut);
                                        wood, timber; firewood. '
     SES:   Bugotu         yai-         'tree, shaft of spear'
     SES:   Kwaio          ?ai          'branch, tree, stick; woody plant (shrub, tree)'
     SES:   Arosi          ?ai          'tree or plant with stem and branches; not used of a
                                        fern cycad, sago palm, coconut etc, but used of
                                        small plants, eg. balsam.'
     NCV:   NEAmbae        kai          'tree, wood'
     NCV:   Paamese        ai           'tree, wood, stick'
     NCV:   Nguna          na-kau       'tree '
     SV:    Anejom         inyai        'tree, wood, often used for relatively small bushes'
     NCal   Xaracuu        kwiiii       'wood, tree (general term)'
     Mic:   Kiribati       kai          'wood (in general), tree, plant, stick'
     Mic:   Chuukese       eyi-         'stick, tree, pole' (only used in compounds)
     Mic:   Ulithian       -X.PY        'counting classifier for trees'
     Fij:   Rotuman        ?ai          'tree, plant; wood, timber, piece of wood '
     Fij:   Bauan          kau          'tree, piece ofwood, stick'
     Fij:   Kadavu         kaou         'tree '
     Fij:   Wayan          kai          'wood; generic for trees and shrubs, and
                                        occasionally also low bushy plants; used in certain
                                        compounds as generic for all plants; piece of wood,
                                        stick'
     Pn:    Tongan         kau          'stalk, stem'
     Pn:    Tikopia        kau          'stalk, stem supporting bunch of fruit '
     Pn:    Samoan         ?au          'stalk; shaft, axle; handle '
     Pn:    Hawaiian       ?au          'handle, staff, stem, bone of lower arm or leg'
>

72     Bethwyn Evans


    Many reflexes of *kayu have additional senses besides 'tree or shrub ' , namely 'wood,
timber', 'stick' and 'firewood' . For the POe term both 'tree or shrub, general name for plants
with woody stems and branches' and 'wood, timber' are reconstructed as they seem to be the
best supported by the modem reflexes. The descriptions in a number of modem languages
suggest that woodiness and a main stem, along with branching growth structure are likely to
have been the salient characteristics of *kayu plants in POe.

                                                                      Ethnobotanical classification          73


    In Polynesian languages there has been a semantic shift and the reflexes of *kayu have the
meaning of stem or stalk. The Proto Polynesian term for tree or woody plant was *ra?akau.
This form was a compound of reflexes ofPOc *raqan 'branch' and *kayu 'tree ', supporting
the idea that the presence of a main stem and branching growth structure were the salient
features of this category.

<
PPn *ra?akau 'generic term for tree or woody plant; wood, timber; generic for all plants'
  (POLLEX)
  Pn:       Niuean          akau             'wood, tree '
  Pn:       Tongan          ?akau            'tree, plant; wood '
  Pn:       E Futunan       la?akau          'tree, bush, shrub ; wood, plant'
  Pn:       Rennellese      ga?akau          'tree, bush, shrub, log, stick'
  Pn:       Tikopia         rakau            'generic term for member of vegetable kingdom,
                                             usually woody plant, including tree, shrub, herb, but
                                             not applied to root vegetable or grass' .
  Pn:       Samoan          Ia? au           'plant, tree '
  Pn:       Hawaiian        Ia? au           'tree, plant, wood, timber'
  Pn:       Maori           rakau            'tree; wood, timber; stick'
>


3.4.3 Palms

Were palms considered *kayu? For the majority of reflexes of POe *kayu it is not clear from
the dictionary definitions whether palms are included within the category. For languages
where the definitions are explicit about the status of palms, in some cases palms are included
and in others not. For example, in Gela and Arosi (SE Solomonic) the categories denoted by
yai and ?ai, respectively, do not include palms. In Wayan Fijian, on the other hand, kai does
appear to encompass palms, with a number of different palms, including masei 'fan palm
(Pritchardia pacifica)' , niu 'coconut (Cocos nucifera)' and sof}a 'palm used for thatching
(Sagus vitiensis, Arecaceae)' defined as part of the kai taxon in Pawley and Sayaba (2003). In
a few languages palms appear to form labelled categories oftheir own. Thus Anejom nakwai
is the generic term for palms, though excluding coconuts (Lynch 200 1a: 173). In Samoan
niu is a 'general name for palms, especially the coconut palm' (Milner 1966: 156-7). Also in
Tongan there is evidence that niu 'coconut tree or fruit ' can be used to refer to palms more
generally since it optionally occurs as part of the name for fan palm (niu piu or piu 'fan
palm, Eupritchardia pacifica', Churchward 1959). Burt describes palms as a covert category
in Kwara' ae (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 17). That is, while Kwara' ae speakers recognise and
acknowledge the similarities amongst palms, they do not name such a category.[6]


[6] To solve the problem of explicitly describing such a covert category in their classification and description of
plants in Kwara'ae, Kwa' ioloa and Burt (2001: 17, 186) label palms as niniu 'kinds of trees that are similar in
being tall and erect and that are used for platforming and walling and for battens for thatching', but this does
not appear to be a conventional Kwara'ae usage.

74   Bethwyn Evans


    A term denoting palms as a category does not appear to be reconstructable for POe, and
it seems likely that palms were considered primary taxa within the system. But was 'palm'
a covert category for POe speakers, as it is today for Kwara' ae speakers? There is some evi-
dence for this in that terms for different parts of palms, such as *bala(p,b )a(q) 'palm branch'
and *[pa]paq[ a-] 'frond of palm' are reconstmctable, suggesting the recognition of a cate-
gory of plants with similar morphological characteristics (Malcolm Ross pers. comm.). It is
of course possible that the variation in the treatment of palms amongst the modem languages
refiectes variation in POe. Thus it could be that palms were considered *kayu 'tree, shrub'
by some speakers of POe and not others and in some circumstances and not others. Such a
situation would not be unexpected in the light of studies on ethnobotanical classifications.


3.4.4 Vine, creeper

POe *waRoc denoted plants with creeping or climbing growth structure, that is vines and
creepers. As reflexes of *waRoc in Gedaged and Wayan encompass lianes, or woody vines,
it seems likely that POe *waRoc did too. But further evidence that creepers and woody vines
were treated as part of the same taxon is needed.7

     The final consonant of the POe form is reconstructed as *c rather than *s, as although the
internal Oceanic evidence cannot disambiguate the choice between *c and *s, the external
evidence points to *c.

<
PMP *waRe} 'vine, creeper' (ACD)
POe *waRoc 'generic term for vines and creepers, plants with creeping or climbing growth
  structure; string, rope '
  Adm: Wuvulu            wao       'rope, vein, tendon'
  NNG: Bing              war       'vine (generic)'
  NNG: Gedaged           waj       'vine, liana'
  PT:     Iduna          waloga-   'vein'
  PT:     Misima         wal       'stem (of mustard vine) '
  PT:     Motu           varovaro  'vines of all kinds'
  MM: Nakanai            ualo      'cord, thread '
  MM: Roviana            aroso     'general name for vines and creepers'
  MM: Marovo             ado so    'vine, creeping or climbing, general term; climbing
                                   vines of Calamus types (lawyer cane)'
  SES: Gel a             alo       'a creeper, string'
  SES: Bugotu            aoo       'rope, cord, creeper'
  SES: Tolo              alo       'generic name for vines ; rope, string'
  SES: Lau               kwazo     'a vine of yam, sweet potato etc '
  SES: Kwaio             kwazo     'vine, string, rope '
  SES: 'Are ' are        waro      'a liana, string, rope '
  SES: Sa' a             walo      'a creeper, rope, string, line, vine '
  SES: Arosi             waro      'a piece of string, twine; prefix to names of
                                   creepers '
                         waro-waro 'vines'
   SV:      Anejom          inwau              'vine; rope (traditional), string; sinew, tendon, vein'
                                               Also occurs as initial element in a number of names
                                               ofvine species.
  Fij:      Bauan           wa                 'a vine, creeper of any kind ' (also occurs as initial
                                               element in a number of names ofvine species)
  Fij:      Wayan           wa                 'generic for scrambling and climbing plants;
                                               creeper, vine'
>

[7] A third meaning, 'vein' is found in reflexes from a number of subgroups (Adm, NNG, PT, NCV, SV, Mic).
Similar meanings are also found with some cognates in non-Oceanic Austronesian languages, such as Simalur
olor 'root, vein, tendon' (Blust ACD).

                                                                     Ethnobotanical classification          75


3.4.5 Grass

POe *pali[s,j ]i appears to have been the generic for plants lacking a main stem and with
narrow-leafed foliage, that is grasses and grass-like plants.

<
PMP *baliU,z)i '(type of ?) grass ' (Acn)
POe *pali[sj]i 'generic term for grasses and other grass-like plants ' Grace 1961: *palisi)
  Adm:      Nauna           pelic              'grass '
  Adm:      Pak             pen it             'grass '
  NNG:      Po eng          paili              'grass '
  NNG:      Tami            ijili              'grass '
  MM:       Lihir           palic              'grass '
  MM:       Ramoaaina       wali               'grass '
  MM:       Halia           halisi             'grass '
  SES:      Kwaio           falisi             'grassy undergrowth (generic) ; yam harvest'
  SES:      ' Are ' are     harisi             'grass, small clover'
  SES:      Sa' a           ha-halisi          'grass '
  SES:      Ulawa           halisi             'grass, onion (late use) '
  NCV:      Mota            valis              'a tall coarse grass; in recent use grass generally and
                                               onions'
  NCV: Mwotlap              vlih               'grass, turf (Gramineae), Thuarea involuta'
                                               (na-plih)
  NCV: Wusi                 palihi             'grass '
  NCV: Morouas              j3alisi            'grass '
  SV:  Sye                  (novl)ovsi         'buffalo grass (Stenotaphrum secundatum). (cf.
                                               novo! 'kind of plant; initial element for plant names
                                               including a grass, a fern and two tree-ferns')
  SV:       SWTanna          niJ-vhiliJk       'a kind of grass ' 8
  SV:       Anejom           ne-pces           'a kind of grass '
  Mic:      Chuukese        fetiri             'grass '
  Mic:      Carolinian      fitili, fetili     'grass '
  Mic:      Woleaian        fatili             'grass (Thuarea involuta or Stenotaphurum )'
  Pn:       Samoan          fall               'kind of grass(? Scirpodendron species)' 9
>

[8] SW Tanna n<Jvhibk ' grass' leads Lynch (200l c: 246) to reconstruct Proto Southern Vanuatu *na-(p, v)alijiy,
suggesting that the POe form was *pali[sJ]ik with a final *-k. However, there is no other evidence for POe *-k,
and so I do not reconstruct it.

[9] The loss of POe *s in Samoan is irregular.

76      Bethwyn Evans


     The cognate set given above reflects both POe *palisi and *paliji. In many languages POe
*sand *j have merged. However, Nauna, Pak, SW Tanna and Anejom reflect *j while Poeng,
Halia and the SE Solomonic languages reflect *s. In the Micronesian languages this form ap-
pears to have undergone metathesis of the two medial consonants, giving Proto Micronesian
*fadili 'generic term for grass '. A parallel change has occurred in the North New Guinea
languages. I take these metatheses to be independent innovations. 10

     The semantic scope of *pali[s,j]i in POe is not totally clear. Poeng, Kwaio, Chuukese
and Carolinian support the reconstruction of this term as a generic for grasses, but there are
also several languages where reflexes of *pali[ s,j ]i denote particular, but different, types of
grass, including Mota, Sye, Anejom, W oleaian and Samoan. Thus while a generic meaning
is reconstructed for POe *pali[ s,j ]i, it needs to be noted that it is not so well-supported as the
reconstruction of other life-form taxa.

     On the basis of modem languages it seems likely that POe would have had a primary
taxon that included at least grasses and/or herbs. In Wayan Fijian o usually denotes non-
bambusoid grasses, but does occur as the initial element in the names of reeds ( o sina) and
bamboos (o bitu). In Nduke heheu is glossed as 'grasses and dicot herbs' and appears to be
restricted to soft grasses, bamboos being part of the yae 'tree ' taxon. In other languages, like
Gumawana, Lau and Mokilese, apparently generic terms for grass are also glossed weeds.
Arosi, on the other hand, does not appear to have a generic term for grasses, although rari
'herbs and shrubs with no main stem' may encompass grasses as well. Such a category would
also appear to fit within the system of the other, better-supported, higher-order taxa of POe.
At this stage *pali[sj ]i appears to be the most likely label for such a category, but further
data and research may lead to different conclusions.


3.4.6 Moss, algae, seaweed

There also appears to have been variation in the POe term that denoted mosses, algae and
seaweeds, such that *lumut and *limut are both reconstructable. This life-form taxa seems to
have been characterised by the morphological characteristic of 'leaflessness', thus including
mosses, lichens and algae, and extended to other plants which share with algae the ecological
characteristics of growing underwater. That both forms were present in POe and many lower
level proto-languages can be seen from the way reflexes of each occur in quite closely re-
lated languages. For example, Tinputz and Roviana are both NW Solomonic languages, and
Tinputz has a form nimus reflecting POe *limut and Roviana a form lumu-lumutu , reflecting
POe *lumut. The same is true of the Micronesian languages, where W oleaian has a form
rumw11 and Mokilese a form limw. It is also possible that there were fully-reduplicated vari-
ants of these forms in POe, thus *limulimut and *lumulumut, since languages from a range
of subgroups have reduplicated reflexes.

    Evidence from non-Oceanic languages suggests that *lumut may have been the older
form meaning 'moss' . For example, Indonesian lumut '1. moss, lichen, bryophyte; 2. algae ' ,
Ilokano lumot 'moss, a slippery river seaweed; fine freshwater algae ', Tagalog lumot 'moss '.
Ilokano and Tagalog also have forms limu 'seaweed' without the final -t, and it is possible
that pre-POe *lumut 'moss' and *limu 'seaweed ' were conflated in POe.


[10] One language, Simalur (WMP), reflects Proto Malayo·-Polynesian *j, suggesting POe *c (Blust ACD) .

                                                       Ethnobotanicat classification   77

<
POe *tumut 'generic term for mosses, algaes and seaweeds' (Capelll943)
  Adm: Lou            tum             'seaweed; weed/grass growing in sea water'
  NNG: Manam          tumta           'moss'
  NNG: Mangap         tum             'algae, green slimy growth on trees, stones etc
                                      under water'
  PT:   Iduna         nunu(bwana)     'moss, slime on ground' (cf. bwana 'phlegm' )
  PT:   Muyuw         numt            'moss '
  MM: Nakanai         tumu            'moss, incl. Psilotum nudum, Microsorium species '
  MM: Nduke           tu-tumutu       'a general name for green algae that grows inside
                                      concrete tanks etc. and moss that grows on trees '
  MM: Roviana         tumu-tumutu 'a variety of moss; a marine alga'
  SES: Gel a          tumu            'moss, weeds on keel'
  SES: Bugotu         tumu(sa)        'moss '
  SES: Tolo           tumu-tumu       'moss '
  SES: Longgu         tumu-tumu       'moss '
  SES: Kwaio          tumu            'moss '
  SES: Lau            tu-tumu         'moss, lichen growth on ship' s keel'
  SES: 'Are ' are     rumu            'seaweed, moss on trees, used in ceremonial
                                      purification'
  SES: Sa' a          tumu(te)        'moss '
  NCV: Mota           tumu(ta)        'moss '
  NCV: NEAmbae tumu(si)               'moss '
  NCV: Malo           tum-tum         'moss, lichen; k.o. seaweed'
  NCV: Vures          tum-tum         'moss, seaweed, algae' (cf. motumtum 'soft, slow')
  NCV: Lewo           tum-tum         'slime in sea'
  NCV: Nguna          na-tumu-tumu 'moss, sponge, algae'
  NCV: Paamese        tum-tum         'moss, slime, seaweed'
  SV:   Anejom        ne-tomw         'moss, hanging algae '
  SV:   Lenakel       tam us          'moss, algae, seaweed'
  Mic: Woleaian       rumwu           'moss, seaweed; to be covered with moss, having
                                      moss'
  Mic: Carolinian tumw                'moss; seaweed variety that grows luxuriantly on
                                      rocks and sunken vessels and that breaks off and
                                      washes onto shore '
  Mic: Chuukese       rumw            'seaweed, moss; sea algae, scum'
  Fij:  Rotuman       tumu            'seaweed, moss'
>

<
POe *timut 'generic term for mosses, algaes and seaweeds ' (Biggs 1965: *timu)
  PT:   Misima         nimut        'moss'
  MM: Tolai            timut        (N) 'green colour or mossy growth on a canoe which
                                   has been standing in the water, seaweed, slime ' .
                                    (ADJ) 'green, blue, moss-green, colour of moss'
  MM: Ramoaaina timut                          slime; blue '
  MM: Kara (E)         timut        'tree moss '
  MM: Sursurunga milut              'moss' (metathesis)
  MM:     Tinputz     nimus           'moss'
  NCV:    Namakir     limi-lim        'seaweed, sea moss'
  SV:     SWTanna lam us              'moss, algae '
  Mic:    Mokilese    limw            'seaweed, sponge, moss '
  Mic:    Marshallese limw-limw       'moss'
  Fij:    Bauan       lumi            'moss, adhering to a rock or a boat; a kind of edible
                                      seaweed'
  Fij:    Wayan         lume-lume     'algae, green slime which grows on reefs and keels
                                      of boats, and in rivers and ponds'
  Pn:     Tongan        limu          'seaweed, moss, lichen'. ( cf. limu tahi 'seaweed ',
                                      limu ?uta ' moss, lichen' )
  Pn:     Samoan        limu          'general name given to mosses, lichens, algae, and
                                      seaweeds ' Also initial element in a number of plant
                                      names.
  Pn:     Hawaiian      limu          'a general name for all kinds of plants living under
                                      water, both fresh and salt, also algae living in any
                                      damp place in air, as on ground, on rocks and on
                                      other plants ; also mosses, liverworts, lichens'
  Pn:     Maori         rimu,         'seaweed; moss, mildew'
                        rimu-rimu
>

78 Bethwyn Evans



3.4.7 Mushrooms, fungi

In a number of modem Oceanic languages the life-form term for mushrooms and other fleshy
fungi is homophonous with the bodypart term 'ear'. For example, in Wayan Fijian tali!Ja de-
notes fleshy fungi such as mushrooms and bracket fungi as well as 'ear'. The polysemy of
'mushroom' and 'ear' is also found with non-cognate forms in a number of Oceanic lan-
guages, such that innovative terms can be seen to have both meanings. For example, in NE
Ambae gwero has both the meaning of 'ear' and of 'mushroom', and the same is true for the
Nakanai term gavusa '(a) mushroom (Agaricaceae); ear' . The cognate set for POe *tali!Ja
below supports the reconstruction of this same polysemy. That the 'mushroom' meaning is
not a post-POe innovation is supported by the f:1ct that reflexes of*tali!Ja occur in a number
oflanguages with 'mushroom' meanings, but not with the 'ear' meaning. Of the languages in
the cognate set below, the four North New Guinea languages, Nakanai, Gela and Tolo are all
languages where the reflex of *tali!Ja no longer has the meaning of 'ear', but has retained the
'mushroom' meaning. In Anejom in-tic!Ja-, the reflex of *tali!Ja, retains only the 'ear' mean-
ing, but the historical presence of the 'mushroom' meaning is indicated by the occurrence of
in-tic!Ja- in a number of compounds referring to mushrooms. In Rotuman, Bauan Fijian, a
number of Polynesian and Micronesian languages terms for mushrooms literally mean 'ear
of spirit/ghost'. The Rotuman form fali!Ja ne ?atua and the Tikopian form tari!Ja !Ja a tua
look to be cognate compounds, but in other languages the second part of the compound does
not appear to be cognate.

<
POe *tali!Ja 'generic term for mushrooms and fleshy fungi ; ear' (AcD)
  NNG: Poeng               tali!J              'mushroom'
  NNG: Dami                talik               'fungus, mushroom'
  NNG: Hote           tali!J                    'mushroom'
  NNG: Sissano (Arop) tel in                    'mushrooms, edible '
  MM: Nakanai         taliga                    'a small edible fungus, Lensites'
  SES: Gel a          tali!Ja                   'fungus, mushroom on mbiluma tree '
  SES: Tolo           tali!Je                   'generic name for mushrooms'
  SES: Kwaio          ali!Ja                    'mushroom'
  SES: Sa' a          ?ali!Je                   'mushroom, large fungus '
  NCV: Paamese        rali!Jen asu              'kind of fungus which grows on dry wood'
  SV:  Anejom         intic!Ja-                 'ear; initial element in a number of
                                                compounds denoting mushrooms '
                           intic!Ja-nyai        'mushroom (arboreal)' (cf. in-yai 'tree ' )
                           intic!Ja-pwohtan     'mushroom (terrestrial)'
                           intic!Ja-numu        'kind of edible mushroom' (cf. numu 'fish,
                                                marine creature')
  Mic:    Kiribati         tani!Janiba          'mushroom-like fungus growing on tree
                                                trunks. Myxomycetes: slime fungus '
  Mic:    Mortlockese      sa?li!Jananu         'mushroom (lit. ear of ghost)'
  Mic:    Woleaian         tari!Jeripal{        'mushroom' (underlying form:
                                                tali!Jali-pal{a)
  Mic:    Satawalese                            'kind oftoadstool'
  Fij:    Bauan           dali!Ja ni kalou      'fungus (lit: ear of spirit)'
  Fij:    Wayan            tali!Ja              'generic, includes various kinds of fleshy
                                                fungi, e.g. mushrooms, bracket fungi '
  Fij:    Rotuman         fali!Ja               'ear; toadstool or fungus ' . Also fali!Ja ne
                                                ?atua 'ear of dead/ghost'
  Pn:     Tongan           tali!Jeli!Ja         'fungus '
  Pn:     Tikopia          tari!Ja (!Ja atua)   'ears of spirits; traditional name applied to a
                                                tree fungus (unidentified)'
  Pn:     Samoan           tali!Ja              'Name given to several types of fungus ,
                                                including Jew's-ear'
  Pn:     Maori            tari!Ja (rakau)      'a fungus '
                           tari!Ja (o tiakiwai) 'Jew' s ear fungus, Auricularia
                                                auricula-judea' Also called tari!Ja kuri
                                                (dog), tari!Ja hakeke
>

                                                           Ethnobotanical classification      79



4.8 Other terms

The five primary taxa reconstructed here do not appear to have encompassed all plants that
would have been known to POe speakers, or indeed, for which terms can be reconstructed.
The contrast between POe *kayu 'plants with woody stems and branches ', *pali[s,j]i 'grass-
like plants' and *waRoc 'plants with creeping or climbing growth structure' leaves open the
question of how non-woody leafy plants, such as alpinias or gingers and the like, would have
been classified by a POe speaker. In Kwara'aefi?i-ru is the descriptive category that encom-
passes plants which grow as a cluster of stems, including plants like ginger with leaf-tubes
sheathing the stem, plants with sectioned stems like bamboo, plants like ferns and pandanus
(Kwa' ioloa and Burt 2001: 193-219). Hawaiian appears to have a similar category, pu which
denotes plants with a 'cluster of several stalks, as of banana, pandanus, kava; clump, as of
sugarcane' (Pukui & Elbert 1971: 317). In Marovo (Meso-Melanesian), there is a general
term rokoroko for leafy shrubs which may have a similar range, and in Anejom the term
nathancai, literally 'young tree ' is used to denote saplings and plants smaller than trees, in-
cluding ferns and crotons (Lynch 2001 a: 189). However, as far as I am aware there does not
appear to be a general term for non-woody          plants which can be reconstructed for POe.

80    Bethwyn Evans


    Ferns and tree-ferns are also plants which do not appear to fit into any of the life-form
categories reconstructed for POe. In Kwara' ae there is a general term for tree-ferns, kwa?e,
and a number of other Oceanic languages also have general terms that denote tree-ferns:

     Mic:   Kosraean     po             'kind of plant: tree fern '
     Fij:   Wayan        balabala       'generic for tree ferns (Cyathea spp.), sometimes
                                        extended to include other large ferns , such as Pteris
                                        tripartita . (i) Cyathea lunulata (Cyatheaceae); (ii)
                                        Cyathea sp., perhaps C. propinqua; (iii)
                                        Calochlaena straminea (Dicksoniaceae); (iv). Pteris
                                        tripartita (Adiantaceae).
     Pn:    Hawaiian     ?ama?u         'all species of an endemic genus of ferns (Sadleria) ,
                                        with trunk more or less evident'.

    From this it seems possible that tree-ferns formed a higher-order taxon in POe, but no
term appears to be reconstructable to back up such a hypothesis.
    In Wayan balabala 'tree-ferns' contrasts with another primary taxon di!Ji, a generic for at
least two types of terrestrial ferns. In Kwara' ae takuma 'Diplazium proliferum' is sometimes
used to denote a collection of edible ferns that includes Diplazium proliferum W oodsiaceae,
though more commonly ferns are referred to by their individual names. In other languages,
such as Iduna, Kosraean, Samoan and Hawaiian there are terms that may denote ferns more
generally, but it is not clear from the dictionary definitions. A generic term for ferns does not
appear to be reconstructable for POe, and it seems likely that the individual names of ferns
were considered to be primary taxa.

     PT:    Iduna        maiwa          '(edible) ferns '
     Mic:   Kosraean     fa             'a kind of plant: fern '
     Mic:   Mokilese     p w:Y          'fern'
     Fij:   Wayan         di!Ji         'generic lthat includes at least the following two
                                        medium-sized terrestrial ferns: N ephrolepis
                                        hiserrata (Davalliaceae), ladder fern, locally
                                        common in open mid-altitude forest;
                                        Sphaerostephanos invisus (Thelypteridaceae),
                                        common on dry grassy hillsides.
     Pn:    Samoan       ?oli?oll       '(i) general name given to large ferns ; (ii) tree-fern
                                        (Also phi/a species) '
     Pn:    Hawaiian      kupukupu      'general name for ferns on a single stem' (also name
                                        for sword fern)

                                                             Ethnobotanical classification    81


   POe *qauR appears to have been the general term for bamboos, with a number of more
specific terms also reconstructable ( ch.l3 , §3.1 ). Kwa' ioloa and Burt (2001) use the descrip-
tive termfi?i-ru 'clumps ' or 'plants which grow as several stems' , or more narrowly fi?i-ru
ne?e kasiru?a ki 'clumps which are sectioned' to represent a group of plants including bam-
boos which have similar growth patterns and uses. In Kwara' ae ka?o 'bamboo, Nastus ob-
tusus' is called 'proper bamboo', but this tenn does not appear to be used as a generic for all
bamboos (outside ofKwa' ioloa and Burt' s book). In Wayan Fijian, bamboos and reeds are
included in the i5 'grasses' taxon. But there is no clear evidence that bamboos were considered
part of any larger category that can be reconstructed for POe.

    It is unclear how pandanus were classified by POe speakers. In Kwara' ae, pandanus are
considered to be part of the larger category of fi?i-ru 'clumps' , whereas in Wayan Fijian
pandanus are considered part ofthe kai 'trees and shrubs' taxon. In ch.11 , §2.5 Ross recon-
structs a number of terms for different types of pandanus and suggests that *padran 'coastal
pandanus, Pandanus tectorius' was also the: generic term for pandanus. This is supported
most strongly by Carolinian where the reflex of *padran,             is the generic term for pan-
danus (Jackson & Marek 1991: 59). Thus it seems likely that pandanus in POe were either:
(a) usually known by their individual names and were unaffiliated primary taxa; or (b) were
classified as a distinct taxon known as *pad ran 'pandanus (generic)'.

    A number of modem Oceanic languages have a category of plants that is glossed as
'weeds', as can be seen from the following list. In a number of languages, including Po-
eng, Gela and Kwara' ae this category appears to denote plants growing unwanted in garden
plots. However, these categories do not have cognate labels. POe *talu(n) 'old garden, fallow
land, land returning to secondary growth' (vol.1 , ch.5, §3.2) may have denoted land with this
type of vegetation, but a term for the vegetation itself does not appear to be reconstructable.

  NNG:    Mapos Buang vav51J             'scrub, brush, weeds'
  NNG:    Labu        wahe               'weeds'
  NNG:    Poeng       kilanna            'weed; growing in old garden spot'
  NNG:    Takia       ud                 'weed, wild grass (generic)'
  NNG:    Mangap      momotia            'weed (N)'
  PT:     Iduna       boya               'smalll weeds'
  PT:     Gumawana    nauna              'weeds, grass'
  PT:     Misima      m wawin            'grass; weeds, to have weeds'
  MM:     Ramoaaina   bual               'full of weeds'
                      palep              'weeds, rubbish; in a plantation'
  MM:     Teop        subui              'weeds'
  SES:    Gel a       makiri             'smalll weeds in a garden'
  SES:    Lau         ?oro?oro           'weeds, grass, anything small growing up '
                      murua              'weeds and grass'
  SES:    Kwaio       fufulu             'weed, grass'
  SES:    Kwara' ae   !au a              'weeds, plants that can (and often should) be pulled
                                         out when they grow in places like gardens;
                                         seedlings, saplings'
  Mic:    Mokilese         tipwtipw      'grass, weeds; overgrown with grass or weeds,
                                         littered (with objects)'
  Mic:    Chuukese                                 plant, weed ' ( cf. W()rt 'bush, vegetation
                                         generally' , IJIJaW 'bad, ugly, unfitting, unsuitable')
  Pn:     Maori            otaota        'herbs in general, weeds, litter'

82   Bethwyn Evans


3.5 Conclusions

Figure 3.7 shows schematically a partial ethnobotanical classification for POe based on the
reconstruction of higher-order taxa presented          and plant names presented in chapters 5-
13. The kingdom rank category of 'plant' had no name in POe, and it is unclear if it was
an implicit category or not. POe appears to have had five major life-form taxa: *kayu 'tree
or shrub, generic name for plants with woody stems and branches, probably not including
palms or tree-ferns'; *waRoc 'general term for vines and creepers, plants with creeping or
climbing growth structure '; *pali[sj ]i 'generic term for grasses and possibly also sedges and
other grass-like plants'; *limut or *lumut              term for mosses, algaes and seaweeds ';
and *tali!Ja 'generic term for mushrooms and fleshy fungi '.

     Ross ' s reconstructions of plant names in chapters 5-13 suggest that the subtaxa ofthese
life-form categories tended to be terminal taxa. However, as folk generics tend to be more sta-
ble than specifics (Pawley this volume), it is not surprising that Ross is unable to reconstruct
many terms for specifics. Rather, it is likely that POe behaved like contemporary languages
in similar environmental and cultural contexts and had named folk taxa within many of the
folk generics that Ross reconstructs.

     In chapters 5-13 of this volume Ross reconstructs POe names for over 80 plants which
were most probably considered subtaxa of the *kayu 'tree, shrub' category. The major-
ity of these reconstructions, like *tuRi-tuRi 'candlenut tree, Aleurites moluccana', *putun
'Barringtonia asiatica', *aRu 'a shore tree, Casuarina equisetifolia', *paRu 'a small shore
tree, Hibiscus tiliaceus', *qatita 'the putty nut, Parinarium laurinum ' and *quRis 'Polynes-
ian plum, Spondias dulcis', denote a single 'scientific' species. A few reconstructions, such
as *kalaqabusi 'a shrub, Acalypha species' and *kapika 'Malay apple and rose apple, Eu-
genia species' denote two or more 'scientific' species, but still appear to have formed the
lowest level within the classification. It is only with a few types of *kayu 'tree, shrub ' that
Ross found evidence to reconstruct a folk generic that denoted several different species and
terms for folk species within the generic category. For example, the POe term *[ka]!JaRi was
polysemous, denoting both Canarium species in general and Canarium indicum in particu-
lar. A second POe term *qalip 'canarium almond, Canarium species' may have denoted a
separate species (ch.ll , §2.1). There are also a few types of *kayu 'tree, shrub ' for which
Ross can reconstruct more than one POe term, such as *fiofium and *kurat both denoting the
Indian Mulberry tree (Morinda citrifolia), which may reflect cases where POe speakers dis-
tinguished by name different varieties of a single 'scientific' species, but often the difference
between these terms in POe is not entirely clear.

    As expected from the comparative evidence, POe speakers appear to have had more levels
within the classification of food plants than with non-food plants. Thus, although it appears
that for most plants folk generics denoting a particular 'scientific' species formed the lowest
level of classification, for some food plants POe speakers appear to have used folk generics to
refer to a cluster of similar species and other more specific terms to denote single species. This
was seen above with *[ka]!JaRi 'canarium almond, Canarium indicum; Canarium species in
general', and can be seen in Figure 3. 7 with regards to types of yams. Alongside the terms
for specific species of yams, POe speakers also appear to have used *qupi 'greater yam,
Dioscorea alata ; yam (generic)' to denote yams in general (ch.9, §2.1). The fine grade dis-
tinctions made in the naming and classification of food plants in POe can perhaps best be
seen in the reconstructions of different types of edible *pudi 'bananas' (ch.9, §3), and sev-
eral different growth stages for *niuR 'coconut (generic)' (ch.12, §3). It is also likely that,
                                                                            (plants)

                                                                                I

      I                   I            I                *. I                    I                    I                  I                I        I


                                                                       n
*pali[sj]i           *kayu         *talil)a              lzmut,             *waRoc                *qauR          *padran 1         *piRu     *baibai(t)



                                                                                                               adrhe
                                                        *lumut
  grass               tree        mushroom                                   vine                 bamboo         pandanus         fan palm     cycad
                                                            1

          '                   '                    ' moss, agae                                            *
                                                                                                                  2
     *paRu              *[ka]l)aRi 1           *quRis               *tupa               *qupi 1             p
                                                                                                           Pandanus           Pandanus
Hibiscus tiliaceus   Canarium spp.         Spondias dulcis        Derris vine        yam (generic)                .          d   . .
                                                                                           I                 tectonu'       o om""'m"'


          *[ka]l)aRi2             *qalip                               *qupi2                *pwatik             *pwasepe                                 ;::;;
     Canarium indicum         a Canarium sp.                       Dioscorea alata     Dioscorea bulbifera      greater yam                               <:::>
                                                                                                                                                          g"
                                                                                                                                                          Ei
                                           Figure 3.7        Partial Proto Oceanic ethnobotanical classification                                          ;::;;
                                                                                                                                                          §'
                                                                                                                                                          ....._

                                                                                                                                                          >::>
                                                                                                                                                           ti
                                                                                                                                                          'S;
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                          ......
                                                                                                                                                          <S'
                                                                                                                                                          ;::;;

                                                                                                                                                          00
                                                                                                                                                          w
84   Bethwyn Evans


like Wayan Fijian speakers, POe speakers had other systems of classifying plants, such as in
terms of food categories. For example, Ross (ch.10, §2.1) reconstructs a term *wasa which
denoted Abelmoschus manihot, but also appears to have referred to the general category of
'edible greens'.
    The form *qauR 'bamboos (generic) ' (ch.13, §3.1) denoted an additional life-form taxon,
and *padran 'coastal pandanus, Pandanus tectorius' (ch.11 , §2.5.1) may have also been used
as a generic for all pandanus and thus been a life-form taxon. Palms may have formed a
covert category, but it seems likely that they were referred to by their individual names and
were unaffiliated to any other primary taxa. Ferns and tree-ferns also appear to have been
unaffiliated taxa.



4 Parts ofplants

4.1 Plant part terms in modern Oceanic languages

This chapter treats the terms used by Proto Oceanic (POe) speakers to denote parts of plants. 1
It complements the chapters that follow, which deal with plant names.

    For presentation purposes plant part temtinologies are divided into the following twelve
categories:
     • stems of woody plants
     • stems of non-woody plants, leaves and flowers
     • branches
     • roots
     • leaves
     • shoots, sprouts and suckers
     • flowers
     • fruits
     • seeds
     • outer coverings (bark, skin, husk)
     • sap or gum
     • thorns
    It is not claimed that such categories are necessarily salient in Oceanic societies, but they
are based to some extent on the lexical distinctions found in modem Oceanic languages. For
example, the category 'stems of woody plants' is based on the fact that a number of modem
Oceanic languages appear to have distinct terms for woody and non-woody plant stems (e.g.
Wayan gai 'woody stem or trunk of a shrub or tree' vs. kasa 'stem of a shrub or small plant,
leaf-stalk or petiole stem of a leaf, flower or fruit'). The single category 'outer coverings' ,
including meanings such as bark, skin or peel and husk, is based on the fact that many Oceanic

[1] I would like to thank several people who provided me with unpublished data while I was working on this
chapter: Catriona Hyslop and Armstrong Malau (Vures), Ralph Lawton (Kilivila), Anna Margetts (Saliba),
Ian Scales (Nduke) and David Walsh (Raga). Thanks also to Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross for detailed
comments on earlier versions of this chapter.

86   Bethwyn Evans


            Table 4.1    Some terms for parts ofthe coconut in Tikopia (Firth 1985)

 famatua      (N) Mature coconut frond. Used traditionally for important taboo sign on vere
              (Barringtonia) or voia (Canarium)       only by chiefs.
 faiJOIJO     (N) Coconut shell (used dried as a receptacle, grater, fuel to kindle fire, source of
              tattooing black pigment).
  kaka        (N) Fibre of base of coconut palm (not sago palm) used traditionally to make filter
              sheet in turmeric extraction, bag for flour etc.
 pararafa     (N) Stem of coconut frond, used traditionally to provide small stirrer for liquids, tiny
              mallet in tattooing; also used ritually in healing, smoothing temple sand etc.
 puru         (N) Husk, primarily of coconut (puru niu), since no other palm nut husk of economic
              interest; a fibrous dense material used as fuel or for domestic purposes such as clean-
              ing wooden bowls, but mainly as lashing or after special treatment, for preparation of
              sinnet cord.
 roro         (N) Bud or shoot of coconut palm near flower bract; masticated with lime and betel
              leaf when areca nut scarce. Also possibly other buds.
  sakilo      (N) Immature coconut leaf, of pale colour; used traditionally as decoration for some
              ritual objects, as a shelf in Resiake temple, or sign of taboo on orchard.
  taume       (N) Spathe or sheathing-leaf of flower of coconut palm; when dry used for fuel. Tra-
              ditionally supplied fire for the ritual dancing in Marae.



languages appear to have one term that denotes the outer covering of fruits (peel, rind) and
of stems (bark, soft leaf-like skin). For example, Wayan taba can refer to any sort of outer
covering or layer, including the bark of a tree and the rind or husk offruit. For each ofthese
twelve categories Oceanic languages tend to have a general term, though this is not the case
in all languages. Thus, while Oceanic languages tend to have a single term that can refer to
the outer covering of different parts of a plant, there are languages in which there is no such
general term, but rather several terms with a much narrower semantic range. For example,
Nduke has three specific terms: tutupa- 'bark of a tree ', poko- 'husk or covering of grain'
and pululu 'cover of fruit found on some palms ', but does not appear to have a general term
that refers to all outer coverings of plants. Languages which do have a general term for a
particular category may also have more specific terms within the category, as we see in the
cases ofWayan and Tikopia in §2.1.

    Modem Oceanic languages also tend to             terms for parts of particular types of plants,
usually those which are of some cultural or economic importance. Thus in Tikopia there is
a term,Jen, that denotes turmeric roots, reflecting their importance as the source of turmeric
pigment (re!Ja) that was traditionally used for the decoration of people and objects and was a
highly valued item (Firth 1985: 393-394). In Wayan there is a specific term for the sap of the
kauri tree, a tree which does not actually grow in Waya Island, but whose sap is important for
the glazes of pots (Pawley & Sayaba 2003). The cultural importance of the parts of particular
kinds of plants that are labelled in Oceanic languages can be shown by the names and uses
of different parts of the coconut palm in Tikopia, given in Table 4.1.

                                                                                           Parts of plants   87


                               Table 4.2        Terms for parts of banana plants

                          Lou          Iduna           Gel a                 Marshallese        Wayan
                          (Adm)        (PT)            (SES)                 (Mic)              (Fij)
   'banana' 1            mun           galo 3          vudi                                     vudi
   'hand'                SEt, turEt,   ihina                                 acEn               ba
                           top wan
   'bunch'               p:Jr:Jk       wa?aina         yaiyai, 4 yaibala 5   yac, wirwwerl/17
   'sucker, shoot'       supu          wakaiya         duli, nanal)a                            soba
   'last fruit' 2        I):JrEn                       kukuru, loiloki                          kalikali
   'flower'                            buhihi          lualako 6                                tido 6
   'stem, stalk'                       aina (galo)     iti, kulo             pcrwaiJs
   'leaf                               hineguli
   'stem sheath'                                                                                basili

   [1] Generic term.

   [2] This refers to terms which denote the small and poorly developed bananas at the bottom of a bunch.

   [3] Galo is the generic term for a number of different varieties of cooking banana.

   [4] Gela yaiyai denotes the good upper bananas of a bunch.

   [5] Gela yaibala denotes ten bunches of bananas.

   [6] Gela lualako and Wayan tido are verbal forms meaning 'to flower (of a banana)'.

   [7] Marshallese wir 111 wer 111 can also be used for bunches of coconuts.

   [8] Marshallese p£( 111GIJ denotes the stalk inside a bunch of bananas or breadfruit.



    As the same types of plants are often culturally and economically important in Oceanic so-
cieties, languages tend to have specific plant pant terms for the same types of plants, including
coconuts, bananas, pandanus, breadfruit, yams and taros. For example, (Ross 1996c: 183-185)
reconstructs *pudi as a general term for bananas in POe and a number of terms that denoted
particular types of bananas. Alongside terms for types of bananas modem Oceanic languages
tend to have terms for certain parts of the !banana plant, such as the suckers, flowers and
bunches of fruit as demonstrated by Table 4.2.

    The remainder of this chapter examines the terms for the parts of plants (both general
and specific) which can be reconstructed for POe. The chapter is organised using the twelve
categories listed above, each section beginning with some comments on the way in which
the semantic category is lexified in modem Oceanic languages. Data from three languages,
Nduke (MM), Wayan Fijian and Tikopia (Pn) are presented to demonstrate the lexical dis-
tinctions that occur in modem Oceanic languages, before the probable POe lexemes and their
meanings are discussed.

    In many modem Oceanic languages part-whole relationships, including the parts of plants,
are expressed by direct possessive constructions, such that the nominal denoting the part takes
the possessive suffixes. For example, in the Kwaio (SES) phrase !ama-na ?ai 'the tree's flow-
ers', the nominal lama- 'flower' takes the 3sG possessive suffix -na indexing the person and
number of the whole (i.e. the tree) of which it is a part (Keesing 1985: 107). Part-whole re-
lationships were probably expressed by the same type of construction in POe, and so many
of the nominals denoting the parts of plants that are reconstructed here would have often (or
always) occurred with a possessive suffix.

88      Bethwyn Evans




       Table 4.3     Terms for stems of woody plants in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 bokolo-       The scar marks left along the trunk of palm trees as the leaves fall off (e.g. of a coconut,
               sago palm, pandanus or betel nut) .
 buli-         Trunk of a tree.
 lolal)a-      Soft material inside a tree trunk, e.g. the pith of palms and pandanus, or soft heartwood
               of trees. Variant: lelel)a-.
     tUI)U-    A rotten or unsound knot in a tree.
 Wayan Fijian
 gai     I . Woody stem or trunk of a shrub or tree. cf. IJGU , tula; 2. Leg (esp. of a person).
 gina    I . Base of a tree-trunk or woody stem. cf. IJGU, gai, vu ; 2. Stump, remnant of trunk
         or stem cut off close to the ground; 3. Root stem, part of a plant growing below the
         ground.
 vu      I . Base, bottom; 2. Root, taproot, bulbous root. cf. waka fibrous root, tu root, bulb,
         tuber; 3. Origin, source, root; 4. Cause.
 golo    (obsolescent) I . Top section of a tree tnmk or of woody stem. contr. gau, main or cen-
         tre section of trunk; so, crown; vu, base; 2. Piece or section of bamboo or sugarcane,
         between one node and the next. syn. buku; 3. Branch of a tree. syn. tula.
 drau    I . Top end of a post, highest part of a tree. near syn. so; 2. Tip or blunt end of any
         long object. near syn. du .
 kai     1. Wood; 2. Generic for trees and shrubs (and occ. low bushy plants) ; 3. Used in
         certain compounds as a generic for all plants; 4. Piece of wood, stick; 5. (vulgar)
         Penis.
 buku    1. (sub. cord or thing that is tied.) Be tied in a knot, fastened by a knot, secured by
         a knob; 2. Be conspired against, be target of a plot or war plan. (N) 1. Knot, made
         by tying string, etc; 2. Knob, node, protruding lump in wood, bamboo, sugarcane; 3.
         Hinge, or place where two things are joined, as the hinge of a bivalve shellfish.
 doa     Heartwood, mature wood, the hardest and darkest wood in a mature tree. cf uto.
 IJGU    I . Middle part, central section; the main component, the body of a thing. contr. dolo,
         du, mua, ends, tip; dronu, bottom. 2. Trunk or body of an animal. contr. la, leg, ulu,
         head. 3. Piece or section.
 iso     Pith or soft tissue forming the centre of stems of certain plants, e.g. tree fern, pawpaw;
         the core of a pineapple.
 Tikopia
     tUI)i     (N) Knot in wood; also sharp stump left when shrub or tree cut down.
     ufJa.fi   (N) Firewood oflarge size, a big log or two to keep fire going.
     kanofi    (N) 1. Flesh; solid part, as sap wood of tree trunk.
     tai       (ADJ) Very hard; (N) Hard timber; heartwood.
     kual)a    (N) Waist; trunk (e.g. kual)a o te rakau trunk of tree).
     tafito    (N) 1. Base; basis; origin; reason; cause. Tafito o te rakau bole, base of trunk.
     uru       (N) 1. head; crest, top 2. principal part, source etc. Uru o te rakau bole, base of trunk.
                                                                                       Parts of plants      89


4.2 Plant part terms reconstructable for POe

The main stems or trunks of woody plants are of considerable importance within Oceanic
societies for the construction of houses and other buildings, and canoes, as well as for mak-
ing bowls and various other wooden artefacts. Ivens (1927: 149-150, 375-377) describes the
construction of and materials used for houses and canoes on Mala Island in the southeastern
Solomon Islands, including the use of two types of hardwood trees, hata and mamahu?e, for
the posts which support the ridgepole of houses, and another two hardwood trees, mawa and
iota, for the keel and hull of canoes, respectively. 2 Woods would have had equal importance
in POe society in building houses (vol.1, ch.3), and making household artefacts (vol.1, ch.4)
and canoes (vol.l, ch.7). For example, Green & Pawley (vol.l, ch.3, §3.4) reconstruct three
POe terms that referred to the posts of a house, namely *aRiRi 'post', *turu(s) 'post' and
*bou '(?) main bearers supporting raised floor or roof structure, or centre post supporting
ridge pole', and based on ethnographic evidence such posts were likely constructed from the
trunks of hardwood trees.

4.2.1 Stems of woody plants

Many modem Oceanic languages have a general term denoting the main stem or trunk of a
woody plant, alongside a number of more specific terms relating to woody stems (see Table
4.3). 3 For example, Wayan gai 'woody stem or trunk of a shrub or tree' and Tikopia kua!Ja
'waist; trunk' are general terms that are used alongside more specific ones denoting different
sections of a trunk, such as Wayan gina 'base of a tree-trunk or woody stem', !Jau 'main
or centre section of trunk' and golo 'top section of a tree trunk or a woody stem'. Modem
Oceanic languages typically also have terms for different kinds of wood within a tree trunk.
Thus Tikopia has a contrast between tai, the heartwood or dense inner wood of a tree trunk
and kanofi, the sapwood or soft outer layers of wood between the heartwood and the bark,
while Nduke has a specific term, lola!Ja, for the soft inner part of palms or pandanus.

    An apparently general term for tree trunk can be reconstructed for POe, namely *pata(!J).
It seems likely that POe *pata(!J) referred to the main stem of plants denoted by *kayu 'tree
or shrub'. As mentioned in ch.3 (§4.3) palms were probably not considered to be *kayu
by POe speakers, but there is no evidence to suggest that the trunks of palms were labelled
differently from the trunks of woody trees. Palm trunks seem to be of considerable importance
for construction in Oceanic societies, although the different properties of palm trunks and
trunks of woody plants may result in different uses.

[2] Ivens (1929) gives the following definitions of these Sa'a terms: hata 'a tree, hardwood, used to make gongs';
mamahu?e 'a tree, used for houseposts, quickset'; mawa 'a tree, red wood, strong smelling when chopped and
causing vomiting, used for keels of canoes'; and iota '1. canoe, 2. a village, metaphorically from canoe', 3. a
tree, used to make canoe planks'.

[3] In this and later tables Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia entries are from Scales (n.d.), Pawley & Sayaba (2003) and
Firth (1985) respectively. The orthographies of the original entries have been replaced by the one used here
(ch.1, §4.2).

<
PMP *bata!J 'stalk, trunk' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *pata(!J) 'tree trunk' (Bender et al. 2003)
  Adm: Lou              pata-           'stem or trunk'
    Adm:    Titan      patd-                   'trunk, stem'
    NCV:    Paamese    vat(i-ai)               'trunk oftree '
    Mic:    Chuukese   (nee- )fasaf}a4         'torso, tnmk'
    Mic:    Pulo-Annan oata, oata-             'tree trunk'
>

90    Bethwyn Evans

    POe *pata(f}) is not reflected widely in modem languages, and has been replaced by in-
novative forms in most.

   As mentioned above, Oceanic languages have terms denoting different parts of woody
stems. POe *puqu(n) denoted the base or bole of a woody stem and apparently also 'base'
more generally, including the base or source of other concrete items and more abstractly the
base, source or origin of stories etc. 5

<
PMP *puqun 'base of tree, source, origin' (Acn)
POe *puqu(n) 'base oftree; source, origin'
  NNG: Bing           fuw           'base oftree'
  NNG: Gedaged        fu-           'origin, beginning, start'
  NNG: Takia          fu-           'originator, host; base, as in base of a tree '
  NNG: Poeng          pu-           'base, source of s. t. '
  NNG: Wampur         hugu-         'base, trunk'
  PT:   Misima        pu-           '(tree) base; (axe, knife) end ; (its) cause'
  PT:   Muyuw          wowu-        '(tree) base '
  MM: Nakanai          vuhu-        '(tree) trunk or base, (leaf) stem, (pearl shell) base;
                                    first part of story; reason; origin (story of one ' s
                                    ancestry)'
  SES: Lau                          'stock, root, origin'
  SES: Sa' a          hu            'real, pem1anent'
  SES: Arosi          hu            'the beginning, origin'
  NCal: Xaracuu       pu            'source, origin, beginning' (cf. pu-kwaa 'base of
                                    tree')
  Fij:  Bauan          vu-          'bottom, basis, root (tuberous, bulbous)'
  Fij:  Wayan          vu           'root, tap root, bulbous root, base, basis, cause,
                                    origin'
  Fij:  Rotuman       hu            '(tree) lower end'
  Pn:   Tongan        fu?u          'complete tree or plant, as infu?u niu 'coconut
                                    tree' .'
  Pn:   Niuean       fo             'trunk of a tree near the root, base of a mast'
  Pn:   Tikopia       pu            'heart or centre of tree '
  Pn:   Marquesan pu                'tree trunk'
   Pn:       Hawaiian         pu              'tree, cluster of several stalks, as of banana,
                                              pandanus or kava; clump, as of sugar cane '
   Pn:       Rarotongan pu                    'stem; chief, root, origin, source, cause '
   Pn:       Maori      pu                    'bunch, bundle, anything growing in a bunch, tuft,
                                              heap, stack'
>

[4] With final-YJa this form apparently reflects POe final *-!7 and added -a, perhaps an inalienably possessed form
of the noun.

[5] Editor's note: Blust (AcD) also reconstructs *puna(YJ) ' source, origin' (including perhaps the headwaters of
a river), with Oceanic reflexes Tolai (MM) vuna ' beginning, cause, origin, source, basis, root, foundations,
Samoan, Hawaiian (Pn) puna 'spring, source (of water) '. Gumawana (PT) una- 'the base of something; the
source of something ' and Bugotu vune- ' base, bottom, beginning, origin, trunk of tree ' apparently also reflect
this term, but their glosses imply conflation with reflexes of POe *puqun .

                                                                                   Parts of plants     91


    Terms with similar meanings to Wayan !Jau 'main or centre section of trunk' and golo
'top section of a tree trunk or of woody stem' are more difficult to reconstruct. The POe body
part term *qulu- 'head' may also have denoted the top part or crown of a tree including the
foliage, as such a meaning is reflected in a few widely scattered modem languages. In some
Nuclear Polynesian languages the terms for the top of a tree look to be a reduced compound of
*kayu 'tree' and *qulu 'head' (e.g. Maori kauru 'the head of a tree' ). However, it is possible
that reflexes of *qulu denoting the crown of a tree represent the independent extension of
a body part term, particularly as in Takia (North New Guinea) many of the terms for plant
parts appear to primarily denote body parts. For example, ai pata-n 'sap (lit. tree its kidney)' ,
ai lua-n 'tree trunk (lit. tree its stomach)' and ai sukulo-n 'bark (lit. tree its skin)'. Of note,
however, is that in Takia the body part term 'head ' is gurma- , and the reflex of POe *qulu is
restricted to denoting the top part of a tree.

<
PMP *qulu 'head; top part; leader, chief; headwaters; handle of a bladed implement; prow
  of a boat; first, first-born ' (ACD)
POe *qulu- 'head, top part, hair ofthe head' (ACD)
   Adm:      Nauna             kulu-n (kry)   '(tree) 1cop'
   NNG:      Takia             ulu-           'top part of tree '
   Mic:      Puluwatese        wit            'budding leaf, top of tree '
   Fij:      Rotuman           ulu(!Ja)       '(tree, house, hill) top, summit' 6
   Pn:       Pukapukan         (ka)ulu        'the top or crown of a tree '
   Pn:       Tahitian          (a)uru         'top ends of small twigs or branches '
   Pn:       Maori             (ka)uru        'the head of a tree '
>

    A term specifically denoting the centre or main part of the trunk does not appear to be
reconstructable for POe.

    Terms for different types of wood or tissue in woody stems are present in Wayan, Tikopia
and Nduke. Tikopia tai denotes the heartwood or dense inner wood of a tree trunk and kanofi
the sapwood or soft outer layers of wood b1;:tween the heartwood and the bark. PPn terms
for these two types of wood are reconstructable. The cognate set of Tongan tahi, Samoan
taia and Tikopia tai attest to PPn *tahi '(heart)wood' (POLLEx), but I have not found any
non-Polynesian cognates ofthis form. A corresponding term for sapwood, *taitea, is recon-
structable for Proto Nuclear Polynesian only and is a compound of *tai 'heartwood ' and *tea
'white ' . Again I have found no non-Polynesian cognates.

[6] The origin of final -l)a is unclear.

<
PPn *tahi '(heart)wood' (POLLEX)
   Pn:       Tongan            tahi           'hard wood or solid centre of certain kinds of trees '
   Pn:       Tikopia           tai            (N) 'hard timber, heartwood '; (ADJ) 'very hard '
     Pn:   Samoan       taia          (N) 'hard core, heartwood of (exogenous) trees' ; (v)
                                      '(of exogenous trees) be mature enough to have a
                                      hard core !(and therefore be used as timber)'
>

92     Bethwyn Evans


<
Proto Nuclear Polynesian *tai-tea 'sapwood ' (*tea 'white' ) (POLLEX)
     Pn:   Tokelauan    taitea        'the soft white wood of Cordia subcordata'
     Pn:   Hawaiian     kaikea        'sap, sapwood'
     Pn:   Maori        taitea        'white wood, sapwood'
>

   POe *uso 'umbilical cord, core ' may also have been used to refer to the core or heartwood
ofwoody stems or tree trunks, as are its reflexes in Sa' a, Wayan and Maori.

<
POe *uso 'umbilical cord, core innards or digestive organs of a shellfish' (Pawley
  forthcoming)
  PT:    Motu         udo           'navel'
  SES: Lau            uto           'core '
  SES: Sa' a          uto           'pith, core '
  Fij:   Wayan        iso           'innards, especially digestive organs of mollusc ;
                                    pith, soft inner tissue of e.g. tree ferns ; core of
                                    certain fruits (e.g. pineapple, breadfruit)'
  Pn:    Tongan       uho           'navel, cord pith, core, core-like centre'
  Pn:    Maori        uho, iho      'umbilical cord, heart (of a tree), pith, inside, kernel'
>


4.2.2 Stems of non-woody plants

Modem Oceanic languages also often have one or two terms denoting the stems of leaves and
sometimes of non-woody plants. For example, Wayan baba 'stalk or stem of leaves of certain
large-leafed plants, especially stem of taro, banana, coconut' and Tikopia fa 'leaf stem of a
fleshy plant'. Table 4.4 gives the range of terms for non-woody stems that occur in Nduke,
Wayan and Tikopia.

    POe seems to have had a general term *baRa-baRa that referred to stems of non-woody
plants, like taros and bananas, and it seems likely that this form was also used to refer to the
soft stem of leaves. Other POe terms for non-woody stems are more specifically either fruit
stems or leaf stems and are described in the following sections.

    POe *baRa-baRa is a well-supported reconstruction, both in terms of form and meaning.
Since widespread reflexes are reduplicated, unreduplicated forms in Micronesian languages
are assumed to represent an innovation (see als:o discussion of POe *paRara in footnote 21
of ch.9, p.280).

<
POe *baRa-baRa 'stem or stalk of non-woody plants, such as taro and banana, probably
  also the soft stems of leaves'
  PT:     Tawala        palapala   '(plant) main stalk, stalk of mustard leaf eaten with
                                   betel nut'
  SES: Bauro            parapara   'stalk of flowers; involucre of flower, sheath of
                                   leaves'
  Mic: Kiribati         ba         'leaf, palm, midrib of palm leaf'
  Mic:       Kosraean    pee               'stalk (oftaro or banana), stem'
  Mic:       Marshallese pap               'coconut frond , midrib of frond '
  Mic:       Satawalese -pee               'counting classifier for coconut or taro leaves'
  Mic:       Woleaian    -pa               'numeral classifier for chained or strung objects
                                           such as palm fronds, leis, shell belts'
  Mic:       Ponapean      pa              'leaf of any large-leaved plant such as taro '
  Fij:       Bauan         ba              'stalk oftaro leaves (only)'
  Fij:       Wayan         baba            'leaf-stalk (petiole) or stem of certan
                                           single-stemmed plants whose leaves unfold from
                                           the stalk, especially taro, banana and leaf-stalk of
                                           palms'
  Fij:       Yasawa        baba            'stalk or stem of certain large-leafed plants,
                                           especially taro, banana, coconut.'
>

                                                                                   Parts of plants        93



  Table 4.4      Terms for stems of non-woody plants in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 kamu-         The rings in the stem of bamboo, palms and grasses (like sugar-cane).
 soyoto        The stem of a flower.
 bayutu-       Stem that supports the flowers , and later the fruit, of the coconut.
 kilikava-     Stem of coconut frond, especially at thick end, used e.g to lay on ground to yotolo
               mola (push up a canoe at landing).
 Wayan Fijian
 kasa     Stem of a shrub or small plant, leaf-stalk or petiole stem of a leaf, flower or fruit; new
          shoots or suckers growing out from trunk or branch of a tree or from main stem of a
          banana plant. near syn. gau, rovuvaci.
 baba     Stalk or stem of leaves of certain large-leafed plants, esp. stem of taro, banana, co-
          conut.
 balotu   A coconut leaf stalk stripped of its leaflets; the stem of the coconut leaf. Used for
          firewood and torches.
 Tikopia
 kau           (N) Stalk, stem supporting bunch of fruit, e.g. bananas, handle of implement.
 fa            (N) Leaf stem of a fleshy plant.
 safe          (N) Flower stem or fruiting bunch of banana. Tao ma tona safe (banana fruit) bake it
               in the oven on its stem (ritual procedure).
 pararafa      (N) Stem of coconut frond, used traditionally to provide small stirrer for liquids, tiny
               mallet in tattooing; also used ritually in healing, smoothing temple sand etc.





4.2.3 Branches

Table 4.5 gives terms for branches in Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia. Nduke has a term kapaha-
that denotes branches of any plant, alongside a couple of more specific terms, VUIJU- 'a branch
or stem bearing nut clusters or fruit ' and buru- 'the fruiting branch (VUIJU-) of coconuts or

94    Bethwyn Evans


              Table 4.5     Terms for branches in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 kapaha-       A branch of a plant.
 buru-         The VUIJU (fruiting branch) of pevu (coconut) or koke or haoro (the canarium trees),
               that is plentiful, producing many nuts.
 VUIJU-        A branch or stem bearing fruit, e.g. a bunch of coconuts or betel nut or bananas still
               attached to the stalk. Particularly this means a cut-down stem that has fruit attached.
 Wayan Fijian
 tula      1. Branch or twig of a woody tree; 2 . An alternative way of doing or saying s.t. , a
           paraphrase or different method or expression.
 kasalu    1. Small branch, minor branch of a tree:. contr. tula; 2. (metaph.) Person of no account,
           of low rank; unimportant person.
 Tikopia
 mal) a        1. (N) Segmentary division in generaL, e.g. subsidiary tuber or corms in root vegeta-
               bles, 2. branch (of tree, coral etc), 3. offshoot, bifurcation, 4. abstract sense of variation
               (e.g. in language).
 ra            (N) Stem; twig; minor branch of tree, as opp. to maiJa, a major branch.
 potunea       (N) A small stick or branch.
 kal)okal)o    (N) Twigs; small dead branches.



canarium trees'. Wayan and Tikopia, on the other hand, have terms for large major branches
and smaller minor branches. Thus Tikopia ma!Ja 'major branch' versus ra 'stem, twig, minor
branch' . A number of different terms for branches are also reconstructable for POe, but the
functional differences between them are not so clear.

     Three apparently different, but quite similar, forms can be reconstructed with the meaning
'branch' for POe, namely *raqan, *rako(q) and *raga(q). On the basis of the modem reflexes
it is not clear what the functional differences among these terms would have been. Each of
these POe forms reflects an older Austronesian term, but the differences in meaning among
them at earlier stages are also unclear.

     Proto Austronesian *daqan 'branch', continued as POe *raqan 'branch (of a tree)' , is
the most widely reflected 'branch' term in Oceanic languages. POe *raqan was probably the
general term for branches of trees and other plants as the meanings in modem languages
denote both major branches of trees and small branches or twigs.

<
PAn *daqan 'branch' (Blust 1993)
POe *raqan 'branch of tree or other plant' (Ross 1988)
  Adm: Drehet         (i)"ra       'branch'
  PT:  Misima         Ia           '(tree) branch'
  PT:  Motu           raya         'fruit-bearing palm branch'
  MM: Siar            rakan        '(tree) branch'
  MM: Sursurunga riJkiJn           '(tree) branch'
  SES: Arosi          ra-na        '(tree) branch'
PNCV *raa, *ra-ra- 'branch' (Clark 1996b)
  NCV: Raga           ra-ra-       'branch'
    NCV:   Kiai            ra-ra-           'wing'
    NCV:   Nguna           a-raa            'branch'
    SV:    Anejom          nra-             'branch'
    Mic:   Kosraean        Ire              '(tree) branch, twig, limb'
    Mic:   Woleaian        ?,aa             '(tree) branch, bough, twig'
    Mic:   Carolinian      rte              (tree) branches'
    Mic:   Chuukese        rte              'branch (with leaves)'
    Fij:   Rotuman         ra               'branch, bough'
    Pn:    Niuean          Ia               '(tree) branch; carries connotation of being small or
                                            the smaller part of a whole '
    Pn:    Tikopia          ra              'stem; twig; minor branch of tree, as opposed to
                                            ma!Ja, a major branch'
    Pn:    E Futunan       Ia? a-la?a       'small branch'
    Pn:    Rennellese      ga?a             'branch'
    Pn:    Samoan          tala             'branch'
>

                                                                                       Parts of plants      95


   POe *rako(q) 'branch, twig' is supported by reflexes in two Papuan Tip languages and
by cognates in non-Oceanic languages that suggest PMP *da!Jkeq 'branch'.

<
PMP *da!Jkeq 'branch' (Blust 1986)
POe *rako(q) 'branch, twig'
    PT:    Gumawana lao                     'a branch'
    PT:    Motu     rako-                   'a twig"7
                    rako-rako               'young, small wood '
>

    Similarly, POe *raga(q) 'branch' is supported by reflexes in a small number ofPapuan Tip
and Meso-Melanesian languages and by non-Oceanic cognates that suggest PMP *da!Jkaq
'branch'.

<
PMP *da!Jkaq 'branch' (Blust 1986)
POe *raga(q) 'branch'
    PT:    Gapapaiwa raga-                  'branch; limb '
    PT:    Tawala    laga-                  'branch'
    PT:    Iduna     laga(ni-)              'branch'
    MM:    Marovo    raga (hae)             'branch' (hae 'tree' )
    MM:    Vangunu   raga                   'branch'
>

    POe also had two morphologically related forms *sa!Ja and *ma-sa!Ja that denoted branch-
ing or forked structures. POe *sa!Ja, a reflex ofPMP *sa!Ja 'bifurcation, to branch', appears
to have been a nominal form referring to a fork in a tree or stick, as well as the crotch. The
verbal reflex in Kosraean seems to be an innovation.


[7] It is unclear whether Motu rako 'twig' is inherited or is borrowed from another Papuan Tip language. The
usual reflexes of POe *-k- are Motu -y- or zero, not ··k-. Ross (1994b) shows that Motu has borrowed lexicon
from a southeast Papuan language; rako may be such a borrowing. However, he also lists inherited items in
which *k is reflected as Motu -k-. Note that Motu ra ko 'twig ' cannot regularly reflect POe *raga(q), as *g is
reflected as Motu g.

96   Bethwyn Evans


<
PMP *sa!Ja 'bifurcation, to branch' (ACD)
POe *sa!Ja 'fork (in tree), forked stick or post, crotch'
  Adm: Lou               sac-n         (N) 'lower branch'
  Adm: Titan             cd!Ja         'fork in       crotch; straddle, climb straddling'
                         cd!Ja-n(key) 'fork of a tree'
  NNG: Gedaged           sa!Ja-n       'crotch, groin, bifurcation, fork'
  SES: Lau               ta!Ja         'the V -shaped groove in a mainpost'
  SES: Kwaio             ta!Ja-na      'groin'
  SES: Arosi             ta!Ja-na      'a crotch; fork of the legs'
  NCV: Mota              sa!Ja         'a fork, crotch, forked stick or post'
  Mic: Kosraean         .se!J          (N)  '(spearhead, fishhook) barb, prong, fish fins
                                       appearing above the surface of the water' ; (vi) 'to
                                       fork, branch out, bifurcate'
  Fij:    Bauan          sa!Ja         (N) 'a crotch'; (ADJ) 'crotched, especially of a
                                       branch which forms a crotch with a tree '
  Fij:    Wayan          so!Ja-so!Ja   'fork or joint between two protruding things; point
                                       or end of a protruding object; have many branches
                                       (e.g. tree, coral)'
>

    POe *ma-sa!Ja is reconstructed with both verbal and nominal functions. Its morphological
structure, that is, the prefix *ma- , suggests that it was an intransitive verb with an Undergoer
subject, as it appears to still be in Lou, Lau, Arosi and Sye. However, the range of reflexes of
*ma-sa!Ja with nominal meanings in modem Oceanic languages suggests that it perhaps also
had nominal uses in POe. A number of modem languages which reflect both *sa!Ja and *ma-
sa!Ja support the reconstruction of nominal and verbal functions, respectively. For example,
in Lau and Arosi reflexes of *sa!Ja now have quite specific nominal meanings and reflexes of
*ma-sa!Ja have the general meaning of 'branching, forked ' and look to be verbal. In Kwaio,
on the other hand, the reflexes of both *sa!Ja and *ma-sa!Ja have nominal meanings.

<
POe *ma-sa!Ja 'to be branching or forked (vi) ; branch (of tree, river, path), fork, crotch (N)'
  Adm: Lou             mosa, moso!Ja-n 'crotch; place where branch divides'
  MM: Kara (E)         masa!Je-na       'fork of tree '
  SES: Tolo            masa!Ja-na       'branch or fork of a road, river or tree '
  SES: Lau             mata!Ja          'forked; to spread fingers or limbs; (tree) branch;
                                        branch in road; the middle'
                       mata!Ja-na       '(frog) legs'
                       mata!Jti         'branching; growing together, of two or more
                                        things ; starfish'
  SES: Kwaio           mata!Ja-na       'crotch, branching place '
  SES: Arosi           mata!Ja          'doubled, forked'
  NCV: Tamambo masa!Ja                  'branch'
  NCV: Araki           !JaSa!Ja         'forked'
  SV:   Sye            ne-mso!J         'fork in tree'
  Pn:   Tongan         maha!Ja          'branch, fork, crotch'
  Pn:   Niue an        maha!Ja          'forked (of a path)'
  Pn:   Rennellese masa!Ja(sa!Ja)       'road fork, branching'
>

                                                                                Parts of plants    97


    PPn *ma!Ja 'branch, fork; branching, forked ' is a well-supported reconstruction. A possi-
ble non-Polynesian cognate is Kiribati mwti!Ja 'branch, limb of tree ', but Harrison ( 1994: 345)
suggests that this may be a Polynesian loan. It is possible that PPn *ma!Ja 'branch, fork' is
historically related to POe *ma-sa!Ja 'to be branching, branch' with irregular loss of *s, but
this is not certain. Most Polynesian languages reflect one or other form, but not both. How-
ever, Niuean reflects both forms and with very similar meanings, and in Tongan both forms
have similar nominal meanings, but the reflex of *ma!Ja also has a verbal meaning.

<
PPn *ma!Ja 'branch, fork; branching, forked' (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan        ma!Ja        (vi) 'fork, branch out, branch off, become divided
                                    into two or more branches; to step across s.t.' ; (N)
                                    'branch, fork, crotch, bifurcation; stride '
  Pn:    Niuean        ma!Ja        'forked '
  Pn:    WUvean        ma!Ja        'branch'
  Pn:    Tikopia       ma!Ja        'segmentary division, e.g. subsidiary tuber or corm
                                    in root vegetables; (tree, coral +) branch; offshoot,
                                    bifurcaltion'
  Pn:    Samoan        ma!Ja        (N) '(tree, road +)fork'; (v) 'divide into two, fork'
  Pn:    Luangiua      ma!Ja        'branch'
  Pn:    Rapanui       ma!Ja-ma!Ja 'bifurcation, branching off'
  Pn:    Maori         ma!Ja        '(tree) branch'
  Pn:    Hawaiian      mana         (N) '(tree, road, stream) branch, limb, crotch;
                                    crosspi1ece, as ofthe cross; a line projecting from
                                    another line'; (vi) 'variant, version, as of a tale ;
                                    branch out, spread out'
>

    Blust (ACD) also reconstructs Proto Austronesian *pa!Ja 'fork of a branch; any forked
structure, bifurcation' (which is reflected in Roviana as pa!Ja 'fish spear with several prongs'),
and *pa!Jaq 'forked, pronged, birfurcation', which appears not to have Oceanic reflexes.
    Blust (ACD) reconstructs Proto Austronesian *ta!Jay 'branch', and a possible irregular
reflex in Sa' a, akeake 'a strand of rope, a twig, a sprig', suggests the reconstruction of POe
*take 'small branch, twig', but it is not well-supported.

4.2.4 Roots

Oceanic languages tend to have a term for roots of plants in general and a number of more
specific terms for kinds of roots such as buttress roots, aerial roots, taproot, fine hair-like
roots. For example, we see from Table 4.6 that Nduke has a general term for roots ayara-,
alongside doyoro- 'aerial roots ' and bayere·· 'buttress roots ' . Another NW Solomonic lan-
guage, Maringe, on the other hand, appears to lack a general term for roots but distinguishes
between bakla 'buttress roots', grabu 'small underground roots', glathi 'taproot of trees or
tubers', and grebu 'short hair-like roots' .

    Besides a general term for roots, *wakaR-, POe had at least three other more specific
terms, *lali(t,c) 'buttress roots ' , *Ramut 'fine, hair-like roots ' and *waka(t) 'mangrove roots ' .
POe *wakaR is a well-supported reconstruction with reflexes in a wide range of Oceanic
languages.

98   Bethwyn Evans




             Table 4.6     Terms for roots in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 ayara-      General term for the root of any plant.
 bayere-     Buttress roots of a tree.
 doyoro-     Aerial roots, e.g. those found on some species of Ficus trees. cf. doyoro eana banyan
             roots.
 rosu-       The root of a tree or plant. This applies to underground roots only, not aerial roots or
             buttress roots.
 Wayan Fijian
 suku      Knobby growth protruding from trunk or branch of tree. near syn. vura; Buttress roots
           of a tree. syn. ribi.
 ribi      Shin, shinbone; buttress root, projecting flank in lower trunk of certain trees. Timber
           good for handles; Projecting growth sometimes found in yam tubers.
 nia       Flesh or main substance of s.t. Thus: Flesh of an animal body, including meat, fat and
           marrow, in contrast to skin (taba) and bones (tua); Flesh or main edible part of fruit
           or root excluding the skin or rind; Tuber of root crop, e.g. taro, yam, sweet potato;
           Mature inner part of a tree, heartwood. near syn. doa; Lower part of stem of the kava
           plant (aqona) in contrast to the root (waka) and upper stem (qai); Substance or main
           content of a speech, book, etc.
 vu        Base, bottom; Root, taproot, bulbous root. cf. waka fibrous root, waka tu taproot;
           Origin, source, root; Cause.
 waka      Roots of a plant. contr. vu, root in sense of base, origin. Kava root, not yet ground.
 dray a    Roots or root-hairs of any plant. near syn. waka, which is now more common in this
           sense.
 Tikopia
 aka         (N) Aerial rootlet, as of banyan.
 vaiaka      (N) Rootlet; spreading roots; aerial root.
 raparapa    (N) Flange; buttress (cf. raparapa rakau tree trunk buttress; bulging tree roots)
 fosa        (N) Root, esp. taro corm and other root vegetables.
 futi        (N) Base. Futi o te rakau roots of tree
 fetl        (N) Turmeric root
                                                                                        Parts of plants       99

<
PMP *wakaR 'root' (ACD)
POe *wakaR 'roots (in general)'
  Adm: Muss au        oa                     'root'
  NNG: Numbami        wok a                  'root'
  MM: Bali            vakara                 'root'
  MM: Nakanai         ua                     'radial roots of a tree '
  MM: Nduke           ayara-                 'general term for roots of any plant'
  MM: Kusaghe         ayoro                  'root'
  SES: Gel a          oya                    'small roots '
  SES: Bugotu         oya-                   'root'
  SES: Kahua          vaya-na                'root'
  SES: Santa Ana waya-na                     'root'
  NCV: Lewo           yaka                   'kind of root, edible'
  SV:   N Tanna       noka-                  'root'
  SV:   Lenakel       nuka-                  'root'
  NCal: Xaracuu       kw8-                   'root'
  NCal: Nemi          wa-                    'root'
  Mic: Kosraean       okre                   (N) 'root'; (vi) ' begin to have roots '
  Mic: Marshallese :Jkar                     'root'
  Mic: Chuukese       war                    '(tree) root'
                      wara-n                 'its root'
  Mic: Woleaian                              'root'
  Mic: Carolinian war                        'roots of a tree or plant'
  Fij:  Bauan         waka-                  'root of a plant (fibrous)'
  Fij:  Wayan         waka-                  'root or roots of plant, fibrous roots ' (cf. waka-tu
                                             'taproot')
  Fij:      Rotuman         va?a             '(fibrous) roots
  Pn:       Niue an         vaka             '(plant) root; be woody, stringy; grow roots '
cf. also:
  MM:       Label           wakir            'tree root'
>

   Blust associates Label wakir with PCEMP *wakir 'kind of root'. However, there being no
other Oceanic reflexes of this etymon, it seems likely that this is an irregular reflex of *wakaR.
Some Micronesian languages including Marshallese :Jkar, Chuukese war, wara-n , Carolinian
war and Woleaian            point to a PMic variant *wakara- (Bender et al. 2003: 104), pre-
sumably inalienably possessed and reflected in Chuukese wara-n. 8

   Blust (ACD) also reconstructs a PEMP term *wakaR-i 'root', which is reflected in anum-
ber of Oceanic languages. Although Blust (ACD) posits an apparent morpheme boundary
between the root *wakaR and an ending *-i, he comments that the morphology of the longer
form remains obscure, and does not suggest any meaning difference between *wakaR and
*wakaR-i. It was probably an altemant inalienably possessed form. 9

[8] Blust (ACD) suggests that the Micronesian data plus Bali vakara 'root' support the reconstruction of a POe
(unbound?) form *wakaR -a 'root' . As Bali vakara 'root' is a regular reflex of POe *wakaR I have not recon-
structed this form . There are a few other Proto Micronesian etyma that retain a POe final consonant and add
*-a; e.g. POe *pata(YJ) is reflected as both *fata and *fataf}a ' tree trunk' in Proto Micronesian (Bender et al.
2003 : 24).

100    Bethwyn Evans


<
PEMP *wakaR-i 'root' (ACD)
POe *wakaRi- 'root'
  NNG: Dami          warei                  'root'
  NCV: Tambotalo uari-                      'root'
  NCV: A ore         wari                   'root'
  NCV: Araki         xuari                  'root' (metathesis)
  NCV: Nduindui      ka-kwari               'root' (metathesis)
  Mic: Nauman        awori-n                'root'
>

    Dempwolff (1938) reconstructs PMP *aka(r) 'root' as a doublet of *wakaR 'root'. Blust
(ACD) notes that all non-Oceanic cognates with an initial *a- are in languages which regularly
lose word-initial *w-, thus providing no evidence for the presence or absence of *w-. Several
Oceanic languages have forms which do suggest a POe doublet form *aka(r,R). None of the
forms below are regular reflexes of *wakaR 'root'.

<
POe *aka(r,R) 'root' (Dempwolff 1938)
  Adm: Lou             ak:J-n     'root'
  MM: Ramoaaina akar              'root'
  Pn:   Tongan         aka        'root, have roots; send out roots'
  Pn:   Tikopia        aka        '(banyan) aerial rootlet'
  Pn:   Samoan         a?a        'root'
>

    Thus POe apparently had three very similar forms, *wakaR, *wakaRi- and *aka(r,R), all
'root'. If *wakaRi- is an altemant inalienably possessed form, then only *aka(r,R) requires
explanation. No modem languages have been found to retain more than one of the four forms,
suggesting that there was no semantic difference among them. POe *wakaR 'root' is the most
widely reflected in modem Oceanic languages and reflects a Proto Austronesian form.

    The POe term for 'buttress roots' was *lali(c,t). This is a more or less regular reflex of
PMP *dalij, reconstructed by Blust (ACD ). The expected POe initial liquid is t*r-, but it has
undergone assimilation to the intervocalic liquid, giving *Ia!- rather that t*ral-. The same
change is found in POe *lalom 'inside', reflecting PMP *Dalem (vol.2, ch.8, §2.3.1). The
expected final consonant is POe *-c. The only languages to reflect a final consonant are Tolai
and Ramoaaina, in both of which the expected reflex is zero, but instead we find -t.

<
PMP *dalij 'buttress roots' (AcD)
POe *lali(c,t) 'buttress roots'
  Adm: Lou               lit, lila-n        'exposed root or vein' (vowel metathesis)
  MM: Tolai              Ialit              'space between the buttresses of a tree'
  MM: Ramoaaina Ialit                       'buttresses of trees'
     SES:   Gel a          !ali             'buttress roots of some trees'
     SES:   Bugotu         lali-(fia)       'buttress of tree'
     SES:   Kwara' ae      !ali             'root'
     SES:   Kwaio          !ali             'big tree root'
     SES:   Arosi          rari-na          'root'
     SES:   Bauro          rari-na          'buttress root'
>

[9] Editor's note: The morphology of POe inalienably possessed nouns with a stem-final consonant is obscure.
Some reflexes suggest that a vowel was added before the suffix-initial consonant, e.g. *wakaR-i-fia 'its root',
others that the stem-final consonant was lost, e.g. *waka-fia.

                                                                                     Parts of plants     101



    The POe reconstruction *Ramut 'fine, hair-like roots ' is a revision of Geraghty' s ( 1990: 69)
PEOc reconstruction *Ramu- 'hair, fibre ' . 10 Extra data suggest that this form had a primary
meaning 'hair-like roots ' and in a number of languages has been extended to refer to other
fine fibrous things. Data from the Meso-Melanesian languages support the reconstruction of a
final consonant in POe. In Papuan Tip languages *Ramut appears to have become the general
term for roots.

<
POe *Ramut 'fine, hair-like roots ' (Geraghty 1990: 69)
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) rami                'roots '
  PT:   Gumawana         lam            'root'
  PT:   Suau (Saliba) lam               'root'
  PT:   Motu             ramu           'root'
  MM: Tolai              ramu-          'feele:rs of a lobster'
  MM: Mono-Alu           lamutu-na      'root'
  MM: Varisi             ramutu-na 'root'
  SES: Gel a             (lau)lamu      'hairs on mango ; fibre of coconut'
  SES: Ghari             lam u-na       'root'
  SES: Tolo              lam u-na       '(plant, tree +)root'
  SES: Arosi             ramu-ramu 'small fibrous aerial roots; loose ends of a bag,
                                        hanging string etc.'
>

    Finally, there is some evidence that POe also had a term that denoted mangrove roots.
Blust (ACD) reconstructs PMP *wakat 'mangrove root' along with a possible doublet *waket.
He notes that the loss of final consonants in most Oceanic languages makes it difficult to
distinguish between reflexes ofPMP *wakaR 'root' and *wakat 'mangrove root', but states
that close attention to semantics suggests thalt only *wakaR 'root' survived in POe. Although
I have found no reflexes of *wak[a,e]t in Oceanic languages which retain word-final con-
sonants, the presence of both *wakaR 'roots (in general)' and *wako(t) 'mangrove root' in
POe is suggested by the apparently distinct reflexes in Kosraean, namely nknk 'mangrove
root' and okce '(N) root'; (vi) 'begin to have roots '. Tawala wakoya 'mangrove' supports the
reconstruction of POe *wako(t) with an *o, reflecting PMP *waket.

    In English 'mangrove' refers to a variety of trees and shrubs that grow in coastal swamps
and tidal estuaries and are characterised by their ability to tolerate salt water and their posses-
sion of different forms of aerial roots (OED). Species of the genus Rhizophora which grow
in the wetter outer areas of the mangrove swamp have interlacing prop-roots, whereas those
of the genus Bruguiera tend to grow in drie:r areas with pneumatophores (breathing roots)

[10] Although Geraghty's reconstructions are all to the level ofPEOc, he implies that *Ramu- ' hair, fibre' could
be attributed to POe by giving Proto Papuan Tip *ramu 'root' as part of the supporting data.

102   Bethwyn Evans




             Table 4.7     Terms for leaves in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 vuvuru-     Leaves on any plant. vuvuru yae 'tree leaves'.
 kakati-     Variegated, ofleaves, e.g. zazala 'croton' leaves.
 kava-       A frond or leaf that attaches directly to the trunk or stem of the plant, i.e. of plants
             (other than grasses) that don't have branches. Examples are the leaves or fronds of
             coconuts (kava pevu), sago palms (kava goe) and other palms, bananas (kava lukata),
             paw-paws (kava manioko) and treefems.
 midi-       The stiff mid-ribs of fronds, e.g. of goe (sago-palm) or coconut fronds. midi goe sago-
             palm broom 'straws'; midi letu coconut broom 'straws'. Brooms (nenepo) are made
             of bundles of sago palm midi tied together at their thick end.
 zaro-       The dead leaves of certain types of plants, e.g. banana and pawpaw leaves.
 hahau-      Dead coconut fronds that fall to the ground.
 letu-       Coconut palm leaflet (i.e. those arranged along the midi stem of the frond). Does not
             apply to goe 'sago', which has vuvuru 'leaves' along the kava 'frond'.
 Wayan Fijian
 susuluka Dry pandanus and banana leaves. contr. botata, dry breadfruit leaves.
 rau       1. Leaf. 2. A hair, hairs of the head. contr. vulu, head hair (as a whole).
 belebele  Young leaves of any plant.
 tl5rau    1. Soft, white young leaves at the top of a coconut tree. Edible; 2. Soft, young leaves
           of any plant.
 tua       (N) 1. Bone. 2. Rib of a leaf.
 tuabou    1. Spinal column, backbone; 2. Rib of a leaf.
 sasa      Dry coconut leaf. syn. basilele samasama.
 basilele  1. Coconut leaf, whether dry or still green and growing on the tree. syn. ro ni niu (lit.
           'leaf of coconut'). cf. sasa. 2. Broom made of coconut leaf ribs.
  botata   Dry breadfruit leaves.
 Tikopia
 rau         Classifier for fiat objects; hence leaf, sheet etc; also often used alone for sago leaf
             thatch sheets, and for thatch generic.
 tauru       (N) Foliage, esp. collectively, as a mass ofleaves on a tree, spray of fern fronds etc.
 sil)ano     (N) Immature leaf of pandanus or coconut palm, used as decoration (manol)i).
firoi        (N) Leaf base of palm.
 maril)a     (N) Small pinnules at base of palmate leaf etc. (e.g. maril)a rau niu, maril)a rau ota
             small coconut, sago pinnules).
 sukusuku    (N) Tail, ending. Sukusuku o te rakau top, crest of tee, mass ofleafage. Also tauru o
             te rakau 'foliage of tree'.
famatua      (N) Mature coconut frond.
sakilo       (N) Immature coconut leaf, of pale colour; used traditionally as decoration for some
             ritual objects, as a shelf in Resiake temple, or sign of taboo on orchard.
 IJausala    (N) Midrib of sago pinnule, used as pin for leaf thatch, leaf pads for oven cover; bundle
             used traditionally as i1 seru for beating rhythm in funeral lament.
                                                                           Parts of plants   103


projecting upward above the surface of the mud. Non-Oceanic cognates suggest that PMP
*wak[a,e]t 'mangrove root' probably referred to the prop-roots of Rhizophora mangroves.
A few Western Malaya-Polynesian reflexes specifically denote prop-roots of mangroves and
Central Malaya-Polynesian reflexes, which mostly refer to the mangrove tree rather than the
root, tend to denote Rhizophora mangroves too. Thus it seems likely that POe *wako(t) also
referred to the prop-roots of Rhizophora mangroves and not simply the aerial roots of man-
groves in general. Ross (ch.6, §2.1) suggests that POe *wako(t) may also have served as a
generic term for Rhizophora, citing the glosses below which refer to the tree and not just the
roots.

<
PMP *waket 'mangrove root' (ACD)
POe *wako(t) 'mangrove root'
  PT:   Tawala       wakoya      'mangrove '
  Mic: Kosraean      nk-nk       'mangrove root'
  Mic: Mokilese      ak          'mangrove '
  Mic: Ponapean      ak          'generic for mangroves '
>


4.2.5 Leaves

As well as a general term for leaf, Oceanic languages tend to have more specific terms refer-
ring either to leaves of particular kinds of plants, leaves at different stages of growth, and/or
parts of leaves. For example, Wayan has a general term rau, three terms that specifically
denote coconut leaves sasa, basilele and tOrau , a term that refers to dry banana or pandanus
leaves, susuluka, a term for young leaves, belebele, and two terms for the midrib of a leaf, tua
and tuabou . Table 4.7 gives the different terms for leaves from Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia.

    A generic term for leaf, POe *raun, is clearly reconstructable and reflects an earlier Proto
Austronesian term with a similar meaning. As some reflexes of *raun denote hair or fur,
it seems likely that in POe *raun referred not only to broad surface leaves, but also to the
needle-like leaves of casuarinas, but the glosses of most reflexes are not specific enough to
determine if this is the case.

<
PAn *dahun 'leaf' (Blust 1993)
POe *raun 'leaf, general term for leaves of all types of plants'
  Adm: Titan               lau-n        'leaf, hair, feathers '
  Adm: Lou                 rei-n        'leaf'
  NNG: Manam               dau          'leaf; (temporary) dwelling'
  NNG: Mangseng            aio!J        'leaf, feather '
  NNG: Po eng              !au          'leaf; paper; (roof) tin; grass roof; letter'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) rau                'paper, leaf, kina notes '
                           raunu        'leaf, hair'
  NNG: Sissano (Arop) royn              'leaf, cloth'
  NNG: Hote                IJaUIJ       'hair; leaf'
  PT:   Gumawana           yao          'leaf'
  PT:   Motu               rau          'leaf'
  SES: Gel a               rau          'a leaf'
                            rau-rau     'leaves, foliage, leafage'
  SES:     Tolo             rau         '(plants, tree +) leaves' (generic)
  SES:     Longgu           rau-i       'leaf'
  SES:     Arosi            rau         'leaf; prefix to names of trees'
  NCV:     Mota             nau-i       'a leaf, flake '
                            nau-nau-na  'its leaves '
  NCV:     NEArnbae         rau         'leaf'
  NCal:    Xaracuu          niJ         'leaf; ornamental feather '
  NCal:    Paid             doo-e       '(its) leaf'
  NCal:    Iaai             Ia-         'leaf'
  Mic:     Kiribati         rau         'thatch made of pandanus leaves'
  Mic:     Kosraean        .sa          'leaf'
  Mic:     Chuukese                     'leaf, sheet' (cf.     rii 'coconut leaf, as distinct from
                                        frond) '
  Mic:     Woleaian        .s¢          'leaf, foliage , leafage'
  Mic:     Carolinian                   'leaf with broad surface, as a banana or taro leaf'
  Fij:     Bauan            drau        'leaf of a tree, a hair of the head '
  Fij:     Wayan            rau         'leaf; a hair (of head); page, leaf of paper'
                            raurau      'leaves ; greens, leafy vegetables'
  Pn:      Tongan           !au         'leaf; sheet, layer of paper or board '
  Pn:      Niuean           !au         'leaf'
  Pn:      Tikopia          rau         classifi,er for fiat objects, hence 'leaf, sheet' etc;
                                        sago leaf thatch sheet; thatch (generic) '
                            rau (rakau) '(tree) leaves; vegetation, vegetable food '
  Pn:      Samoan           !au         'leaf; blade; thatch'
>

104     Bethwyn Evans



    More specific leaf terms are not so easily reconstructable for POe. Modem languages
tend to have a number of terms denoting the leaves of different types of plants. Table 4.8
shows the different leaf terms in Iduna (PT), Arosi (SES), Anejom (SV) and Niuean (Pn).
As well as representing different regions of Oceania, these languages seem representative of
the different ways leaf terms are lexicalised. Some languages, like Iduna, have distinct terms
for the leaves of each of a number of different plants, including coconut, pandanus, sago,
taro and tobacco. These include terms for leaves used for different purposes. The Niuean
dictionary, on the other hand, lists a number of terms for different leaves, but they are mostly
compounds containing the general term for           !au. Thus launiu, comprising !au 'leaf' and
niu 'coconut' denotes 'coconut frond ', laufa consisting of !au 'leaf' andfa 'pandanus ' de-
notes pandanus leaf' and laumamanu comprising !au 'leaf' and mamanu 'a common fern,
Phymatodes scolopendria' denotes 'fern leaves '.

    Anejom is in between these two extremes with some compound terms, such as neri-
neafi 'coconut frond ' comprising neri- 'leaf' and neafi 'coconut', neri-neto 'sugarcane leaf'
consisting of neri- 'leaf' and neto 'sugarcane', and nerintal 'taro-leaf' consisting of neri-
'leaf' and intal 'taro (generic)', and some distinct, synchronically unanalysable, lexical items
for different leaf types, such as nilev 'dry coconut-leaf used in making house-walls' , nevak
'dry pandanus leaf ready for weaving' and narico 'leaf of sugarcane or wild cane (white and
itchy)' . Other terms in Anejom, such as inmatinyat 'dry fallen pandanus leaf' and inmatito
'dry leaves of sugarcane ' are compounds consisting of inmati- 'dry leaf of' and contracted
forms of the plant names; inmati8ve 'dry coconut leaf looks to be a similar compound al-
though the second element is not clear. For other languages there are only a few leaf terms
that denote leaves of specific kinds of plants. For example, Arosi has terms for the leaves of
coconut, pandanus and taro.

                                                                  Parts of plants    105




                Table 4.8   Leaf terms in selected Oceanic languages

Iduna                                      Anejofu
lukumi-      leaf                          neri-        leaf
didi-        coconut frond                 neri-neafi   coconut frond
tafa         dried coconut fronds used     inmati8ve    dry coconut frond
             as a torch
belobelo     pandanus leaf                 nilev        dry coconut-leaf used in
                                                        making house-walls
kwalala      sago frond                    inmatinyat   dry fallen pandanus leaf
lafilafiya   sago fronds used in house     nevak        dry pandanus leaf ready for
             construction                               weaving
hewakabu     taro leaves                   incetmi      pandanus leaf used for
                                                        weaving
lokwahi      taro leaves for making a      neri-ntal    taro leaves
             soup
yawai        tobacco leaves                neri-neto    leaf of sugarcane
                                           narico       leaf of sugarcane or
                                                        wildcane (white and itchy)
                                           inmatito     dry leaves of sugarcane
                                           inmehei      Heliconia leaf
Arosi                                      Niuean
rau          leaves                        !au          leaf
roboatari    coconut fronds                launiu       coconut frond
buro!Ja      dried coconut leaf hanging    piupiu niu   young leaf of growing
             ready to fall                              coconut
sara         pandanus leaf used as sling   laufa        pandanus leaf
             for baby
bwara-       taro leaf                     Ia           young taro leaves used for
                                                        food
waroamadi    leaves of asp. resembling     laumamanu    fern leaves
             Piper bette

106   Bethwyn Evans


    Also of note is that many languages have distinctive labels for leaves of the same sets of
plants. So the languages in Table 4.8 all have names for coconut fronds , for pandanus leaves,
and for taro leaves, while with other types of plants, such as betel pepper or sago, only one
or two of the languages have specific terms. It is apparent that the types of leaves which
have distinctive names in a language are those which have some cultural use or other sig-
nificance. Thus many Oceanic languages have several terms for coconut leaves, apparently
reflecting the different uses of different growth stages of them within Oceanic societies. Firth
(1985: 92-293) writes of the great variety of uses of parts of a coconut palm in Tikopia, in-
cluding 'fresh leaves for floor mats (tapakau) and rough baskets (popora) ; dry leaves for
torches (afi) ; and immature leaves (sakilo) for decoration'. Lewo has three terms that denote
coconut leaves, namely mamaru 'leaf of coconut (green)' , masuge 'coconut leaf dry' and pu-
rukupi 'coconut frond ' , distinguishing between green and dry coconut leaves. This distinction
is one that is often lexicalised in Oceanic languages. Thus Wayan basilele 'coconut leaf, dry
or green' versus sasa 'dry coconut leaf , Lou lien 'unopened coconut leaf versus suZan 'dry
coconut leaf and Chuukese payiri 'coconut leaf and wupwut 'young coconut leaf (still light
in colour)'. In other languages, such as Takia, the different terms for coconut leaves seem to
directly reflect different uses, thus bombom 'coconut leaves (used for roofing)' and lu!J 'co-
conut leaf (used for perpetual fire)'. The significance of the terms for dry coconut leaves also
seems to be related to usage, for torches (e.g. Ramoaaina ulu 'leaf of coconut palm, (coconut
leaf) torch ') or for various woven items, including mats, baskets and the roofing and walls
of houses (e.g. Manam rigina 'coconut fronds (plaited), used as mats and roofing and siding
for houses', Lukep sal 'coconut leaf fence/enclosure ' and Sursurunga her 'coconut leaf; mat
made from coconut leaf).

    Pandanus leaves are often more important than coconut leaves for weaving in Oceanic
societies. Firth (1985: 105-106, 186) describes the use of the leaves of different types of
pandanus for weaving in Tikopia. Thus the leaves of fara 'pandanus, narrow stiff leaves,
single tall trunk' are used for coarse mats and sewing coconut fibre bags and the leaves of
kie 'pandanus (sp. similar to Pandanus odoratissimus)' are used for fine mats. However,
it seems that languages tend to only have a single term for pandanus leaves, if they have
one at all. The situation with sago leaves is somewhat similar. Most dictionaries have terms
which denote sago leaf thatch, and sago leaves are clearly the most used leaf for making
thatch amongst Oceanic societies, but a term for sago leaves is found in only a scattering of
languages (e.g. Titan kali!Jat 'sago leaf (shingles)' , Mapos Buang ngem!J 'sago leaves (used
for making grass skirts)' , Mangap ram 'new leaves of sago (used for decoration)' and Tolo
hatsira 'sago palm leaf).

    Names for types oftaro leaves, on the other hand, are apparently distinguished in Oceanic
languages on the basis of their value as food . For instance, Kaulong has three terms pasu 'taro
leaf (mature)' , sulak 'taro leaf (young)' and talan 'taro leaves that are not suitable for eating' .
In other languages there will be a single term £or taro leaves (e.g. Arosi bwara 'leaf of taro '
and Drehet moru!J 'taro leaf).

                                                                           Parts of plants   107


    How many terms for specific types of leaves can be reconstructed for POe? Across the
languages in Table 4.8 it can be seen that not many ofthe terms are cognate. Thus while all
the languages have terms for coconut and taro leaves, none of the terms are cognate. This
is in part not unexpected as the terms in Table 4.8 often refer to coconut leaves of different
growth stages. So while Anejom has terms for dry coconut leaves, one of the Arosi terms
and the Niuean term denote coconut leaves in general. But even looking at just the terms
for dry coconut leaves in Table 4.8, there are still no forms that are cognate (e.g. Iduna tafa
'(dry) coconut leaves used as torch', Arosi btHOIJa 'dry coconut leaf, Anejom inmati8ve 'dry
coconut leaf and nilev 'dry coconut-leaf used in making house-wall'). Table 4.8 seems to
typify a general trend across Oceanic languages, such that while languages have terms with
similar meanings they are not often cognate. Certain terms associated with coconut fronds
are nonetheless reconstructable, and their meaning also includes a function for which they are
used: POe *sulu(q) 'dry coconut leaftorch; dry coconut leaf and POe *ramaR 'coconut leaf
used as a torch when fishing' (ch.12, §5.1.2), and POe *no(k,g)o 'midrib or spine of coconut
leaflet; broom made therefrom' (ch.12, §5.1.3).

     Pandanus and sago leaves were apparently as important as coconut leaves in many tra-
ditional Oceanic societies. A POe term *qatop 'thatch, roof can be reconstructed (see vol.1,
ch.3, §3.4), with reflexes in many languages that refer specifically to sago-leaf thatch. In SE
Solomonic and North-Central Vanuatu languages reflexes of this term denote the sago palm,
as well as sago-leaf thatch. In Arosi that ao 'sago palm' can refer to the leaves is evident from
compounds such as adodo ao 'to lay together the leaves in bundles', susu?i ao 'layers of sewn
leaves put ready for thatching' and taba ao "to go out and cut sago palm leaves'. However,
reflexes of POe *qatop that refer specifically to sago palm leaves are not widespread, and
so unlike POe *sulu(q), a secondary 'leaf meaning does not appear to be reconstructable. In
fact, there does not seem to have been a distinctive term for sago leaves, although a number
of modem languages do have such terms. The same is true for pandanus leaves. They ap-
pear to be much used for weaving in many negions of Oceania and known for finer weaving
than coconut leaves, but a distinctive term does not appear to be reconstructable for POe.
Bender et al. (2003: 52) reconstruct a Proto Micronesian form *ma!JU 'pandanus leaf, but
the etymology of this form is unclear. Geraghty (1990: 64) suggests it is a reflex of POe
*maRa!Jo 'to be dry, withered', supported by the formal correspondence and the fact that
in a number of Micronesian languages the meanings are restricted to dry pandanus leaves
and in Ponapean mc!J has the meaning 'withered, dry, dead vegetation'. Ross ( ch.ll, §2.5)
suggests that Marshallese mti!J 'pandanus leaves', Chuukese ma!J 'pandanus leaf, especially
when softened by a shell' and Woleaian ma!Ji 'pandanus leaf are reflexes of POe *mwa!Ja
'Pandanus sp., perhaps Pandanus conoideus' supported by Kosraean mwe!J 'pandanus'. It
seems likely that there has been a conflation of these two POe terms in Proto Micronesian.
Ross reconstructs several POe terms for different types of pandanus and it is possible that
these terms could be used to refer to the leaves as well as the tree, especially as only the
leaves of certain kinds of pandanus would have been valued for weaving.

     POe *gal(a,o) 'taro leaves' is tentatively neconstructed by Ross (this volume, ch.9, §2.2.1),
supported by the cognate set below.

<
POe *gal(a,o) 'taro leaves' ? (Ross 1996c: 190)
  Adm:    Baluan         gal           'taro'
  NNG:    Labu           ka            'taro'
  MM:     Nakanai        gala-gala     'taro leaves'
  MM:     Vitu           galo          'taro leaves'
  SES:    Kwaio          gala-         'taro shoot'
>

108   Bethwyn Evans


    Ross (1996c: 175) also reconstructs POe *was(i,a) 'edible greens, Abelmoschus manihot
(syn. Hibiscus manihot)' that apparently denoted edible green leaves, as well as the most
salient member of the class, Abelmoschus manihot.


4.2.6 Shoots, sprouts and suckers

As can be seen from Table 4.9 Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia all have several terms for the new
growth of plants. Wayan, for example, has ouli 'sucker of plant', so 'young, tender leaves at
the top of a plant', gau 'suckers', tubu 'new growth, young shoot or sprout' and hebe 'suckers
or shoots of taro or tobacco plant' . Wayan also has a more specific term, soba, that denotes
banana suckers. Tikopia also has a number of general terms for the new growth of plants,
and a term roro that specifically denotes the new growth of a coconut palm. In the data for
Nduke, on the other hand, there are a number of general terms for suckers and shoots, but
none that denote the new growth of particular kinds of plants only.

     The number of terms for shoots and suckers in modem Oceanic languages reflects the
importance ofthese parts in the propagation offood crops. French-Wright (1983: 193) notes
that taros, yams, bananas and breadfruit 'are fairly easily generated by means of suckers' and
that 'today many daughter communities rarely use seeds, although the gourd, which is grown
from seed, is an exception'. He also writes that 'the POe gardener probably relied to a large
extent upon seedlings, cuttings and seed tubers for the propagation of food plants', and he
reconstructs a number of POe terms that provide evidence for such horticultural practices.

     The most general term for shoots or suckers in POe appears to have been *[s,j]uli(q),
reconstructed as *suli(q) by French-Wright (1983: 78). Ross (1996c: 179) reconstructs POe
*[s,j ]uti(q) with a general meaning of propagation material (e.g. cutting or shoot), as well as
the more specific meaning of banana or taro shoot, as it is this more specific meaning that is
reflected in many modem Oceanic languages. The Mota, Wayan and Tongan glosses suggest
that this term could be used figuratively to refer to one' s children or offspring.

     The initial consonant is uncertain because Manam and Tawala reflect *sand not *j, but
Numbami, Lukep and Gela reflect *j and not *s. In the other languages the initial consonant
reflects both *sand *j.

<
PAn *suliq 'runner, sucker, shoot (Blust 1972a)
POe *[s,j ]uti(q) 'banana or taro sucker, slip, cultting, shoot (i.e. propagation material)'
  (Ross 1996c: 179)
  Adm: Lou              sili-n         '(banana, pineapple) sprout'
  Adm: Loniu            cili           'sprout, especially banana shoot'
  NNG: Tami             jili           'taro sucker'
  NNG: Numb ami         duli           'taro sucker'
  NNG: Man am           suli           'banana slip, cutting'
  PT:      Taw ala      huni           'taro '
  PT:      Kilivila     uli            'taro '
  PT:      Motu         dui            'banana pllant'
  MM: Ramoaaina ul-ul                  'put forth new leaves; of tan (tree sp.) only'
  SES: Gel a            duli           'a sucker, of banana'
  NCV: Mota             suliu          'sucker from roots of a plant, shoot from tubers '
                        sulu-i         'sucker, met. children, offspring'
   SV:     Sye            nelye-        'sucker, shoot'
   SV:     Anejom         nisei-        '(plant) shoot'
   Mic:    Kosraean       sulu-n        'young shoot of, sprout of
   Fij:    Wayan          ouli          '(plant, esp. banana, taro) sucker'
   Fij:    Bauan          suli          '(plant, esp. banana, taro) sucker'
   Pn:     Tongan         huli          'shoot, sprout, twig, or sucker; scion, descendant'
   Pn:     Niuean         huli          'shoot, young plant'
   Pn:     Samoan         suli          '(obsolete) sucker of a banana plant, heir'
   Pn:     Hawaiian       huli          'taro top, used for planting'
>

                                                                               Parts of plants     109



        Table 4.9   Terms for shoots and suckers in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

Nduke
kihe-        A sucker of a banana or taro, or pineapple tops, or the germinating fruits of goe 'sago'
             or hea 'betelnut'. These have in common that these growing shoots are used for plant-
             ing back. Growing coconuts (nogoro or zizira) are not kihe.
liho-        New growth or young shoots on a plant, including coconut, betelnut, yam, gingers
             and grasses but not hololu 'mangrove'.
pisoyata     New growth, of coconuts, potatoes, etc.; to sprout, of a germinating seed, etc.
soyoyo       Newly growing flowering shoot of a palm tree, e.g. of a coconut or sago palm.
togo-        To germinate, of seeds, or 'newly shoot', of plants. A general word that can refer to
             a germinating seed, a sucker (kihe} or any new leaf growth (liho). In a more general
             sense, it can mean any growth occuring of a plant. This is the only word that applies
             to germination of seeds.
Wayan Fijian
ouli      I. Sucker of a plant, esp. banana or taro, but also used of kava and other plants. syn.
          gaugau. 2. (slang) Offspring, kids.
so        1. Highest part; top or tip. 2. Young, tender leaves at the top of a plant. 3. Source of
          a river or stream. syn. so ni wai (lit. 'source of water').
gau       (N) Suckers, young plants set down by taro or bananas, or growing roots of a tree.
tubu      (N) 1. Increase, growth. 2. Profit, interest (monetary), financial return on a business
          or investment. 3. New growth, young shoot or sprout.
bebe      (N) Suckers or shoots oftaro or tobacco plant. syn. gaugau, hebe ni doko, (N) Suckers
          of taro hebe ni sawasawa, (N) Suckers oftobacco plant.
rovu      (v) (sub. e.g. teeth, new leaves, shoots.) Sprout, germinate, shoot up, appear. (N)
          Sucker, new shoot growing from root of a plant.
rovuvaoi  1. (sub. fruit.) Start to form. 2. (sub. a tree, shrub.) Sprout new leaves, bud. (N) 1. New
          fruit, just starting to form. 2. Bud, new shoot growing from a branch.
soba      1. Banana sucker. cf. gau, ouli, vura, which are more general terms for suckers. 2.
          Fruit-head of a banana bunch, consisting of a circular red pod containing flowers and
          immature fruit.
Tikopia
purapura     (N) Seedling (archaic, ritual form).
pupura       (N) 1. Seed material; seedling; planting material.
muko         (N) Young shoot of plant.
sakare       (N) Shoot of plant (e.g. sakare o te ufi shoot of yam, sakare o te niu shoot of coconut,
             sakare kaula areca shoot, sakarefuti banana shoot).
tap una      (N) Shoot of plant (generally prefaced by tau relational particle, indicator of linkage)
             (cf. tautapuna (N) shoot of plant).
uri          (N) Shoot or sucker of plant; tiller (e.g. te uri taro the shoots (tillers) of taro).
vaemanu      (N) Shoot (of root food crop); side tuber.
karekare     (N) 1. Very young plant, animal etc.
roro         (N) Bud or shoot of coconut palm near flower bract; masticated with lime and betel
             leaf when areca nut scarce. Also possibly other buds.
110   Bethwyn Evans




    French-Wright ( 1983: 60) also reconstructs a very similar term with the meaning 'to trans-
plant'. Again there is variation in the initial consonant with Roviana reflecting POe *j and
Arosi reflecting POe *s. He suggests (1983: 61-62) that *(sj)uli could be used in POe to
denote the practice of growing taros from sucke:rs which are left in the ground when the ma-
ture taro is harvested and then transplanted when a new garden has been prepared, and to the
transplanting of fruit trees grown initially from seeds, but replanted to a carefully chosen spot
when still small. However, the POe reconstruction with this meaning is not well supported,
as it is reflected in only one NW Solomonic and one SE Solomonic language.

<
POe *(s,j)uli 'to transplant' (French-Wright 1983: 60)
  MM:     Roviana       zuli           'to transplant seedlings etc '
  SES:    Arosi         (u)suri        'to transplant' (source of u- not known.)
>

    From the fact that modem languages tend to have several forms that denote new growth
of plants, we would expect the same to be true of POe, but other terms with similar mean-
ings are not easily reconstructable. However, there are two nominal terms which appear to
be candidates. Bender et al. (2003: 28) reconstruct Proto Oceanic *qili 'sprout, shoot' sup-
ported by reflexes in Micronesian languages and Nakanai. The combination of the lack of
an initial consonant in the Micronesian languages and an initial h- in Nakanai support the
reconstruction of an initial *q in POe, and neither the Micronesian forms nor the Nakanai
form are plausible reflexes of POe *[s,j ]uti(q).

<
POe *qili (N) 'sprout, shoot (esp. of banana or taro)' (Bender et al. 2003)
  MM:     Nakanai     hili             'sprout of banana or something similar'
  Mic:    Marshallese yil              'taro sprout; immature taro plant'
  Mic:    Ponapean    iii              '(banana, breadfruit, taro) sucker'
  Mic:    Chuukese    iri              '(banana, taro, bamboo) shoot, short sucker, runner'
  Mic:    Woleaian    iri              'young shoots surrounding an old plant; a young
                                       plant'
  Mic:    Carolinian    il-il          'young taro shoots which develop from the mature
                                       taro root'
>

    A third possible POe term for the new growth of plants is *rama. This is not a very well-
supported reconstruction, but is suggested by the Lou form r:Jm :Jn 'taro shoot' and a few
terms from North New Guinea languages, including Sissano (Arop) raman 'seedling, shoot,
plant'. As Lou and Sissano (Arop) are not languages which reflect final consonants, it seems
likely that the final -n in these languages reflects the 3sG possessive suffix.

                                                                                   Parts of plants     111

<
POe *rama 'shoot, new leaf, seedling'
  Adm: Lou              r:Jm:J-n      'taro shoot'
  NNG: Mangap           ram           'new leaves of sago, used for decoration'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) lam              'sago palm leaf decoration made from top shoot'
                                      (for tram)
  NNG: Sissano (Arop) rama-n          'seedling, shoot, plant'
>

   Taro is propagated by planting either the tops of large corms or the small suckers which
grow from the side ofthe corm, and POe *up( e,a) denoted this planting material. Its reflexes
sometimes denote propagation material for plants other than taro.

<
POe *up(e,a) 'taro seedling'
  NNG: Mutu            (do)uwe             'seed'
  NNG: Tami            uwe                 'taro seedling'
  NNG: Yabem           UWI                 'seedling'
  PT:    Are           ube                 'taro tops for planting'
  PT:    Gapapaiwa uve                     'taro tops for planting'
  PT:    Taw ala       uwe                 'taro seedling'
  PT:    Motu          uhe                 'the end of yam, kept for planting, any seed for
                                           planting'
     SES:    Arosi         uha             'taro sp. '
     NCal:   NyeHlyu       (uk)owe         'taro seedling'
     NCal:   Yuanga        uva             'taro seedling'
     NCal:   Pwapwa        upe             'taro seedling'
>

    POe also appears to have had a couple of verbal terms that denoted new growth, including
*tupul 'to send out new growth' (French-Wright 1983: 78) and *pwer(e) 'to sprout, grow' (see
vol.1 , ch.5, §9 for the reconstruction of other terms denoting growth). 11

<
POe *tupul 'to send out new growth' (French-Wright 1983: 78)
  PT:    Motu          tuhu-tuhu    'young shoot'
  MM: Roviana          tuvulu       'send out new growth, of trees that have been cut
                                   down'
  Fij:   Bauan         tuvu         'shoot up, as of a tree '
>

<
POe *pwer(e) 'to sprout, grow'
  Adm: Lou              pwe-pwer    (v) 'sprout'
PMic *pwere 'to sprout, blossom' (Bender et al. 2003: 74)
  Mic: Kiribati         pwe-pwe     (v) 'give off shoots'
  Mic: Ponapean         pwcr        'appear, blossom (of fruit and flowers)'
  Mic: Carolinian pwcer             (v) 'emerge, sprout; go all the way through a hole or
                                    tunnel'; (N) 'sprout'
>

[11] French-Wright (1983 : 79) also reconstructs POe *kaka(R,d,l) 'to sprout' and *pisi 'to bud, of leaves; to
blossom', but neither of these reconstructions is well-supported.

112     Bethwyn Evans


            Table 4.10      Terms for flowers in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 havoro       The general term for flower; to flower, blossom.
 pelara-      1. Wide open, of eye. 2. Any flower that closes at night and opens in the morning,
              e.g. hibiscus flowers.
 Wayan Fijian
 se        Blossom, bloom, flower. (N) Flower, blossom of s.t.
 sei       Flower of the vadra pandanus tree. Yellow. vadra sei, (N) Tree (kai) taxon: Pandanus
           tectorius syn. vadra. Timber used for rafters; old leaves used to wrap cigars and for
           thatching.
 waluwalu Flower of the breadfruit. The fruit grows when the long thin flower drops.
 Tikopia
 sei          Flower, especially as in decoration, e.g. in ear lobe, hence any ear ornament' Poss.
              occ. uttered as se, se rakau flower of plant. Cf. sesei flower (poss. plural of sei, archaic
              sese)
 rasei        (N) Flower, flower ornament
 kalokalo     (N) Bright red flowers of coral tree (l)atae 'Erythrina sp.'). Appearance in July/August
              taken as traditional sign for start of turmeric extraction.
 viro         (N) Sago flower.




4.2.7 Flowers

Oceanic languages tend to have a general term that refers to blooms of any kind, like Nduke
havoro 'the general term for flower ' and Wayan se 'blossom, bloom, flower' . Some languages
also have names for the flowers of specific type:s of plants, such as Tikopia kalokalo 'bright
red flowers of coral tree (!Jatae 'Erythrina sp. ')' and viro 'sago flower ' .

    POe appears to have had two general tem1s for flower, *pu!Ja, which continues PMP
*bu!Ja, and *se, and it is not clear how they differed. Both forms are reflected most widely in
Eastern Oceanic languages; in fact I have found no Western Oceanic cognates of *pu!Ja and
only one of *se.

<
PMP *bu!Ja 'flower, blossom; to flower, bear flowers; first-born child; skin rash, prickly
  heat; speckled (offish)' (AcD)
POe *pu!Ja 'flower, blossom' (ACD)
  SES: Longgu           VU!Ja       (vi) 'to bud, blossom; to flower ' ; (N) 'a bunch'
  NCV: Lonwolwol WU!Ji-             'flower of'
  NCV: Paamese          hu!Je-      'flower; tiny immature fruit on plants with no
                                    flowers'
  NCV: Sesake           na-VU!Ja    'flower'
  SV:     Lenakel       nOUIJiJ-    'flower'
  NCal: Xaracuu        pu           'flower'
  NCal: Iaai            Vt1.1JO     'flower'
  Pn:     Samoan       fu!Ja        (N) 'flower, blossom; (v) 'be in bloom'
  Pn:     Tokelauan     fu!Ja          'flower, blossom'
  Pn:     Luangiua      pu!Ja          'coconut flower, coconut seeds '
>

                                                                          Parts of plants   113


    The Fijian, Polynesian and Nakanai forms below suggest the reconstruction of *see 'flower'
with a long vowel, but no contrast between short and long vowels is reconstructed for POe.
Possibly the POe form was *seqe as loss of *q is a regular change in all the languages which
reflect it. But this raises a further phonological question. POe *e reflects PMP *-ay which
only occurred word-finally. It is possible that the first vowel of the POe form was not *e, and
that in Nakanai and Proto Central Pacific a sequence of unlike vowels, perhaps resulting from
the loss of medial *q, merged as ee. However, without further cognates, these comments are
purely speculative and it can simply be noted that POe *see 'flower' is a non-canonic form
which may need revision if additional reflex1es are found .

<
POe *see 'flower' (Geraghty 1983)
  MM:     Nakanai       se-se         'flower; blossom; (tobacco) seeds '
  Fij:    Bauan         se-           (N) 'flower'; (v) 'flower, be in blossom'
  Fij:    Wayan         se            (N) 'flower, blossom'; (v) 'blossom, bloom, flower '
  Pn:     Tikopian      se            'occasional pronunciation of sei (flower) in
                                      possessives, e.g. se rakau (flower of plant)'
  Pn:     Futunan       se            'to flower, blossom; a flower '
  Pn:     Sikaiana      se            'flower, bud'
>

    A very similar form, *sei, appears to be reconstructable for Proto Central Pacific, although
the original meaning is not entirely obvious. In Fijian reflexes refer to the flower ofthe pan-
danus and in Polynesian languages reflexes refer to flowers that are used as ornaments behind
the ear or in the hair.

<
PCP *sei 'flower, especially as an ornament'
  Fij:    Bauan         sei           'flower of the vadra or balawa (pandanus)'
  Fij:    Wayan         sei           'yellow flower of the vadra pandanus tree '
  Pn:     Tongan        sei           'ornamentation (e.g. flower) placed behind the ear'
  Pn:     Niuean        hei           (N) 'floral decoration for bride '; (v) 'place a flower
                                      in hair or behind ear'
  Pn:     Rennellese    sei           'ornament in the lobe ofthe ear'
  Pn:     Tikopia       sei           'flower, especially as in decoration, e.g. in ear lobe,
                                      hence any ear ornament'
  Pn:     Samoan        sei           'flower worn as ornament (behind ear or in hair)'
  Pn:     Tokelau       hei           'ear or hair ornament of flower or leaf
>

    The generic terms for flowers in many Western Oceanic languages are innovative, and
are not only not cognate with those found in Eastern Oceanic, but are also often not cognate
within lower level subgroups.

    Just as with leaf terms, modem Oceanic: languages tend to have one or two more spe-
cific flower terms that denote the flowers of particular types of plants. So alongside se 'blos-
som, flower ', Wayan has sei 'flower of the vadra pandanus' and waluwalu 'flower of the
breadfruit'. Other languages tend to have specific names for coconut, sago or banana flow-
ers (e.g. Misima ldmun 'coconut flower ', Ramoaaina tete 'flower of banana', Tikopia viro
'sago flower '). But again none of these more specific terms appear to be reconstructable for
POe. Even within lower level subgroups languages have non-cognate forms. For example,
the Papuan Tip languages Gapapaiwa (sisina 'coconut blossoms '), Gumawana (niyola 'blos-
soms on a coconut palm') and Misima (ldmun 'coconut flower ' ) have non-cognate terms for
coconut flower.

114     Bethwyn Evans




             Table 4.11     Terms for fruits in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 malete-    Fruit. malet' pevu 'fruit of coconut', malet' manioko 'pawpaw'. Can describe any
            kind of fruit, whether ripe or already fallen ..
 mezu-      To be ripe, of kino (cut-nut) or tat'lise (sea-almond) nuts (but not used of canarium
            nuts). This is determined by the skin of the fruit beginning to soften slightly and the
            nuts falling down by themselves.
 udo-       The spoilage of fruit that happens when fruit-fly or flying foxes attack it. Fruit that is
            udo often drops to the ground prematurely. In coconuts udo happens when the fruit
            is still very young.
 vara-      A hand ofbananas or hea 'betelnuts', but not of kino'cutnuts (Barringtonia)' or haoro
            'Canarium nuts'. Refers to the separate 'hands' ofbetelnut or bananas that have been
            torn off from the full bunch.
 Wayan Fijian
 vua      1. Fruit; 2. (metaph.) Results, products, offspring. (v) 1. (sub. a plant.) Fruit, bear
          fruit; 2. (sub. a project, etc.) Produce results, bear fruit. 3. (sub. e.g. people, animal
          stock.) Increase, multiply.
 vuata    1. Crops, food plants, fruit or vegetables which are harvested. cf. marawa, magiti
          'vegetables'. 2. Returns, benefits, products of one's work, fruits of one's labour.
 ua       Bunch or cluster of fruit.
 nia      Flesh or main substance of s.t. Thus: 1. Flesh of an animal body, including meat, fat
          and marrow, in contrast to skin (taba) and bones (tua); 2. Flesh or main edible part
          of fruit or root excluding the skin or rind; 3. Tuber of root crop, e.g. taro, yam, sweet
          potato; 4. Mature inner part of a tree, heartwood. near syn. doa; 5. Lower part of
          stem of the kava plant (agona) in contrast to the root (waka) and upper stem (gai); 6.
          Substance or main content of a speech,. book, etc.
 marawa 1. Ground crops, food-plants obtained from plants other than trees; uncooked vegeta-
          bles, including root crops, bananas, sugarcane, corn, melons, etc. contr. vuata, fruits,
          magiti, food ready for eating or foodstuffs in general. 2. Used by some as a generic
          term for all food plants, including tree--crops or fruit.
 ba       Hand of bananas. ba i ata, (N) Top or upper hand. ba ira, (N) Bottom or lower hand.
 kalikali 1. Groin, top of the leg where it joins the trunk (of person or animal). nr syn. qiriqiri.
          2. The lowest rows of bananas on a stalk, poorly developed. syn. kalikali ni tiaina.
 Tikopia
 fua         (N) 1. Fruit 2. Analogous objects to fruit, e.g. eggs of fish or birds.
 rere        (v) 1. Move with speed, rush 2. Develop from bud into fruit.
 kaureu      (N) Unripe, but damaged fruit, e.g banana bunch which must be cut to avoid loss.
 moa         (N) Banana fruit on stem in formative stage.
                                                                            Parts of plants    115




4.2.8 Fruit

Table 4.11 gives the terms for 'fruit' and related meanings in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and
Tikopia. All three languages have generic terms for fruit and specific terms relating to ba-
nanas.

     The term 'fruit' in English has a number of senses, including: '1. vegetable products in
general, that are fit to be used as food by men and animals ... 2. the edible product of a plant
or tree, consisting of the seed and its envelope, esp. the latter when it is of juicy pulpy nature
.... 5. the seed of a plant or tree regarded as the means of reproduction, together with its
envelope ' (OED). With terms glossed as 'fruit' in the dictionaries of Oceanic languages it
is often difficult to determine which of the English senses are present in the meaning of the
Oceanic term. Ross (1996c: 208-209) concludes that POe *puaq, the general term for 'fruit',
denoted fruit as a plant part and plant product, rather than a food category. The number of
reflexes of *puaq that are glossed as 'seed' suggests that its meaning encompassed both the
seed and its envelope (see §2.9).

<
PAn *buaq 'fruit' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *puaq 'fruit: generic for fruit as a part of plants, the seed and its envelope (N); to bear
  fruit (v)' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Gitua            pua              'seed, egg'
  PT:     Wedau         ua               'fruit'
  PT:     Motu          hua-hua          'fruit, bear fruit '
  PT:     Mekeo         pua              'seed'
  MM: Tabar             ua-ua            'seed'
  MM: Label             hua              'seed'
  MM: Teop              vua              'fruit, seed '
  MM: Roviana           vua              'fruit'
  MM: Maringe           vua              'fruit'
  SES: Gel a            vua-vua          'fruit; seed; flower '
  SES: Lau             fu-fua            'fruit'
  SES: Arosi            hua              'fruit; counter for fruit, stones, eggs, fish etc ; round
                                        or lump-like objects; bear fruit '
  NCV: Raga             vwa-i-           'fruit'
  NCV: Big Nambas na-va-                 'fruit'
  NCV: Nguna            na-waa           'fruit'
  SV:      Sye          (no)vwa-         'seed'
                        (no )vwa(hay) 'fruit of any tree'
  SV:     Anejom        (no)howa-        'fruit'
  Mic: Chuukese         wuwa             'fruit, berry'
  Mic: Carolinian uwa                    'fruit, flower '
     Fij:      Wayan        vua             (N) 'fruit; results, products, offspring'; (v) '(plant)
                                            bear fruit; (project, etc.) produce results, bear fruit;
                                            (people, animal stock) increase, multiply'
     Pn:       Tongan       fua             (N) 'fruit; result; egg'; (v) 'bear fruit'
     Pn:       Niuean       fua             (N) 'fruit, berry, nut, egg shell, shellfish'; (v)
                                            'swell' 12
     Pn:       Tikopia      fua             'fruit;         similar to fruit, such as fish or bird
                                            eggs, but not fatu kai (seeds of plants)'
     Pn:       Samoan       fua             (N) 'fruit; flower, bloom; egg; produce'; (v)
                                            'produce; bear fruit'
>

116         Bethwyn Evans


    POe also had several terms that for clusters or bunches of fruit. The most general of these,
*pu!Ju, denoted a bunch or cluster of any kind of fruit or nuts.

<
PMP *pu!JU 'bunch, cluster (of grain, fruit, areca nuts, etc.)' (ACD)
POe *pu!JU 'bunch or cluster of fruit or nuts' (Ross 1996c: 185)
  Adm: Loniu                he-pu!J         'one duster (as of areca nuts)'
  Adm: Titan                sa-bu!J         'one duster (as of areca nuts)'
  NNG: Yabem                bu!J            'bunch (of bananas etc)'
  NNG: Mumeng (Patep) bun                   'bundle; oftimbers, green etc; tie (into a bunch)'
  MM: Nduke                 VUIJU-          'bunch or cluster of nuts or fruit'
  SES: Gela                 VUIJU           'grain of maize or com; pod, bunch, cluster of fruit'
  SES: Lau                 fu!Ju            'bear fruit or seed; a bunch'
  SES: Kwaio               fu!Ju            'bearing fruit; bunch offruit'
  SES: 'Are'are             hunu            'bear fruit, be in fruit; bunch, bundle'
  SES: Arosi                hu!JU-          'a bunch or cluster offruit'
  NCV: Mota                 VUIJ            'a bunch of fruit or coconuts, Canarium almonds
                                           (but not bananas or pandanus)'
>

    POe *jamu((q)a), on the other hand, apparently referred to clusters of fruit, or flowers,
on palms. This term is reflected with such a meaning in Kairiru, Rotuman and Rarotongan,
but in other languages, such as Wayan and Tikopia, reflexes have come to denote the spathe
or the covering of a coconut flower cluster. The addition of this latter meaning appears to be
restricted to Central Pacific languages, and so is not reconstructed as a secondary meaning
for the POe term. The Polynesian forms here are taken to be reflexes that have undergone
metathesis (Geraghty 1986: 301).

<
POe *jamu((q)a) 'cluster of flowers or fruit, usually palms' (Ross 1989: 474)
  NNG: Kairiru        }yam           'bunch of palm fruit'
  NNG: Gedaged        damu           'a bunch, cluster (of nuts or fruit)'
  Fij:  Rotuman       jamu?a         'branching flower and fruit stem of coconut or fan
                                     palm'
  Fij:  Wayan          samoa         'hard sheath or calyx enclosing flower of coconut
                                     (used as torch); coconut flower before sheath bursts'
     Pn:    Tongan           toume            'coconut spathe, often used for torches'
     Pn:    Tikopia          taume            'coconut spathe, when dry used for fuel'
     Pn:    Tuvalu           taume            'fruit-bearing coconut shoot; coconut spathe'
     Pn:    Rarotongan       taume            'coconut spathe' (but examples refer clearly to
                                              spadix [flower spike])
>

[12] Sperlich (1997: 85) writes that Niueanfua 'has a wide meaning range, mainly related to natural phenomena
of growth, offspring, swelling and protective encasement used by various animals and plants'.

                                                                                        Parts of plants       117



   POe also had a distinct term, *qiti!J, that denoted a hand or bunch of bananas. The balance
ofthe evidence suggests that 'hand' was the usual meaning.

<
PMP *qiti!J 'bunch of bananas' (ACD)
POe *qiti!J 'a hand or bunch of bananas' (based on ACD)
  PT:      Gumawana kisi              'hand of bananas'
  MM: Sursurunga !Jiti-n              'hand of bananas'
  MM: Roviana           iti!Ji-na     'a hand of bananas'
  SES: Gela             iti (ni vudi) 'the stem of a bunch ofbananas'
  SES: Lau                            'hand of bananas'
  Fij:    Rotuman       ifi           'hand of bananas; (small kinds of fruit) bunch,
                                      cluster'
>

    Also attributable to POe is a distinct term for the stem offruit, probably denoting bananas
in particular. 13

<
POe *kulo 'stem of fruit, especially banana'
  Adm: Lou             kolu(cn)       'fruit stem'
  NNG: Poeng           kule-na        '(banana) stem'
  SES: Gela            kulo           '(banana) stem'
  Mic: Marshallese kiJlwre            'fruit s1cem; stalk, leaf-stem, petiole'
>


4.2.9 Seeds

Table 4.12 gives the terms for 'seeds' in Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia. Nduke has a single term,
kiko-, which is a general term for seeds or grain. Wayan, on the other hand, has a number of
different terms, three of which, mata, gele and kawa, denote seeds in general, although with
mata and kawa the seed of a plant is only one of a range of related meanings. Wayan also
has a term nbou that denotes the seeds of mangrove trees.

     'Seed' in English refers to 'the ovules of a plant or plants (chiefly, when in the form of
'grains' or small roundish bodies) esp[eciallly] as collected for the purpose of being sown'
(OED), and can refer to a variety of objects, including the large stone-like seeds of some
fruit, grains of grasses, beans, the scale-like seeds of pine cones etc. While many modem
Oceanic languages have apparently monosemous terms glossed as 'seed', other languages
have polysemous terms with primary meanings of 'stone', 'fruit' or 'louse egg'. POe appears
to have been like these latter languages.

[13] Blust (1976) reconstructs a term *kuRo 'stem, trunk' on the basis ofGela kulo 'stem of a banana' and Samoan
?uo 'short thick log (about six feet long)' , but the additional data presented above indicate that the Samoan form
is not cognate, and that the POe term was more restricted in its meaning.

118   Bethwyn Evans


             Table 4.12     Terms for seeds in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

  Nduke
  kiko-     A general term for a seed or grain.
  Wayan Fijian
  mata    Something which is the focal point or most important part of s.t., e.g. eye of needle,
          mesh of net, entrance to house, blade of knife, point of a spear, seed, source of water,
          etc.
  gele    Seed of a plant, pips or stones of fruit.
  kawa    That which is reproduced by a plant or animal: seed, progeny, offspring, descendants,
          stock.
  tlbou   Seeds of mangrove (tiri or tol)o ).
  Tikopia
  koru     (N) Seed or kernel of large fruit, e.g. Areca. Also a dry breadfruit; and (mod.) ship's
           biscuit.
  fatufatu (N) Stone, rock; knob, knot, nodule, kernel (e.g. fatu kofe 'bamboo nodule' ,fatu kai
           'melon, melon seed'); Parts of body, protuberant or kernel-like (e.g. knuckle, Adam's
           apple etc).
  nukuru (N) Dried kernel of areca nut, stored for betel chewing.
  kaka     (N) Dry, woody areca nut, in late stage.



    In a number of modem Oceanic languages, including Manam, Carolinian and Tikopia,
reflexes of POe *patu 'stone ' are polysemous and can also refer to the seeds of plants. In
other languages, such as Lukep, Marovo and Emae, reflexes of POe *patu appear to have
lost the 'stone ' meaning and remain as distinct terms for 'seed'. While it is possible that the
shift from the meaning 'stone' to that of 'seed' occurred independently in different groups
of Oceanic languages, it seems probable that POe *patu was polysemous and could denote
both stones and the seeds of plants. The most natural polysemy of *patu would have been
'stone ' and 'large stone-like seeds'. The Lukep, Kiribati and Samoan reflexes suggest that
*patu may have also denoted small seeds such as those of melons and citrus fruits, but it is
not clear if *patu could refer to the seeds of all plants.

<
PAn *batu 'stone '
POe *patu 'stone, rock; seed' (vo1.2, ch.3, §7.1)
  NNG:    Lukep (Pono) patu-               'small seeds such as com, melon, carrots etc'
  NNG:    Takia        patu-               'seed, (small) fruit of tree, nut, egg; coin'
  NNG:    Man am       patu                'stone, seed, money'
  PT:     Tubetube     patu                'seed'
  MM:     Siar         patu-n              'seed'
  MM:     Marovo       patu-na             'seed'
  SES:    Tolo         vatu-na             'seed'
  Mic:    Kiribati     ati                 'seed, (fruit) pips; block of coral, rock, stone ; islet'
  Mic:    Carolinian   fay                 'stone, rock, seed, testicles '
  Pn:     Tikopia         fatu-fatu      'stone, rock; knob, knot, nodule, kernel; protuberent
                                         or kernel-like body-part (e.g. knuckle, adam's apple
                                         etc)'
  Pn:     Emae            fatu           'seed'
  Pn:     Samoan          fatu           'hear1t; seed, pip; grain; core, essence'
>

                                                                           Parts of plants   119


     Holzknecht (1989: 87) presents data from a number of Markham (NNG) languages to
support the reconstruction of POe *lija(n) 'se1ed', the primary meaning of which was probably
'nit, louse egg' (Ross 1989: 481-482). More detailed Oceanic data indicates that the POe form
was *lisaq 'nit, louse egg', reflecting an earlier PAn term *liseqeS 'nit, louse egg' (Blust
2002), and that a second form, *leja!J 'nit', is reconstructable for PWOc. Reflexes of POe
*lisaq 'nit, louse egg' with the meaning 'seed' occur in Sa' a (SES) and Wusi (NCV), so it is
possible that this was a secondary meaning in PEOc. The exact reference ofPEOc *lisa 'seed'
is unclear, but it probably denoted small seeds like grain at least, and may have referred more
generally to the seeds of plants. The 'seed' meaning of reflexes of PWOc *lejan in several
Markham (NNG) languages, including Adzera niju-n 'seed' and N Watut nejo 'seed', indicate
that a similar shift in meaning has also occurTed with reflexes of this form.

<
PAn *li(!J)sa 'nit, louse's egg' (Blust 1972b)
PEOc *lisa 'nit, louse egg; seed'
  SES: Sa'a             lite           'seed, kernel'
  NCV: Wusi             lise           'seed'
>

    As noted in §2.8, POe *puaq was another term that could refer to the seeds of a plant
as part of a broader meaning that also encompassed 'fruit'. A number of Oceanic languages
have a distinct term for the seeds of the breadfruit, but as can be seen from the following list,
the modern terms are rarely cognate.

   Adm:    Lou            komwit-       'breadfruit seed'
   NNG:    Kaulong        emlu          'breadfruit seed'
   NNG:    Mangseng       salemi        'breadfruit seed'
   MM:     Bola           baki          'breadfruit seed'
   MM:     Nakanai        kako          'breadfruit seed'
   MM:     Ramoaaina      tat           'breadfruit seed'
   SES:    Gel a          dui           'breadfruit seed'
   Mic:    Kosraean       k:Jl:J        'breadfruit seed'
   Mic:    Carolinian     bwuxili       'edibl1e seeds from one variety of breadfruit'

   The data given by Ross (1996c: 188) allow the reconstruction ofPWOc *kalijo 'edible
kernel of breadfruit segments', but no term with this meaning is reconstructable for POe.

<
PWOc *kalijo 'edible kernel of breadfruit segments'
  NNG:    Mangap        kiliizi          'breadfruit seed'
  NNG:    Sio           kalinzo          'breadfruit seed'
  NNG:    Malasanga     kariro           'breadfruit fruit'
  NNG:    Lukep (Po no) kadidi           'breadfruit seed' (*-1- assimilated to -d-)
  NNG:    Takia         alid             'breadfruit seed'
     NNG:     Man am              kaizo      'edible breadfruit seed'
     NNG:     Ali                 alic       'breadfnuit'
     MM:      Halia               ariro      'Artocarpus leeuwenii' (Glennon & Glennon 2005)
     MM:      Teop                ariko      'seed of breadfruit tree ' 14
>

120       Bethwyn Evans


    The breadfruit is a syncarp, a compound fruit with many segments arranged around the
core, which itself is the spike of the original flower. POe *malo- denoted both the flower
spike and the fruit core.

<
POe *malo- 'breadfruit flower, breadfruit core ' (Blust 1972b: *malo(n) 'core ofthe
  breadfruit')
  NNG: Bariai         malo          'breadfruit flower '
  NNG: Gedaged        malo-         'core of the breadfruit'
  Fij:   Bauan        malo          'core of the breadfruit'
  Pn:    Tongan       malo          'flower-spike ofthe breadfruit'
>


4.2.10 Outer coverings

This section looks at terms for the outer coverings of parts of plants, such as the bark of woody
stems, rind or peel of fruits and husk or shell of nuts. In some modem Oceanic languages there
is a general term that covers all such meanings. For example, in Wayan taba denotes any sort
of outer covering or layer, including skin or hide, bark, rind or husk of fruit and the outer
shell of things like eggs. Similar terms are found in other languages, such as Longgu pagepage
'bark; skin of snake or lizard; skin of an animal that sheds ; skin that peels, of human; skin of
fruit or tubers (e.g. cassava, sweet potato); any skin removed from " owner"', and Mumeng
(Patep) nin;:JVi 'skin, of person, animal, fruit, tree'. N duke, in contrast, has a number of quite
specific terms, tutupa 'bark of tree', poko- 'the husk or covering of grain' and pululu 'the
cover over fruit found on some palm trees'. Many languages, like Nduke and Tikopia, have
specific terms for the husk of coconuts.

     In many modem Oceanic languages the same word is used for skin (of animals and peo-
ple), skin of fruit and bark (oftrees), e.g. Xaraciuu kii 'skin, hide ; bark, peel (offruit)' , Iduna
kwajilina 'skin (of fruit, plants, animals) ; bark of tree ', Mangseng peti 'skin, peel, bark' and
Labu anas:J 'skin; bark; peel'. And this also appears to have been true of POe *kulit. Also
reconstructable for POe (and PMP) is a verbal derivative *kulit-i- , with the transitive suffix
*-i, denoting the removal of skin or bark.

<
PMP *kulit (N) 'skin' (Dempwolff 1938)
PMP *kulit-i (vT) 'to remove the skin ofs.t. , to remove bark from a tree ' (ACD)
POe *kulit (N) 'skin (of animals, people, fruit), bark (of trees)' (Ross 1988)
POe *kulit-i- (vT) 'to skin s.t., to remove bark from a tree '
     Adm: Titan        kuli-n                'skin'
     NNG: Lukep (Pono) kuli-                 'skin, bark'
   PT:     Misima          kunis'(humans, animals, fish, food) skin; (tree) bark;
                                (fish) scales; (coconut) husk'
   MM: Nakanai    kuli-kuli     'skin (a piece rather than the whole) ; bark; peel'
                  kulisi        '(skin) have scrape ; remove tree bark or fruit skin'
   MM : Ramoaaina kuliti        'peel off in flakes '
   SES: Gel a     (yui)yuli     (N) 'skin"
                  yuliti        (v) 'peel skin or bark'
   SES: Bugotu    (yui)yuli-fia (N) 'skin,, bark'
                  yuliti        (v) 'flay, skin'
   SES: Tolo      huli-na       '(human, fruit) skin; (tree) bark'
   SES: Kwara' ae ?uli-?uli     'bark, skin with flesh (thicker than ta?eta?e 'skin,
                                bark, husk')'
   SES: Arosi     ?uri-na       'human skin, animals, roots, fruits ; inner tree bark'
   NCV: Lonwolwol ul            '(human, tree) skin'
   NCV: Paamese   uti-          'tree bark (especially the fibrous kind which easily
                                peels off in long strips and can be used for tying
                                things)'
   Mic: Kiribati  kun           'skin, peel, bark, crust, membrane, book cover'
   Mic: Kosraean  kolo-         'skin, peel, bark, hide, rind, pillow case '
   Fij: Rotuman   ?uti          'skin, peel, bark, crust'
   Fij: Bauan     kuli-         (N) 'skin, peel, bark'
                  kulit-a       (v) 'peel cooked taro or food cooked in water; strip
                                off the skin or bark of a tree '
>

[14] Reflects *kaligo rather than *kalijo.

                                                                              Parts of plants     121

         Table 4.13   Terms for outer coverings in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

Nduke
poko-        The husk or covering of grain. Variant: popoko-.
pululu       The cover over fruit found on        palm trees.
tutupa-      The bark of a tree.
punutu-      Fibrous epidermis round the base of a coconut frond. The punutu looks like an open-
             weave cloth, and is used for straining coconut 'milk' from squeezed coconut flesh .
rereto-      Spathe of the coconut, the 'boat' that accompanies the flowers and baby coconuts.
             The flowers and fruits (coconuts) are themselves supported by the bayutu (stem).
pepenete-    Husk of a mature coconut, and also the thick coir or fibre that makes up the inside of
             the husk.
Wayan Fijian
sau       I . Shell or endocarp of any organism; 2. Anything which has had the good parts taken
          out, which is reduced to its waste or useless parts; thus, waste material, offal, rind or
          husk of fruit, food refuse, etc; 3. Rubbish in general, refuse, garbage.
taba      Outer or covering layer. Thus: 1. Skin or hide; 2. Bark; 3. Rind or husk of fruit; 4.
          Shell or outer case (of egg, football) ; 5. Page or leaf of paper.
talil)a   1. Ear (of animal); 2. Carved knob or horn at base of curve on kiakavo club; 3. Sheath
          or calyx containing the seed and flower of certain fruits . Talil)a ni kulu sheath or
          calyx containing the seed and flower of breadfruit; talil)a ni tiaina sheath or calyx
          containing the seed and flower of banana.
basili    Dead skin of the stem of a banana plant.
samoa     1. Hard sheath or calyx enclosing the flower of a coconut. Used as a torch.syn. basi-
          wara. 2. Coconut flower before the sheath bursts.
Tikopia
kiri         (N) Skin (of man, animal); bark (of tree). Cf. raukiri 'bark of tree' .
moko         (N) Outer (covering), applied especially to bark, skin.
vakai        (N) Fibre of inner cortex of plants, esp. hibiscus; used for cord, pads for expressing
             coconut cream, pad for preparing kava and (dyed) ornament for pandanus mats.
penu         (N) 1. Integument, outer covering of object, as shell, husk, rind etc.
paku         (ADJ) 1. blunt 2. hard 3. rind, crust.
puru         (N) Husk, primarily of coconut (puru niu), since no other palm nut husk of economic
             interest; a fibrous dense material used as fuel or for domestic purposes such as clean-
             ing wooden bowls, but mainly as lashing or after special treatment, for preparation of
             sinnet cord.
tau me       (N) Spathe or sheathing-leaf of flower of coconut palm; when dry used for fuel. Tra-
             ditionally supplied fire for the ritual dancing in Marae.
122   Bethwyn E vans



    In Proto Remote Oceanic there is evidence for doublet forms *kulit and *kilit, with *kilit
reflected in Namakir of North Central Vanuatu , Western Micronesian languages and Poly-
nesian languages. However, it is likely that these reflect independent developments in Proto
Micronesian, Namakir and PPn.

<
PROc *kilit 'skin, bark'
  NCV:    Namakir     kili-n          'skin, bark'
  Mic:    Marshallese kit             'skin'
  Mic:    Mokilese    kili-           'skin, bark, peel, hide '
  Mic:    Mortlockese kili-n          'skin, bark (3s)'
  Mic:    Chuukese    sir-            'skin, bark'
  Mic:    Woleaian    xir             'bark, skin'
  Mic:    Carolinian xll              'skin, bark'
  Mic:    Ulithian    xili-           'bark, skin'
  Pn:     Tongan      kili            'skin; peel; rind ; bark'
  Pn:     Niue an     kili            'bark; skin'
  Pn:     Tikopia     kiri            '(human, animal) skin; (tree) bark'
  Pn:     E Futunan   kili            'skin; bark, (fruit) peel'
  Pn:     Hawaiian    ?iii            'skin, complexion, hide, scalp, bark, rind, peel'
>

    Specific terms for the outer coverings of different parts of the coconut are also recon-
structable for POe and are presented in chapter 12.

                                                                            Parts of plants   123

           Table 4.14   Terms for sap or resin in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

 Nduke
 oto-        The sap or gum of trees and some fruits (e.g. unripe pawpaw). Oto appears when you
             cut the stem of a tree or plant.
 Wayan Fijian
 toy a    Sap of a tree, especially when runny. contr. bulei.
 bulei    1. Gum, sticky sap exuded from tree or fruit. 2. Chewing gum.
 makadre (N) Resin or sap of the kauri pine (dakua), not present on Waya. cf. toya. Used for
          torches and for glazing pots.
 Tikopia
 piki        l.(v) Cling; stick to; adhere; clasp. 2. (N) Adhesive material: gum, resin etc from
             breadfruit and other trees.
 vale        (N) Resin; also saliva.
 toto        (N) 1. Blood. 4. Sap of plants and trees.



4.2.11 Sap, resin

Table 4.14 gives the terms for sap or resin in Nduke, Wayan and Tikopia. Nduke appears
to have a single term oto- 'the sap or gum of trees and some fruits'. Tikopia and Wayan, on
the other hand, have several different terms. In Wayan toya denotes sap, especially when it's
runny, bulei denotes sticky sap or gum, and makadre denotes the gum or resin of the kauri
tree which is used for glazing pots.

    The Oceanic data, shown in the cognate set below, suggest the reconstruction of POe
*butut, and perhaps of a variant POe *bulit, referring to the sap of plants and other sticky
substances. It was also apparently an Undergoer subject verb 'to be sticky' with a corre-
sponding transitive form *bulut-i- 'to stick something to something'. Reflexes of *butut in
a number of Oceanic languages have narrower meanings than that reconstructed for POe,
denoting kinds of sap that have a particular purpose. For example, 'Are'are purui and Sa'a
pulu denote the use of putty nut gum to caulk canoes. Samoan pulu also denotes the substance
used for caulking, in this case, breadfruit sap, and Mota pulu and NE Ambae bulu denote the
sap ofthe Canarium almond which is used for tattooing.

<
PAn *be/it, *bulit 'viscous, sticky' (ACD)
POe *bul[i,u]t (N) 'sap (of plant) or other sticky substance'; (vT) 'be sticky' (Capell1943:
  *bulu(t)
POe *bulut-i- (vT) 'to stick something to something'
  Adm: Lou           pulut             'sticky''
  Adm: Titan         }Julut-i          'stick to s.t. (vT)'
  MM: Nakanai        bulu              'soup, any liquid'
                     bulu-bulu-        'sap of tree'
  MM:      Ramoaaina bulit             'stick, glue; sap; the sap ofthe breafruit tree'
  MM:      Siar      polo-n            'sap of a tree'
     SES:      Kwaio        bulu?-ia         'caulk, tamp a post; gum; mix together' 15
     SES:      'Are'are     puru-i-          'gum, stick, caulk joints of canoe planks with
                                             puttynut'
     SES:      Sa'a         pulu             'pitch, gum, native cement; a nut, Parinarium
                                             laurinum, is scraped on rough coral rock and
                                             darkened in colour with a mixture of charcoal and
                                             the juice ofthe o?a tree; the cement hardens almost
                                             immediately'
     NCV: Mota              put, pulu        'gum of trees, particularly of Canarium; torch;
                                             tattoo done with Canarium gum; birdlime, to catch
                                             birds with; to stick'
                           pulut             'to make stick (vT)'
     NCV: NEAmbae          bulu              'sap of Canarium, used in the making of tattoos'
                           bulus-i           'to join (vT)'
     Mic:      Marshallese pwil              'sap, chewing gum'
     Mic:      Kosraean    ful               'breadfruit sap'
     Mic:      Pulo-Annan vwuni-             'sap, gum,, glue'
     Fij:      Wayan       bulu              'adhere, be attached, stick to a surface; be patched,
                                             sealed, filled (of a tooth), have s. t. glued on top to
                                             cover it'
                            bulu-bulu        'be patched, sealed with a patch; be sticky, gluey,
                                             adhesive, doggy'
                            bulut-i-         'to patch s. t., stick a patch on s. t.'
     Fij:      Rotuman      pulu             'sap, gum:; any adhesive substance -gum, paste,
                                             sealing-wax, solder etc; chewing gum' cf. pulpulu
                                             'sticky'
     Pn:       Tongan       pulu             'white sap, especially of breadfruit tree'
                            pupulu           'sticky, adhesive'
     Pn:       Samoan       pulu             'breadfruit gum, used as putty especially for
                                             caulking canoes; chewing gum; rubber'
cf. also:
     SES:      Arosi        buru             'tree species, Parinarium laurinum; the gum is used
                                             to caulk canoes'
>

124         Bethwyn Evans



4.2.12 Thorns

As can be seen from Table 4.15 Wayan, Tikopia and Nduke all have a single term for the
thorns of a plant.
    Proto Austronesian *Cenek 'thorn' (ACD) appears to be reflected within Oceanic only
by the Bauan Fijian verb tono-ka 'to pierce, poke'. Ross (1996c: 189) reconstructs *ruRi

[15] The -?ia ending ofKwaio butu?ia probably reflects tht: transitive suffix and 3sG object suffix. While there is
no corresponding intransitive form tbutu, Kwaio does have other forms that look to be derived from an original
base *butu, such as butua 'squeeze together' and iota butubutu 'a traditional composite canoe' (iota 'canoe')
(Keesing 1975: 29).

                                                                                 Parts of plants        125



             Table 4.15      Terms for thorn in Nduke, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia

   Nduke
   robo- Thorns of a plant, e.g. lime tree thorns or Bougainvillea, and also sharply serrated
         leaves.
   Wayan Fijian
   voto    1. Thorn, prickle. 2. Spike or spines of a fish, such as the sokisoki, Pufferfish. 3. Barb
          or tail needle of a stingray. 4. Gooseflesh.
   Tikopia
   sina   (N) Thorn, spine.


as the general term for thorns and spines in POe, noting that some reflexes (e.g. Lou and
Lukep) refer specifically to the barbs of sago leaves and bark, and the Titan reflex to the sago
plant itself. Reflexes of this term have only been found in Admiralty, North New Guinea
and Papuan Tip languages. While Bilibil, Takia and Kis and Gapapaiwa reflect POe *druRi,
Numbami and Mapos-Buang and Iduna reflect *ruRi, and the Admiralty forms are compatible
with either *ruRi or *druRi .

<
PMP *duRi 'thorns' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *(dr,r)uRi 'thorns'
  Adm:    Lou               ruwi            'barbs on sago bark'
  Adm:    Titan             nruwi           'a type of sago which has a lot of thorns'
  NNG:    Bilibil           dur             'thon1'
  NNG:    Lukep (Po no)     riri(ni)        'sharp points on sago and pandanus leaves (IP
                                            noun)'
  NNG:    Takia       duduru-               'thorn (inalienable)'
  NNG:    Kis         dulu                  'thon1'
  NNG:    Numbami     luli                  'thon1'
  NNG:    Mapos Buang ruru(k)               'thon1'
  PT:     Gapapaiwa   tuiri-na              'his bone '
  PT:     Iduna       lulu                  'bone'
>

    Blust (1976) reconstructs POe *poto(k) 'thorn, barb of stingray'. However, while the
'thorn' meaning is well-supported, the 'stingray barb ' meaning appears to be restricted to
Central Pacific languages, and so may not have been present in POe.

<
POe *poto(k) 'thorn, barb of stingray' (Blust 1976)
  Adm: Titan           poto-n        'thorn'
  Fij:   Bauan         voto          'a thorn, prickle; root of bodily hair (not of the
                                     head)' cf. voto-ka 'to prick (vT)'
  Fij:   Wayan         voto          'thorn, prickle; spike or spines of a fish; gooseflesh'
  Pn:    Tongan        foto          'barb of stingray'
  Pn:    Niuean        foto          'thorn, barb, spike, bristle (used both literally and
                                     figuratively, describing personal characteristics)'
  Pn:    Samoan        foto          'sting (of stingray)'
>

126   Bethwyn Evans


    In a number of languages terms for 'thorn' reflect POe terms that are best reconstructed
with the meaning 'needle'. Thus POe *saRum 'needle, tattooing needle (typically made from
wing-bone of flying fox)' (vol.1, ch.4, §3.2.1) is reflected in Carolinian tou-tow as the general
term for thorns of plants. The same is true of the Sa'a reflex of POe *sika 'netting needle'
(vol.l, ch.8, §2). Milke (1961) reconstructs *sika for POe with the meaning 'netting needle,
thorn', but the 'thorn' meaning appears to be reflected only in Sa'a sike 'thorn', suggesting
that the original meaning was 'netting needle' and that the Sa' a form is innovative.


4.3 Concluding remarks

This chapter presents more than 40 POe reconstructions of terms that denote the parts of
plants. In general the number and types of terms that are reconstructable for POe within
each of the 12 semantic categories are similar to those found in modem Oceanic languages.
For example, modem languages tend to have several terms that refer to the roots of plants,
typically including a term for roots in general and a number of more specific terms denoting
different types of roots. Similarly, for POe a general term for roots, *wakaR, and several
more specific terms, *lali(t,c) 'buttress roots', *Ramut 'fine, hair-like roots' and *wako(t)
'mangrove (aerial) roots', can be reconstructed. The same is true for terms referring to outer
coverings. POe *kulit denoted the skin of fruits and the bark of trees, as well as the skin of
animals and people. Alongside *kulit, POe also had specific terms for coconut husk (*punut,
*p(w)enut) and for the sheath of fibrous material around the base of a coconut frond (*Runut,
*nuRut). Many modem Oceanic languages hav1;: similar types ofterms for outer coverings.

    Modem Oceanic languages also tend to hav,e extensive terminologies for the parts of the
coconut palm, its fruit and their uses (Table 4.1 ). Chapter 12 is devoted to this topic.

    The number of general plant part terms reconstructed for POe, over 30, is similar to the
numbers of such terms in Wayan (nearly 50), Tikopia (nearly 50) and Nduke (over 30). How-
ever, these modem languages have a much larger number of terms for the parts of particular
types of plants (nearly 20 in all three languages), than can be reconstructed for POe (7 terms
in this chapter). This difference was particularly apparent with the terms for leaves. Table 4.8
gave a selection ofthe range of terms for leaves in a number of Oceanic languages, demon-
strating how modem Oceanic languages typically have several terms for the leaves of par-
ticular types of plants, including coconut, taro and pandanus. Ross ( 1996c) reconstructs POe
terms for taro leaves (*gal(a,o)) and palm fronds (*[pa]paq[a- ]), and POe *sulu(q) 'coconut
leaf torch' could probably also refer to dry coconut leaves, but other terms for the leaves of
particular types of plants do not appear to be reconstructable.

    Table 4.2 shows the range of terms in a number of modem languages for parts of banana
plants. Many Oceanic languages, including Lou, Iduna, Gapapaiwa, Gumawana, Ramoaaina,
Gela, Longgu, Wayan, and E Futunan, have tenms that specifically denote the new shoots or
suckers of banana plants, but such a specific term does not appear to be reconstructable for
POe. Rather, POe *[s,j ]uli(q) apparently denote:d propagation material in general (including
suckers and shoots), though it may have referred especially to the suckers of banana and taro.
Modem Oceanic languages also tend to have more specific terms for bunches of bananas than
can be reconstructed for POe. Thus Lou has a term p:Jr:Jk denoting a new bunch of bananas
and several terms for hands ofbananas, including topwan 'first banana hand', 1prcn 'last hand
of bananas', set 'one hand of bananas' and turet 'two hands of bananas'. For POe only the
more general term *qiti!J 'hand of bananas' can be reconstructed.

                                                                           Parts of plants    127


     It is unlikely that the structure and detail of the POe terminology for plant parts differed
much from that of modem Oceanic languages. Our inability to reconstruct as many POe
names for the parts of specific plants as there are in modem languages probably stems from
two factors: (i) a rapid rate of lexical replacement in such names; (ii) shortcomings in the
data for modem Oceanic languages. Both factors would reduce the number of cognate sets.
It is possible that a faster rate of lexical replacement with specific plant part terms reflects a
lower frequency of use. In small migrating communities, where it is likely that the younger
people move on while the elders remain at home, there may be a tendency for less frequently
used lexical items to be forgotten and later              if and when needed.




5 Wild plants of the coastal strand

5.1 Introduction

Tropical coastal habitats are of two kinds, depending on whether or not fresh as well as salt
water is available along the coastal strip. If fresh water is available, then a mangrove swamp
may occur (chapter 6). If there is no fresh water or if mangroves are removed by human
agency, a beach is formed.[1] In NW Island Melanesia beaches are usually sandy (rather than
pebbly) and range from almost white, from the erosion of coral reefs and shells, to almost
black, from the erosion of volcanic rocks. A beach creates an environment for coastal strand
vegetation, which typically consists of three zones, the first two usually forming quite narrow
bands: [2]
       • herbaceous zone (§3);
       • beach scrub (§4);
       • littoral forest (§5).
There is sometimes also an underwater zone in the coastal shallows which is home to sea-
grasses and seaweeds.

    Where the coast is gradually being built out by the accretion of sand, a succession of ridges
develops, parallel to the beach. Ridges closer to the beach are typically about two metres high
(Paijmans 1976: 27-28). The herbaceous zoine begins at the high-tide mark and occupies the
beach up to the first ridge. It has a cover of creeping plants which include Ipomoea pes-caprae
(§3 .1), Canavalia rosea (syn. C. maritima) !(no reconstruction) and Wedelia biflora (§3.2),
as well as grasses and sedges which include Thuarea involuta (ch.8, §3).
    On their landward side the beach ridges merge into gently undulating fiats which provide
the environment for beach scrub. The border between the herbaceous zone and beach scrub is
often vague and the two zones overlap. Beach scrub consists of shrubs like Pemphis acidula
(§4.1.4) and Scaevola taccada (§4.1.5) and low-growing bushy-crowned trees like Cordia
subcordata ( §4 .1.1), H ernandia nymphaefolia ( §4 .1.2 ), Hibiscus tiliaceus ( §4 .1 .3), Thespesia
populnea (§4.1.6), Tournefortia argentea (§4.1.7) and Vitex trifolia (§4.1.8), often densely
tangled with climbers like Flagellaria indica (§4.2.1 ). Beneath the shrubs is a ground layer of
ferns, grasses, gingers and herbs which includes Crinum asiaticum (ch. 13, §6.6) (Mueller-
Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 50).

[1] I am grateful to Will McClatchey for elucidating this contrast.

[2] Except where otherwise indicated, this introduction is based on material in Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg
(1998 : 50--70).

130   Malcolm Ross


     Landwards, there is a transition, abrupt or gradual, from beach scrub to littoral forest
(although it is common in NW Island Melanesia for littoral forest to have been displaced by
coconut groves). This forest is often dominated by evergreen broadleaf trees like Barring-
tonia asiatica (§5.2), Calophyllum inophyllum (§5.3), Heritiera littoralis (ch.6, §4.4) and
Terminalia catappa (ch.ll, §2.4) (and in the Solomons Cerbera manghas, ch.6, §4.1) or the
screwpine Pandanus tectorius (or on coral soill P. dubius) (ch.ll, §2.5) or sometimes Ca-
suarina equisetifolia (§5.4). Where beach ridges have been eroded, littoral forest borders
immediately on the beach, and Barringtonia asiatica (§5.2) predominates. Trees of lesser
stature reported by Peekel (1984) in the littoral forest in New Ireland include Adenanthera
pavonina (§5.1 ), Guettarda speciosa (§5.8) and Pongamia pinnata (§5.12). In the Solomons
the lower storey includes Hibiscus tiliaceus (§4.1.3), Diospyros species (ch.7, §5.5), Klein-
hovia hospita (ch. 7, §5. 7), Ficus austrina (no reconstruction), Premna corymbosa §5.13) and
Morinda citrifolia (ch.13, §3.4) (Paijmans 1976:29-20, Henderson & Hancock 1988:321,
Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 50, 59, 70).

     As the chapter numbers in the crossreferences above indicate, it is difficult to draw a line
between littoral forest and lowland rain forest, as the two shade into each other. Trees which
grow in lowland rain forest generally are mostly assigned to chapter 7. Certain trees of damper
littoral forest also thrive on the landward margins of mangrove forests (Heritiera littoralis,
Cerbera manghas) and are treated in chapter 6. Terminalia catappa, Pandanus tectorius and
Morinda citrifolia fall under the rubric of tended or cultivated plants and are discussed in
chapter 11.

     From the perspective of linguistic reconstruction the shrubs and trees of the beach scrub
zone and the littoral forest stand out because their names are quite easy to reconstruct, their
Proto Oceanic (POe) names are often continuations of earlier forms, and they display con-
tinuity within Oceania. There are probably three main reasons for this. The first is simply
that these plants have a very wide Pacific distrilbution, an obvious condition of continuity in
naming. The second is probably that, being just lbehind the beach, they were easily accessible
from people's homes in beachside villages, and, thirdly, they also happen to be useful plants.


5.2 Coastal shallows

The coastal shallows are home to seagrasses and seaweeds and, if there is a reef, to any
number of marine plants. Seagrasses are those families of Angiosperms (flowering plants)
that spend their entire life cycle under water. Seaweeds, on the other hand, are algae.

    POe had a generic term for mosses, algaes and seaweeds, namely *lumut or *limut (§4.6).
Beyond this, comparative lexical material on these plants is thin, and only two further recon-
structions are offered here. Glosses in the sources are vague, often not distinguishing between
seagrass and seaweed. There are no species identifications.

    The Tawala description below, 'seaweed like kunai grass in appearance', is a reasonable
characterisation of seagrasses of the genus Enhalus, which is characterised by long narrow
leaves (Peekel 1984: 42-44, Hviding 2005: 13) and this is the (weak) basis for the gloss of
PNGOc *domu.

                                                                                The coastal strand     131

<
PNGOc *domu 'seagrass sp. , perhaps Enhalus'
  NNG:     Numbami   do-domu                             sea grass'
  PT:      Ubir      dom                                long species'
  PT:      Gapapaiwa tom-tom                            type '
  PT:      Tawala    tom-tom                            like kunai grass in appearance '
  PT:      Kilivila  do-dom
>

   The glosses of the items supporting the reconstruction of POe *karagwam are both too
vague and too varied to allow the denotaturn to be further pinned down. The Drehet gloss
suggests a seaweed, Andra a seagrass. The Motu gloss is somewhat confusing, as Fucus is a
genus of algae, not seagrass.

<
POe *karagwam 'seaweed, seagrass ' [3]
  Adm: Drehet              kurak            'seaweed '
  Adm: Andra               korek            'seagrass sp. growing on reef flat ' (unexpected
                                            vowels)
  PT:      Molima          kalagoma         'a seaweed'
  PT:      Taw ala         yalegwama        'seaweed type, brown'
  PT:      Muyuw           yalig            'seaweed used to paint canoes '
  PT:      Motu            alaga            'seaweed like grass, Fucus sp.'
  MM:      Nakanai         !ega             'seaweed sp.'
  MM:      Patpatar        karaguo          'seaweed '
  MM:      Tolai           kala-kalag       'seaweed sp.'
  SES:     Lau             ?alaga           'seaweed '
  SES:     Arosi           ?araga           'seaweed '
  Mic:     Kiribati        kea!J            'seagrass'
>

[3] The form of the reconstruction is puzzling, as it appears to contain the labialised velar*g", but this POe
phoneme has not previously been reconstructed. How this should be interpreted is not yet clear.


5.3 The herbaceous zone

5.3.1 Ipomoea spp., morning glocy (Convolvulaceae)

Within the Evans ' *waRoc 'vines and creepers' taxon (ch.3 , §4.4) there was apparently a
subtaxon *puRe, which consisted of beach creepers. Clark (1996) takes the PEOc reflex to
have denoted shore creepers of the genus Convolvulus. The evidence for this in the cognate
set below is at first sight thin. However, there is a strong tendency in the botanical litera-
ture for Ipomoea species ('morning glory' ) to have synonyms in the genus Convolvulus, and
it is likely that some, if not all, of the Convolvulus glosses below denote Ipomoea species.
It is thus possible that POe *puRe prototypically denoted Ipomoea grandiflora (syn. Ipo-
moea tuba, Convolvulus tuba, Calonyction grandiflorum) and Ipomoea pes-caprae (Figure
5.1, left), beach creepers with trumpet-like flowers, white and purple respectively, commonly
found on beaches in the Bismarck Archipelago (Peekel 1984: 461). Eastern Polynesian re-
flexes reflect a shift in denotatum to the gourd Lagenaria siceraria (ch. l3 , §7.1).

132     Malcolm Ross


    No reconstruction can be made for another beach creeper, Canavalia rosea (syn. C. mar-
itima), which typically co-occurs with Ipomoea pes-caprae. It is possible that it was included,
at least at some locations, in the *puRe subtaxon.

<
POe *puRe 'taxon of beach creepers; perhaps prototypically Ipomoea grandiflora and
  Ipomoea pes-caprae'
  Adm: Lou             pwi-pwi            'vine which grows on the sand'
  NNG: Kairiru         wul (kabuk)        'wax gourd, Benincasa hispida'
  PT:     Muyuw        (igina)pwey        'Ipomoea pes-caprae'
  MM: Nakanai          vule               'Crinum sp. '
  MM: Kia             fu-fure             'Ipomoea pes-caprae' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                          comm.)
  MM: Kokota          fu-fure             'a flowering plant, grows as a littoral creeper'
  MM: Gao             fu-fure             'Ipomoea pes-caprae' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                          comm.)
  SES: Lau            fule-fule           'sp. creeper on the shore'
  SES: Arosi           hure               'beach creeper, Convolvulus sp.'
  SES: Sa' a           hule               'Convolvulus sp. growing on beach. '
  NCV: Uripiv          na-wu-wu (ne dis) 'cre1eper growing at seashore' (dis 'sea' )
  NCV: Paamese         hua-hue            'beach morning glory' 4
  NCV: Lewo            (ma)wo-we          'Ipomoea sp.'
  SV:     Kwamera      najua              'beach vine sp. with yellow trumpet-shaped
                                          flowers ' 4
  SV:    Anejom        no-hou             'vine sp. on beach with purple flower ' 5
  NCal: Xaracuu        kwe                'gourd '
  Pn:     Tongan      fue                 'generic term for vines' (Whistler 199lb: 35)
  Pn:    Niuean       fue                 'cre1eping vine, Merremia peltata'
  Pn:     E Futunan fue                   'Canavalia maritima'
  Pn:     Rennellese hue                  'Ipomoea pes-caprae'
  Pn:     Tikopia     fue                 'a         vine '
  Pn:     WFutunan fue                    'sweet potato sp.'
  Pn:     Samoan      fue                 'generic for vines and creepers' (Whistler
                                          2000: 166)
  Pn:     Tuvalu      fue                 'Canavalia maritima'
  Pn:     K' marangi hue                  'Ipomoea alba'
  Pn:     Tokelauan fue                   'a vine, Ipomoea macrantha'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan hue                   'gourd '
                       (poo)hue           'Convolvulus sp.'
Proto Eastern Polynesian *fue 'gourd, Lagenaria siceraria'
  Pn:     Tahitian     hue                'gourd, calabash'
  Pn:     Rapanui      hue                'gourd, Lagenaria siceraria'
  Pn:     Rarotongan ?ue                  'gourd, Lagenaria siceraria'
  Pn:     Maori        hue                'gourd, Lagenaria siceraria'
>

[4] Presumably an Ipomoea sp.

[5] Possibly Ipomoea pes-caprae.

                                                                       The coastal strand     133



            Figure 5.1 Left Ipomoea pes-caprae, morning glory. Right Wedelia biflora.


5.3.2 Wedelia biflora (syn. Wollastonia biflora) (Asteraceae)

Wedelia biflora (Figure 5.1 , right) is a herbaceous or half-shrubby coastal plant, usually
1.5-2.5 m tall, with yellow flowers. On the beach it sometimes forms impenetrable thick-
ets, but it also occurs in the littoral forest, where it climbs as high as 6 m (Peekel1984: 561).

     The leaves are filled with a tasty milk-like sap, and Tangga speakers (offshore east of
southern New Ireland) boil and eat them (Bell 1947: 244)). At Marovo the leaves are an
ingredient in cures for stomach ache (Hviding 2005: 108).

     The following comparison is due to Blust (ACD ) , who associates it with PMP *qatay
'liver', since sources from the Philippines and northern Sulawesi suggest that the plant owes
its name to the fact that its leaves are shaped like a pig' s liver.

     Bender et al. (2003) reconstruct Proto Chuukic *adi-adi 'Wedelia biflora' . It is hard to be-
lieve that this is not associated with the reconstruction above, but this association must be by
borrowing (perhaps from Yapese), as the Proto Chuukic form would reflect POet*(q)a(s,j )u-
(q )a(sJ)u, not *qate-qate.

<
PMP *qatay-qatay 'a climbing plant, Wedelia biflora' (ACD)
POe *(qate-)qate 'W edelia biflora'
  Yap:      Yapese        ?a£)          'flower of a type of plant'
  Pn:       Tongan        ate           'shrub, Wedelia biflora' (for expected t?ate)
  Pn:       W Uvean       ate           'shrub, Wedelia sp.'
  Pn:       Anutan        ate           'plant spp., Wedelia biflora, Adenostemma lavenia'
  Pn:       Samoan        ate-ate       'shrub, Wedelia biflora'
cf. also:
Proto Chuukic *adi-adi 'Wedelia biflora' (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic:      Mortlockese ctiyet          'Wedelia biflora'
  Mic:      Chuukese    atiwat          'Wedelia biflora'
  Mic:      Puluwatese ya?tiya?t        'W edelia biflora'
  Mic:      Satawalese yatiyat          'W edelia biflora'
  Mic:      Ulithian    ya8ya8          'Wedelia biflora'
>

134       Malcolm Ross


5.4 Beach scrub

5.4.1 Woody shrubs and small trees

5.4.1.1 Cordia subcordata, kerosene wood, island walnut, sea trumpet, Pacific rosewood, P kerasin wud, Bburao blong solwata (Boraginaceae)

A twisted shore tree 8-15 m tall, Cordia subcordata (Figure 5.2, left) is well known for its
very strong black-veined heartwood, which may remain as a skeleton after the rest of a dead
tree has rotted away (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.). It occurs in varieties with orange and
yellow flowers (Peekel1984: 471, Hviding 2005: 131).

    Its wood is lightweight but durable. In the western Solomons, in Vanuatu and on W aya
Island it is used for carving (Gowers 1976: 56, Hviding 2005: 131, Gardner & Pawley 2006,
Friday & Okano 2006). In earlier times the Marovo also used it for house posts, but its use in
construction seems never to have been widespread. On New Ireland, however, the ceremonial
V-shaped entrance to a men's house was always made of C. subcordata (Record 1945). In
Tonga it was used for carving and for construction (Whistler 1991b: 108). Gowers (1976: 56)
and Capell (1941) report that its sap served as an adhesive in Vanuatu and Fiji.

    POe *kanawa(n), *toRu and *jasi and PWOc *nagi are all reconstructable, but contrasts
in meaning are unclear.

<
PMP *kanawa 'Cordia spp.' (ACD) 6
POe *kanawa(n) 'Cordia subcordata'
    NNG:     Kove          kanau            'Cordia subcordata' (Chowning 2001: 83)
    PT:      Misima        ganawan          'Cordia subcordata'
    MM:      Kara (E)      keno             'Cordia subcordata'
    MM:      Patpatar      kanawa           'Cordia subcordata'
    MM:      Tolai         kanao            'Cordia subcordata'
    Mic:     Kiribati      kanawa           'Cordia subcordata'
    Mic:     Mokilese      kanaw            'tree sp.'
    Mic:     Woleaian      xariiw           'Cordia subcordata'
    Mic:     Chuukese      anaw             'Cordia subcordata'
    Mic:     Puluwatese    yanaw            'Cordia subcordata'
    Fij:     Wayan         nawa-nawa        'Cordia subcordata'
    Fij:     Bauan         nawa-nawa        'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      Tongan        (pua tau )kanave 'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      E Uvean       kanava           'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      E Futunan     kanava           'tree sp. with black wood and small red flower,
                                            found at Alofi'
    Pn:      Samoan        (tau)anave       'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      Tokelauan     tanava           'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      Nukuoro       ganava           'Cordia subcordata'
    Pn:      Nukuria       ganava           'Cordia subcordata'
>


[6] Wolff (1994) argues that this term should not be reconstructed for PMP but started its life somewhere in
eastern Indonesia and spread in non-Oceanic languages by borrowing. However, the ACD includes Palauan
kelau 'Cordia sebestena', which supports the PMP reconstruction.

                                                                            The coastal strand      135



Figure 5.2 Left Cordia subcordata, kerosene wood: A, tree; B, small branch with flowers and
leaves; C, fruit cluster Right Hibiscus tiliaceus, cotton wood: D, leaf; E, shoot with flower; F, matured
over-ripe fruit cluster.


<
POe *toRu 'Cordia subcordata'
  MM:      Nehan          to-tor          'Cordia subcordata'
  MM:      Petats         to-to!          'Cordia subcordata'
  Fij:     Wayan          tou-tou         'tree of coastal slopes and rocky places inland: Gyrocarpus americanus'
  Fij:     Bauan          tou             'Cordia aspera, sap used as a paste'
  Pn:      Tongan         tou             'Cordia aspera'
  Pn:      E Uvean        tou             'Cordia aspera'
  Pn:      Tikopia        tou             'unidentified tree with soft light timber, no economic use'
  Pn:      Samoan     tou                 'Cordia aspera'
  Pn:      Tongarevan tou                 'Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:      Rarotongan tou                 'Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:      Tahitian   tou                 'Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:      Tuamotuan tou                  'Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:      Hawaiian   kou                 'Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:      Marque san tou                 'Cordia subcordata'
>

136    Malcolm Ross


   The term *jasi is reconstructed for PCEMP and POe (rather than PEOc, as the data here
imply) because there appears to be an external cognate in Timorese (nonwai) tasi 'Cordia
subcordata' (Heyne 1950: 1306).

<
PCEMP *jasi 'Cordia subcordata'
POe *jasi 'Cordia subcordata'
  SES: Kwara'ae        (jofo)tasi      'Cordia subcordata'
  NCV: Nduindui        (fifai) na-tahi 'Cordia subcordata'
PPn *tahi 'heartwood, including that of Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:    Tongan        tahi            'hard heart or solid centre of certain kinds of tree'
  Pn:    E Uvean       tahi            'old (ofwood)'
  Pn:    Samoan        tai             'heart of a tree'
  Pn:    Tuvalu        tai(ki)         'heartwood'
  Pn:    Tokelauan tai(tea)            'white wood of Cordia subcordata'
                       tai(uli)        'dark wood of Cordia subcordata'
  Pn:    Rarotongan tai(ki)            'heartwood'
  Pn:    Maori         tai(ki)         'heartwood'
>

<
PWOc *nagi 'Cordia sp.'
 PT:   Muyuw        (a)nag                  'Cordia sp.'
 MM: Nduke          na-nagi                 'Cordia sp.'
 MM: Marovo         nagi-nagi               'Cordia subcordata'
>

4.1.2 Hernandia nymphaefolia (syn. H. peltata) , sea hearse tree, lantern tree, Bnambirimbiri, napiripiri,
      bluwud (Hernandiaceae)
                                      Peekel (1984: 192) describes Hernandia nymphaefolia as
                                      'one of the most frequent beach trees' in New Ireland. It is
                                      a small tree with hard white wood, white flowers and spher-
                                      ical white fruit about 3 em in diameter which ripen to pink
                                      (Gowers 1976: 85).
                                          The Nakanai of New Britain and people in parts of Van-
                                      uatu use the trunk for making canoe hulls. The Nakanai
                                      also use the wood for hourglass drums (Floyd 1954, Gow-
                                      ers 1976: 85).
                                          Bennett (n.d.) comments that at Biliau (north coast of
                                      New Guinea) the flowers are used on a hook to attract fish
                                      when one is fishing from a moving boat.
                                          On Waya Island (Fiji) the flowers are said to have pro-
                                      vided medicine for asthma (Gardner & Pawley 2006), and
   Figure 5.3 Hernandia               Gowers also reports that it was held to have medicinal prop-
 nymphaefolia, sea hearse tree        erties in Vanuatu.
                                                                             The coastal strand      137


     There is some evidence that for early Oceanic speakers H ernandia nymphaefolia and
Thespesia populnea (§4.1 .6) formed a taxon. 7 Both are small shore trees and both have hard
wood that is used for hourglass drums. In Lau the regular reflex of POe *biRi-biRi 'H. nym-
phaefolia' denotes 'T. populnea'. In Wayan Fijian the same is true of a borrowed reflex of
*biRi-biRi. The Kiribati reflex of *biRi-biRi appears to denote both tree species.

     The Nduke and Roviana reflexes appear to denote Excoecaria agallocha (ch.6, §4.3), the
leaves of which resemble those of H . nymphaefolia (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.).

     Clark (1996a) takes the *-r- ofPNCV *biri-biri below to reflect POe *-r-, but loss ofthe
rhotic in PPn *pipi points to POe *-R- . Recent work by Lynch (2007) shows that PNCV *-r-
may reflect either POe *-r- or POe *-R- , confirming that the POe form was almost certainly
*biRi-biRi. There is a margin of uncertainty because the Polynesian forms have short i where
long vowels are expected, and the authors of POLLEX suggest that this may reflect borrowing.

     The Seimat and Micronesian forms reflect POe t*bi!Ji-bi!Ji rather than *biRi-biRi. It is
possible that the Seimat form represents a borrowing from a Micronesian language, but PMic
*-IJ- remains unexplained.

<
POe *biRi-biRi 'Hernandia nymphaefolia' (lPNCV Clark 1996a; PEOc Geraghty 1990)
    Adm:   Seimat         bi!Ji-bi!Ji 'Hernandia ovigera' (Sorensen 1950)
    NNG:   Bing           pir-pir     'tree sp. (with white flowers ; grows beside the sea)'
    MM:    Kara (E)       vi-vi       'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
    MM:    Patpatar       bir-bir     'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
    MM:    Tolai          (palu)bir   'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
    MM:    Sursurunga     bir-bir     'large tree that grows on sand'
    MM:    Nehan          bir-bir     'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
    MM:    Kubukota       biri-biri   'a tree that grows on the shore, whose leaves are
                                      used as medicine for stings from certain fish'
  MM: Nduke            bi-biri        'tree of mangrove areas, sap injures the eyes'
                                      (perhaps Excoecaria agallocha)
  MM: Roviana          biri-biri      'beach tree, sap injures the eyes' (perhaps
                                      Excoecaria agallocha)
PEOc *biRi-biRi 'k.o. shore tree, Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  SES: Gela            bi-bili        'k.o. tree '
  SES: Lau             bili-bili      'tree sp., Thespesia populnea'
  SES: Arosi           biri-biri      'tree sp.'
PNCV *biri-biri 'k.o. shore tree, Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Mwotlap         biy-biy        'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Mota            pir-pir        'tree sp.'
  NCV: NE Ambae biri-biri             'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Raga            biri-biri      'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Paamese         viri-viri      'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Lewo            (pur )pel-pele 'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Namakir         bi-bir         'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  NCV: Nguna           na-peperi      'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
 NCV: S Efate            na-ipir      'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
PMic *pi!Ji-pi!Ji 'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
 Mic: Kiribati           pi!Ji-pi!J   'Thespesia populnea and probably Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  Mic: Marshallese pi!J-pi!J             'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
PCP *bibi 'Hernandia spp.'
  Fij:    Wayan          wiri-wiri       'Thespesia populnea' (borrowing: exp form is tbzbl)
PPn *pi-pi 'k.o. shore tree, Hernandia nymphaefolia' (exp form is t*pipl)
  Pn:     Niuean         pi-pi           'a large tree, Hernandia moerenhoutiana'
  Pn:     Tongan         pi-pi (failolo) 'Atuna racemosa'
  Pn:     E Futunan pi-pi                'tree with a soft black interior like a fir'
  Pn:     Samoan         pi-pi           'tree, Hernandia moerenhoutiana'
cf. also:
  PT:       Misima         bi-biu            'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
  Fij:      Rotuman        pi-pi             'Atuna racemosa' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
>

[7] According to Madulid (200la: 104) Tagalog banago, reflecting PMP *banaRo 'T. populnea ', is used for both
species.

138      Malcolm Ross


<
PROc *buavu 'Hernandia sp.'
  NCal: NyeHlyu    phoap                   'Hernandia ovigera'
  Fij:  Wayan      buevu                   ' H ernandia nymphaefolia'
>

5.4.1.3 Hibiscus tiliaceus, beach hibiscus, TP mangas, P, Bburao (Malvaceae)

Hibiscus tiliaceus is a small sprawling, tangled shore tree with small girth, a branching trunk
and pale yellow flowers (Figure 5.2, right). It grows 5-15 m tall (Peekel1984: 364, Henderson
& Hancock 1988: 161). Barrau (1965) reports that the bark was eaten in New Caledonia, and
almost every source agrees that it provides fibre to make cordage, mats and nets (e.g. Floyd
1954, O'Collins & Lamothe 1989, Whistler 1991b: 29).

    The POe term for Hibiscus tiliaceus was *paRu. Blust (ACD) suggests that it is reflected
in terms for 'tie' like Bauan vau 'tie, bind' and Samoanfau 'bind, lash together', but it is now
clear that these terms reflect POe *paqu(s), *paqus-i- 'bind, lash; construct canoe by tying
together' (vol.l, ch.9, §10).

<
PMP *baRu 'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (Acn)
POe *paRu 'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Adm:      Lou            po              'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NNG:      Kove           vahu            'Cordia subcordata'
  NNG:      Gitua          paru            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NNG:      Tami           pa-pa/au        'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NNG:      Kairiru        fyar            'Hibiscus'
  PT:       Muyuw          (ayo)vay        'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (F. Damon, pers. comm.)
  PT:       Hula           vatu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:       Bola           varu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:       Kara (E)       fai             'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:      Tolai           va[r]-var       'k.o. tree, the bark of which is used as string'
  MM:      Varisi          varu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:      Babatana        varu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:      Nduke           varu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:      Roviana         varu            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  MM:      Marovo          (leru) varu     'a forest tree growing near rivers, Agathis
                                           macrophylla' (leru 'Hibiscus tiliaceus')
  TM: Aiwoo            (nuo)po             'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
PEOc *paRu 'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Gel a           vatu          'tree sp.'
  SES: Lengo           vatu          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Longgu          vatu          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: 'Are'are        haru          'shrub sp.'
  SES: Arosi           haru          'tree sp.'
  NCV: NEAmbae vae                   'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Mota            varu          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Araki           (vi)(ja       'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Naman           n<J-veve      'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Tape            vive          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Uripiv          vava          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCV: Paamese         vea-vee       'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
PSV *n<J-vau 'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye           n-vau         'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SV:    Kwamera       ne-vo         'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SV:    Anejom        n-hau         'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCal: Iaai           viiu          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCal: Xaracuu        pe            'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  NCal: Nyelayu        payi          'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
PCP *vau 'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Fij:   Rotuman       hau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Fij:   Wayan         vau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus, Kleinhovia hospita' 8
  Fij:   Bauan         vau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Niue an       fou           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Tongan        fau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Pukapukan wau               'tree sp. whose bark is used for cordage'
  Pn:    Rennellese hau              'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Tikopia       fau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Emae          fau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Samoan        fau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Rarotongan ?au              'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  Pn:    Hawaiian      hau           'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
>

[8] Gardner & Pawley (2006) record Wayan vau for both H. tiliaceus and Kleinhovia hospita . This homonymy has
arisen through consonant losses in two POe etyma, *paRu 'Hibiscus tiliaceus' and *paqu 'Kleinhovia hospita'.

                                                                              The coastal strand       139


140    Malcolm Ross


    The cognate set below contains a number of puzzles. It has just one Western Oceanic
member, Kokotafayalo, but this is likely to be a borrowing from a SE Solomonic language,
and so the protoform is reconstructed for PEOc, not for POe. As Lynch (2004a) points out,
a number of the forms from Malakula display metathesis, reflecting *bwalaka rather than
*bwakala, whilst Anejom displays loss of medial *-k-. These appear to be local innovations.
More problematic are the discrepancies between the SE Solomonic forms and all other re-
flexes, as they make a reliable PEOc reconstruction impossible. Proto SE Solomonic *vayalo
'Hibiscus tiliaceus' looks very like an irregular (borrowed?) reflex of POe *paRu above,
which was also regularly reflected as Proto SE Solomonic *vatu, as the SES forms above
show. The PNCV form *bwakala displays the rounding feature not on its final syllable (cf
Proto SE Solomonic *-o) but on its first syllable. This is decidedly unusual, but, as the alter-
native Kwara'ae dialectal formfa?ola shows, rounding shift does occur.

<
PEOc *pakalo, *pwakala (?)'Hibiscus sp.'
  MM: Kokota          fayalo
Proto SE Solomonic *vayalo 'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Bugot:u         vayaoo       'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Gela            vayalo       'tree sp.'
  SES: Birao           vahalo       'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Kwara'ae       fa?alo,fa?ola 'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Dori'o         fa?alo        'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Arosi          ha?aro        'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES: Kahua          ha?aro        'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
PNCV *bwakala 'Hibiscus sp.' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: Mwotlap        na-bwyal      'Hibiscus rosa-sinensis'
  NCV: Mota           bwayala       'flowering hibiscus of many varieties'
  NCV: Naman          belag         'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (metathesis)
  NCV: Neve'ei        ne-bwelagu    'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (metathesis)
  NCV: Avava          balaya        'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (metathesis)
  NCV: Larevat        balgo         'Hibiscus tiliaceus' (metathesis)
  NCV: S Efate        na-pwkal      'Hibiscus rosa-sinensis'
PSV *na-bwaz 'Hibiscus sp.' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Anejom       n-pwaz        'Hibiscus sp.'
  NCal: Pije          pakela        'Hibiscus abelmoschus'
  NCal: Nelemwa       paxela        'Hibiscus abelmoschus'
cf. also:
  SES:      Lau           fakaso       'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
  SES:      Kwara'ae      fakusu       'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
>

5.4.1.4 Pemphis acidula (Lythraceae)

                                                                                  The coastal strand   141


Pemphis acidula is a small twisted beach tree (Figure 5.4, left) with very hard, tough wood
used atMarovo to make tools such as pestles, husking sticks and weapons (Hviding 2005: 131),
in Tonga for tool handles and house parts (Whistler 1991b: 39) and in Tahiti to make combs
(POLLEX). Its distribution seems to be patchy: it is not mentioned by Peekel (1984) for the
Bismarcks nor by Borrell (1989) for Kairim (Schoutens). Will McClatchey (pers. comm.)
suggests that its distribution across Oceania was once quite uniform but that it was so useful
that it was pushed to extinction in some places. The reconstruction of POe *f}iRac is unprob-
lematic as its reflexes are regular.

<
PMP *f}iRaj Pemphis acidula' [9]
POe *f}iRac 'Pemphis acidula' (Geraghty 1990: PEOc *f}iRa)
  PT:     Misima        nila-nila   'Pemphis acidula'
  MM: Nehan             gihes       'Pemphis acidula'
  MM: Nduke             f}irasa     'Pemphis acidula'
  MM: Marovo            f}irasa     'Pemphis acidula'
  MM: Kia               f}i-f}irasa 'Pemphis acidula' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Uripiv           ne-f}ir     'Pemphis acidula'
  SV:     Anejom        ne-f}iye    'Pemphis acidula'
  Mic: Kiribati         f}ea        'Pemphis acidula'
  Mic: Marshallese (kd)f}e          'Pemphis acidula'
  Mic: Chuukese         (e)f}i      'Pemphis acidula'
  Mic: Woleaian         (xai)f}iy   'Pemphis acidula'
PCP *f}i(a)-f}ia 'Pemphis acidula'
  Fij:    Bauan         f}i-f}ia    'Pemphis acidula'
  Fij:    Wayan         f}ia-f}ia   'Pemphis acidula'
  Pn:     Tongan        f}i-f}ie    'shore shmbs or small trees Pemphis acidula and
                                             Suriana maritima'
   Pn:      Niuean          f}i-f}ie         'Pemphis acidula'
   Pn:      Rennellese      f}i-f}ie         'shmb sp. growing on coastal ledges.'
   Pn:      Pukapukan       f}i-f}ie         'tree sp.'
   Pn:      Sikaiana        n-nie            'a plant with strong wood'
   Pn:      Takuu           n-nie            'Pemphis acidula'
   Pn:      Tokelauan       f}a-f}ie         'Pemphis acidula'
   Pn:      Mangaia         f}a-f}ie         'a littoral shmb'
   Pn:      Tahitian        ('a)?ie          'Pemphis acidula'
   Pn:      Tuamotuan       f}ie-f}ie        'Pemphis acidula'
>


4.1.5 Scaevola taccada (syn. S. koenigii, S. sericea, S.jrutescens ), Bhafflaoa (Goodeniaceae)

Peekel ( 1984: 553) describes Scaevola taccaa'a as a 'stiffly erect shmb with finger-thick fleshy
green twigs, 2--4m tall' and 'common, on sandy beaches' (Figure 5.4, middle). The shmbs
grow in dense clusters near the beach (Hviding 2005: 122). It is probably the best distributed
plant on the Pacific islands, found on the smallest islets and the largest islands (W. Mc-
Clatchey, pers. comm.). The light green leaves are somewhat succulent with a waxy covering

[9] PMP *l)iRaj is reconstructed above on the basis of the data here, Palauan !]is 'Pemphis acidula' (noted by
Geraghty 1990) and Ilokano l)irad 'Pemphis sp.' (Madulid 200la).

142    Malcolm Ross



      Figure 5.4   Left Pemphis-acidula. Middle Scaevola taccada. Right Thespesia populnea.


and are alternately arranged along the stem. The white or cream flowers, often with purple
streaks, are 8-12 mm long and have a pleasant smell. All five petals are on one side of the
flower, so that they look as ifthey have been torn in half(hence the Bislama term hafflaoa).
The fruit of S. taccada are fleshy white oblong berries of varying size, the smallest about
1 em long.

    On Lihir the leaves are squeezed in salt water and the resultant sap is used for various
medicinal purposes. The leaves are heated over the fire and rubbed on the skin to relieve
pain in joints, bones, and muscles (S. Foale 2001). The stem bark was used for medicinal
purposes in Tonga (Whistler 1991b: 38). At Marovo the leaves are used during fishing trips
to shield the catch from the sun and to parcel up food. Newly broken leaves and branches
provide evidence that a turtle has made a nest nearby (Hviding 2005: 122).

    PEMP *nasu-nasu is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data here, plus W eda (S
Halmahera) nesnas and Biak anas, both 'Scaevola taccada' (Heyne 1950: 1428). It happens
that *-u is lost from POe *CVCu forms in Pak and in the Western Oceanic and Southern
Vanuatu languages in which reflexes occur. Thus although only reflected in Micronesian
and Polynesian languages, medial and final *u are reconstructed both for PEMP and POe
because the canonic form (CVCV[C]) of morphemes in these protolanguages requires the
reconstruction of a final vowel in the morpheffil;o: that then undergoes reduplication.

<
PEMP *nasu-nasu 'Scaevola taccada'
POe *na[su]-nasu 'Scaevola taccada'
  Adm: Pak             na-nas                   'Scaevola sp. (Nevermann 1934)'
  NNG: Kairiru         na-nas                   'Scaevola sericea'
  MM: Lavongai         (ni)!Jas                 'Scaevola taccada'
  MM: Sursurunga nas-nas                        'tree sp. that grows on the beach'
  MM: Patpatar         (i)nas-nas               'Tournefortia argentea'
                       (i )nas-nas(madil-madil) 'Scaevola taccada'
PSV *na-nas 'tree sp., Scaevola sp.' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye           na-ni-na-ni              'Scaevola sp.'
  SV:     Kwamera       na-nes                              'tree sp. '
  SV:     Anejom        na-nae                              'Scaevola cylindrica'
PMic *na-nasu 'Scaevola sp. '
  Mic: Marshallese (ka )n-nwat                              'half-flower, Scaevola sp. '
  Mic: Chuukese         n-nat                               'half-flower, Scaevola sp. '
  Mic: Woleaian         n-nati                              'half-flower, Scaevola sp. ' (Bender et al. 2003)
PPn *!Jasu 'a seaside shrub, Scaevola sp. '
  Pn:     Tongan        !Jahu                               'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     Niuean        !Jahu                               'Cyrtrandra samoensis'
                        !Jahu-pa                            'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     E Uvean       !Jahu                               'Scaevola sp. '
  Pn:     E Futunan IJaSU                                   'a seaside plant'
  Pn:     Anutan        !Jau                                'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     Pukapukan !Jayu                                   'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     Samoan        IJaSU                               'Palaquium stehlinii'
  Pn:     Tuvalu        !Jahu                               'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     Tokelauan !Jahu                                   'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:     Rarotongan !Ja-!Ja?u                              'a creeping littoral plant with small leaves '
>

                                                                                 The coastal strand       143


5.4.1.6 Thespesia populnea (syn. T. macrophylla) , B burao blong solwota (Malvaceae)

Thespesia populnea is a tree typically 5-10 m and sometimes as much as 15m in height with
large yellow flowers which have a brown c1entre (Figure 5.4, right). Its strong dark-brown
heartwood is used to make hourglass drums in New Ireland. The bark is used as binding
material (Record 1945, Peekel 1984: 369). In Tonga it is used in handicrafts, house parts
and canoes, and extract from the scraped bark is given to babies to treat mouth infections
(Whistler 1991 b: 86).

<
PMP *banaRo 'Thespesia populnea' [10]
POe *(p,b)anaRo 'Thespesia populnea'
  MM: Sursurunga banar            'beach tree sp.,with inedible fruit '
  MM: Patpatar       banaro       'Thespesia populnea'
  MM: Tolai          banar        'Thespesia populnea'
  NCV: Mwotlap       na-pne       'Thespesia populnea'
  NCV: Mota          vanau        'Thespesia populnea'
  NCV: Apma          vena         'Thespesia populnea'
  Mic: Ponapean      pana         'Thespesia populnea'
>

[10] PMP *banaRo is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data here, plus Pangasinan banaro, Panay Bisayan
banago, Hanunuo banagu, Kuyonon banag, Tagbanwa banaw, all 'Thespesia populnea' (Madulid 2001b: 204).

<
PEOc *milo 'Thespesia populnea'
  SES: Kwara' ae     milo                     'T hespesia populnea' 11
  NCV:     Nguna            na-miro          'Cordia subcordata' (Gowers 1976: 57)
  Pn:      Tongan           milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Niue an          milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      E Uvean          milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      E Futunan        milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      WUvean           milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Tikopia          miro             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Samoan           milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Tuvalu           milo             'tree sp. '
  Pn:      Tokelauan        (tuu)milo        'tree sp.'
  Pn:      Hawaiian         milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Mangareva        milo             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Marquesan        mi?o             'rosewood'
  Pn:      Tahitian         miro             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Tuamotuan        miro             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Rarotongan       miro             'Thespesia populnea'
  Pn:      Maori            miro             'tree sp., Podocarpusferrugineus'
>

[11] Kwa'ioloa and Burt (2001:123, 132) gloss milo as 'Elaeocarpus angustifolius' and ' Trema aspera' .

144    Malcolm Ross



5.4.1.7 Tournifortia argentea (syn. Messerschmidtia argentea), tree heliotrope, beach heliotrope (Boraginaceae)

                               T ournefortia argentea is a small heliotropic beach tree 5-8 m
                               tall with silvery hairy leaves and white flowers. It has a
                               short bole covered in deeply corrugated bark. Limited to
                               beachside environments, it is tolerant of salt water (Peekel
                               1984:471-472, Manner & Elevitch2006b). AtMarovo, where
                               it is reported often to grow in association with Cordia subcor-
                               data (§4.1.1 ), children use the sticky sap to catch butterflies
                               (Hviding 2005: 111).

                                    No term for 'Tournefortia argentea' is reconstructed at a
                               higher-order level than PPn *tau-sinu or PMic *cen. There
                               is no obvious reason for this, as it is a common tree in the
                               Bismarcks. However, the data offer tiny hints that in POe T.
                               argentea formed a taxon with Scaevola taccada (§4.1.5), i.e.
                               POe *na[su]-nasu 'Scaevola taccada' also denoted T. argen-
                               tea, perhaps with a modifier added to distinguish between the
                               two species. Thus the Patpatar (New Ireland) term for T . ar-
                               gentea is i-nas-nas, reflecting POe *nasu-nasu, whilst the term
     for S. taccada is i-nas-nas-madil-madil. Conversely E Uvean
     tauhunu 'S. taccada' reflects PPn *tau-suni 'T. argentea'. Will
                               McClatchey (pers. comm.) tells me that a taxon consisting of
T. argentea and S. taccada makes sense for two reasons: 'First, the plants live in the same
environment and have the same suite of adaptations for survival. Second, in my experience
working with healers and fisherpersons, they use the two for very similar purposes. '

  Figure 5.5 Tournefortia
           argentea.

                                                                       The coastal strand    145


           Reconstructing the PPn form from the cognate set below is tricky. There are two compet-
ing Proto Nuclear Polynesian reconstructions, *tausinu and *tausunu: the latter almost cer-
tainly reflects the former with vowel assimilation. The Tongan, Niuean and Samoan forms
reflect *tausuni, but for two reasons I prefer to reconstruct PPn *tausinu. First, it is favoured
by the distribution of the data, as it is reflected in Nuclear Polynesian Pukapukan and in
several Eastern Polynesian languages, whereas *tausuni reflects metathesis, then probable
diffusion in the Tonga-Samoa area (A. Pawley, pers. comm.). Second, it is likely that the
term was originally bimorphemic, and the              morpheme perhaps reflects PCP *sinu 'a
shrub or tree, possibly Phaleria sp.' (§6.1.5). Both Tournefortia argentea and Phaleria coc-
cinea have white flowers.

<
PPn *tausinu 'Tournefortia argentea' POLLEX
   Pn:      Tongan    touhuni       'Tournefortia argentea'
   Pn:      Niuean    toihuni       'Tournefortia argentea'
                      taihuni       'coastall growth, scrub'
  Pn:    Samoan       tausuni       'Tournefortia argentea'
Proto Nuclear Polynesian *tausinu 'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Pukapukan taeyinu          'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Rapanui      tainu         'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Rarotongan tauhinu         'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Tahitian     tahinu        'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Maori        tauhinu       'shrub sp., Pomaderris phylicaefolia'
Proto Nuclear Polynesian *tausunu 'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Anutan       tauunu        'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    E Uvean      tauhunu       'Scaevola taccada'
  Pn:    Rennellese tausunu         'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Samoan       tausunu       'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Tuvalu       tauhunu       'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Tokelauan tauhunu          'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Sikaiana     taunusu       'tree sp.'
  Pn:    Luangiua     kaUSUIJU      'a small tree'
  Pn:    Manihiki     tauhunu       'a bush'
  Pn:    Tongarevan tausunu         'Tournefortia argentea'
  Pn:    Tuamotuan toohonu          'Tournefortia argentea'
>

    The PMic form *cen 'Tournefortia argentea' looks at first sight as if it also reflects PROc
*sinu. If it does, however, this is a result of borrowing, as PMic *c- reflects POe *d or *dr-,
not POe *s-.

<
PMic *cen 'Tournefortia argentea'
   Mic:     Kiribati    ren                  'Tournefortia argentea'
   Mic:     Marshallese (ki)ren              'Tournefortia argentea'
   Mic:     Chuukese                         'Tournefortia argentea'
   Mic:     Woleaian                         'Tournefortia argentea'
>

5.4.1.8 Vitex trifolia (syn. V. negundo) (Verbenaceae)


146    Malcolm Ross


Vitex trifolia is an erect shrub or small tree: 1-5 m tall which grows on the beach and on
muddy stream banks. In the older botanical literature it is sometimes confused with V. ro-
tundifolia, a low-lying shrub less that a metre in height, growing inland on poor sandy soils
(W. McClatchey, pers. comm.), and the two evidently form a taxon in Wayan Fijian: drala
ni mataoawa 'beach drala' but drala kaka 'wild drala' .

                                            V . trifolia has sprays of blue-purple flowers
                                        and fruit. All parts of the plant are aromatic. On
                                        New Ireland the crushed leaves are used against
             Z!if                       headache. On Waya juice from the leaves is used
                                        as a healing agent for wounds (Peekel 1984:481 ,
                                        Gardner & Pawley 2006).
                                            The POe term for Vitex trifolia was *drala.
                                        Both POe *drala 'Vitex trifolia' and POe *rarap
                                        'Indian coral tree, Erythrina variegata' (§5.5) are
                                        regularly reflected as Bauan Fijian drala . 12 The
                                        two terms are disambiguated by the addition of
                                        sa/a 'path, road, track' to form the binomial drala
                                        sa/a "V itex trifolia' .
                                            In PPn the two forms would similarly have
                                        fallen together as *!ala, but here the form survived
       Figure 5.6 Vitex trifolia.       with the meaning 'V. trifolia', whilst PPn t*lala
                                        'Erythrina variegata' was lostY

<
POe *drala 'shrub sp., Vitex trifolia'
  MM: Patpatar         data            'Vitex trifolia'
  MM: Tolai            data            'Vitex trifolia'
  NCal: NyeHiyu        dade            'Vitex trifolia'
  Fij:   Bauan         drala (sa/a) 'Vitex trifolia'
  Fij:   Wayan         drala           'Vitex trifolia'
PPn *!ala 'shrub, probably Vitex sp. '
  Pn:    Tongan        !ala            'taxon of shrubs inc. Vitex trifolia, Dendrolobium
                                       umbellatum and Wikstroemiafoetida'
                       lala(tahi)      'Vitex trifolia' (Whistler 1991 b: 63)
  Pn:    Niue an       !ala            'shrub sp., Grewia crenata'
                       !ala-tea        ' V itex trifolia'
  Pn:    E Uvean       !ala            'shrub sp."
  Pn:    E Fut:unan !ala(a-vao) 'tree sp., Myristica inutilis'
  Pn:    Anuta         rara            ' V itex trifolia'
  Pn:    Tikopia       rara            ' V itex trifolia'
  Pn:    Samoan        !ala            'shrub, Dendrolobium umbellatum'
  Pn:    Luangiua      !ala            'shrub with fragrant flowers '
  Pn:    Rarotongan rara               ' V itex trifolia'
>

[12] Bauan drala 'Erythrina variegata' results from the application to PCP *rara , from POe *rarap, of eastern Fi-
jian apical prenasalisation, a process entailing prenasalisation of the initial apical consonant of a noun following
the common noun article na (Geraghty 1983: 74--96).

[13] The authors of POLLEX assume that PPn *lata 'Vitex trifolia ' reflects the transfer of the term for Erythrina
variegata to Vitex trifolia. As the data here show, this assumption is incorrect.

                                                                           The coastal strand       147


5.4.2 Climbers

5.4.2.1 Flagellaria indica, supplejack, Bnavula (Flagellariaceae)

Flagellaria indica is a climbing cane-like vine
whose stem, 1-1.5 em thick, grows to a length of
3-6 m. The leaves are 20-40 em long and have
a curling tendril at the apex with which the plant \
secures itself to its host.

     The long strong woody stem remains pliable
and serves the functions of a rope. The stems are
prepared for use as cordage by splitting them and
drying them in the sun. They serve as a bind-
ing and plaiting material, especially to sew sago
matting (Sorensen 1950, Peekel 1984: 76). They
are also used as anchor cables and as rope: for
bindings in canoe- and house construction and in
roofing (Floyd 1954, S. Foale 2001 , Thieberger
2006b) . In various parts ofthe Solomons lengths
of whole F. indica complete with their long
leaves are joined together to make scarelines
(Marovo arara, a reduplicated form of ara 'F. in-
dica' ). These are laid out to encircle fish on reef
fiats or in the lagoon and scare them into traps
or into an area of shallow water with a limited
exit (Henderson & Hancock 1988:216, Hviding                    Figure 5.7 Flagellaria indica: A, climbing
2005: 101). On Lihir a potion made from F . in-                 plant; B, leaf with tendrils; C; shoot with
dica is said to impart the ability to fight well (S.              fruit; D, flowers .
Foale 2001).

     POe *waR[e] 'Flagellaria indica' reflects PMP *huaR 'Flagellaria indica' (AcD) . The
expected POe descendant of this form is *waR, and this is reflected by Nduke [a]r-ara (redu-
plicated) and Kokota n-ara. 14 POe was seemingly resistant to monosyllabic content words,
and Mussau, Seimat and Kwara' ae reflect a form with a final vowel, which shows up as *-e
in Mussau and Kwara' ae.

     The Muyuw, Sursurunga, Tangga and Mwotlap forms all reflect POe *-1-. Muyuw weled
also has a final -d, and may be a chance resemblance rather than a cognate. The other forms
shown under 'cf. also', however, are either outcomes of borrowing or reflect a POe altemant
*wale.

<
PMP *huaR 'Flagellaria indica' (ACD)
POe *waR[e] 'Flagellaria indica'
     Adm: Mussau            (ta)wale        'liana sp.' (Nevermann 1934)
     Adm: Seimat            wah             'Flagellaria indica' (Sorensen 1950)
     MM: Varisi             zara            'Flagellaria indica' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:       Avaso          zara          'Flagellaria indica' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:       Nduke          [a]r-ara      'Flagellaria indica'
  MM:       Marovo         ara           'Flagellaria indica'
                           ar-ara        'long               of Flagellaria indica prepared for
                                         fishing'
  MM:       Kokota         n-ara         'a tree cre1eper; rope made from the eponymous
                                         plant'
  MM:       Maringe        fi-ara        'Flagellaria indica' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES:      Kwara'ae       kwale-kwaze   'Flagellaria indica'
                           ware-ware     'Flagellaria indica' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES:      Ulawa          wale          'Flagellaria gigantea' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                         comm.)
  Fij:      Wayan          wa-wa         'vine sp., Ipomoea indica; a shrubby climbing plant,
                                         V entilago vitiensis'
cf. also:
  PT:       Muyuw          we led        'Flagellaria sp.'
  MM:       Lihir          yal-yal       'Flagellaria indica'
  MM:       Sursurunga     wal-wal       'tree or bush type; cane type'
  MM:       Tangga         wal-wal       'vine used in catching fish' (Bell 1946:317)
  NCV:      Mwotlap        (ya)wol       'Flagellaria sp.'
  NCV:      S Efate        n-ata         'Flagellaria sp.'
>

[14] POe *w is lost in NW Solomonic languages; final -a is a predictable echo vowel. Kokota n- reflects the
accreted article POe *na .

148      Malcolm Ross


5.4.2.2 Hoya spp. (Asclepiadaceae)

Leafy climbers of Hoya species are often found on the beach and around mangroves and
beach trees (Peekel 1984: 455-457).

   The reconstructions ofPCEMP *(d,r)a(d,r)ap and POe *dradrap below are based on just
two etyma, Muyuw dadav and Ngadha (CMP) rara 'Hoya spp.' (Verheijen 1990: 220).

<
PCEMP *(d,r)a(d,r)ap 'Hoya sp.'
POe *dradrap 'Hoya sp.'
  PT:   Muyuw        dadav               Hoya sp. (Damon 2004)
>


5.5 Littoral forest

5.5.1 Adenanthera pavonina (syn. A. gersenii, A. polita, Corallaria parvifolia), bead tree, red sandalwood, Bbisa, nabisa (Mimosaceae)

A tree which grows to 8-15 m on sandy foreshores and coral soil, Adenanthera pavonina
is well known for its shiny scarlet, disk-shaped seeds about 6 mm in diameter which serve
widely as necklace beads. It has a small, yellowish flower which grows in dense drooping
rat's-tail flower heads resembling catkins. Its fllowers are white to yellowish, and the seeds
grow in curved hanging pods, with a bulge opposite each seed, which curl up and tum brown
(Peekel1984: 210).

                                                                                      The coastal strand   149


    The wood is medium hard and in Vanuatu is used for houseposts (Gowers 1976: 19).
French (1986: 75) reports that the leaves are eaten in some Papua New Guinea locations, but
Peekel makes no mention of this.

    The distribution of A. pavonina is odd: it is reported from Papua New Guinea and Van-
uatu, but not mentioned by Solomons sources. It is also missing from Borrell's (1989) flora
checklist for Kairiru. It is native to SE Asia, but Rhys Gardner and Will McClatchey (both
pers. comm.) suggest that it is a (recently?) introduced plant, at least from Fiji eastwards and
perhaps also in Vanuatu. If this is so, then the two data sets require an explanation other than
cognacy. The first set appears to support PROc *m(wJata, but the items glossed 'A. pavon-
ina' are all from languages located in Vanuatu (Emae and Ifira-Mele are Polynesian outliers
in Vanuatu) and probably reflect a series of borrowings. Items denoting other species are
presumably chance resemblances.

__pre__
     NCV: Namakir             na-mara       'Adenanthera pavonina'(Wheatley 1992: 133)
     NCV: S Efate             na-mara       'Adenanthera pavonina'(Wheatley 1992: 133)
     Fij: Bauan               mala          'Dysoxylum lenticillare, tree with large
                                            yellow-green flowers'
                         mala-mala          'Dysoxylum spp.' (Keppel et al. 2005)
     Pn:      Tongan     mala-mala(-?a-toa) 'small tree sp., Memecylon harveyi' (Whistler
                                            1991b:81)
     Pn:      Niuean     ma-ma/a            'k.o. tree'
     Pn:      Emae       mara-mara          'Adenanthera pavonina'
     Pn:      Ifira-Mele mwara              'Adenanthera pavonina' (probably borrowed
                                            from a NCV language)
     Pn:      Tahitian   mara               'k.o. tree, N auclea forsteri'
     Pn:      Tuamotuan mara                'k.o. tree, Cordia subcordata'


    The data below allow the reconstruction of PSOc *bisu 'bead tree, Adenanthera pavon-
ina' but may actually reflect a Pacific Pidgin term based on English 'peas' or 'beads'.[15]

[15] I am grateful to Will McClatchey for drawing my attention to this possibility.

__pre__
      NCV:     NEAmbae          bise            'Adenanthera pavonina'
      NCV:     Araki            (vi)pisu        'bead tree'
      NCV:     Tango a          (vi)pisu        'Adenanthera pavonina'
      NCV:     Raga             bisa            'Adenanthera pavonina'
      NCV:     Paamese          vise            'Adenanthera pavonina'
      NCV:     Lewo             (puru)piu       'Adenanthera pavonina'
      SV:      Sye              ne-mpes         'bead' (ecclesiastical use only)



5.5.2 Barringtonia asiatica (syn. B. speciosa, B. littorea), sea poison tree, fish poison tree, P poesentri, Bfisposentri (Lecythidaceae)


150    Malcolm Ross

For naming purposes, Barringtonia species in NW Island Melanesia fall into two groups:
    • those with edible nuts: B. novae-hiberniae, B. procera and B. edulis (ch.11, §2.3); and
     • those with inedible nuts, of which just one species, B. asiatica, has a reconstructable
        name and is the subject ofthis section.

                                      Two other species with inedible nuts, B. racemosa and
                                  B. niedenzuana, resemble B. edulis in appearance. 16 The
                                  Patpatar and Tolai names for B. racemosa are respectively
                                  paua-paua and pao-pao, reduplicated forms of Patpatar
                                  paua and Tolai pao 'B. edulis' (Peekel 1984: 397-399),
                                  the reduplication expressing the inferiority of B. racemosa
                                  (ch.2, §7.2).
                                      B. asiatica is a large beach tree, 10--20 m high, which
                                  is able to grow with its roots in salt water at times. It has
                                  large white and pink flowers which open at night and close
                                  in the morning, and ten-centimetre square fruits that float in
                                  the sea and sprout when they reach the shore. Fishermen use
                                  them as buoys or fishing floats. The seeds contain a poison.
                                  In New Ireland they are grated and thrown into the water
                                  to stun fish in pools on the reef. At Marovo they are some-
                                  times used to kill dogs, but they also serve as medication for
                                  ringworm, scabies and other skin diseases (French-Wright
     Figure 5.8 Barringtonia       1983: 157, Peekel1984: 397, Hviding 2005: 139)
             asiatica.                Two terms are reconstructable, POe *putun, which is re-
                                  flected all over Oceania except in parts of Vanuatu, where
it is replaced by PNCV *vuabu, 17 and in the Chuukic languages of Micronesia, where it is
replaced by a reflex of POe *kuluR 'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis' (Ch.9, §4).

<
PMP *butun 'a shore tree, Barringtonia' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *putun 'Barringtonia asiatica' (Biggs 196:5: *putu; French-Wright 1983)
     Adm:   Seimat          hut               'Barringtonia asiatica' (Sorensen 1950)
     Adm:   Drehet          puk               'type oftr,ee with poisonous seed used to kill fish'
     Adm:   Loniu           put               'tree sp. and its fruit, used for stunning fish'
     NNG:   Malai           putin             'Barringtonia asiatica'
     NNG:   Sio             puto              'Barringtonia asiatica'
     NNG:   Malasanga       put-put           'Barringtonia asiatica'
     NNG:   Bing            jut               'Barringtonia asiatica'
     NNG:   Man am          utu               'Barringtonia asiatica'
     PT:    Muyuw           uta-wut           'Barringtonia asiatica' (F. Damon, pers. comm.)
     PT:    Misima          uta-utan          'Barringtonia asiatica'
     MM:    Vitu            putu              'Barringtonia asiatica'
     MM:    Bola            putu              'Barringtonia asiatica'
     MM:    Nakanai         putu              'Barringtonia asiatica'
     MM:    Tigak           utun              'small tree sp. that grows on the beach'
  MM:    Kara (E)     futun         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Lihir        hut           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Tangga       jut           'fish poison from seed of Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Patpatar     hutun         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Tolai        vutun         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Haku         (ha)putun     'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Teop         posus         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM:    Mono-Alu     puputu        'Barringtonia asiatica' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                    comm.)
  MM: Babatana       pututu         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM: Nduke          pututu         'Barringtonia asiatica'
  MM: Kokota         putu           'Barringtonia asiatica'
PEOc *putu(n) 'Barringtonia asiatica'
  SES: Gela           vutu          'Barringtonia asiatica'
  SES: Lau           fu             'Barringtonia asiatica'
  SES: Sa'a           hu            'Barringtonia speciosa'
  SES: Arosi          hu            'Barringtonia speciosa'
  NCV: Mota           vutu          'Barringtonia speciosa'
  NCV: Vera' a        vur           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: NEAmbae (vele) vutu 'Barringtonia asiatica' (vele 'Barringtonia edulis')
  NCV: Raga           vutu          'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: Lewo          puru(wap) 'Barringtonia asiatica'
                     puru(kurki) 'bush nut tree (its skin is used as fish poison):
                                    Barringtonia edulis'
  SV:   Sye           no-vont       'Barringtonia asiatica'
  SV:   Kwamera       niJ-kwiJriJfJ 'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCal: Pije          (ce)piuk      'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCal: NyeHiyu      piyu           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCal: Nelemwa       (haele)wot 'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Mic: Po nape an     Wl            'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Mic: Mokilese       wi            'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Fij:  Bauan         vutu          'Barringtonia sp.'
  Fij:  Wayan         vutu          'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Pn:   Tongan       futu           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Pn:   E Futunan futu              'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Pn:   Tikopia      futu           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Pn:   Samoan       futu           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  Pn:   Marque san hutu             'Barringtonia asiatica'
>

[16] These similarities lead to disagreements among listings of names: an APNI entry identifies B. racemosa with
B. edulis, whereas an IPNI entry identifies it with B. speciosa ( = asiatica).

[17] Initial *vu- here is not related to the prefix vu- 'tree counter' which occurs in various North Vanuatu languages
(ch.2, §7.1.3).

                                                               The coastal strand      151


<
PNCV *vuabu 'Barringtonia asiatica' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: Nokuku         a-up           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: Kiai           uapo           'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: Araki          (vi)apu        'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: Tamambo        (vu)abu        'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV: Sakao          n-uap          'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Uripiv        n-uwaa            'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Port Sandwich n-iamb            'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Paamese       hoavu             'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Lewo          (puru)wapu        'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Namakir       n-oamw            'Barringtonia asiatica'
  NCV:    Nguna         n-oapu            'Barringtonia asiatica'
>

152   Malcolm Ross


5.5.3 Calophyllum inophyllum, portia, Indian laurel, Alexandrian laurel, beach mahogany, TPkalopilum, Btamanu, nabakura (Clusiaceae)

Often with a short gnarled trunk or branches leaning out over the sea, Calophyllum inophyl-
lum is a salient shore tree about 10--20 metres tall with fragrant flowers and small round fruit
(Hviding 2005: 106).

                                                     Its red wood is very hard and difficult to
                                                 work when it is seasoned. The grain is inter-
                                                 locked, and so the wood does not split easily
                                                 (Margetts 2005b). Its straight smaller branches
                                                 are used for pig spears, for outrigger booms
                                                 and for building (Sorensen 1950, Floyd 1954,
                                                 Peekel1984: 377, Gardner & Pawley 2006). In
                                                 Vanuatu the sap serves for patching holes in
                                                 wood. In other parts of the Pacific the gum,
                                                 bark, leaves, roots, flowers and oil from the
                                                 seeds are used in traditional medicine (Gowers
                                                 1976:40, Gardner & Pawley 2006). Its macer-
                                                 ated leaves are used to stupefy octopus in holes
                                                 in the reef and its burnt fruit provide black hair
                                                 dye. In the Ninigos, where Seimat is spoken, a
                                                 brown dye is made from the yellowish milky
                                                 sap (Record 1945, Sorensen 1950).
                                                     Other species of Calophyllum grow inland,
                                                 hence straight, and provide even better timber
                                                 than C. inophyllum, including canoe hulls. C.
                                                 kajewskii (syn. C. peekelii) is a rain forest tree
                                                 than grows up to 50 m.
                                                     There are a number of reconstructions with
Figure 5.9 Calophyllum inophyllum : A, rna- Calophyllum species as denotata. The most
ture tree; B, flowering shoot; C, fruit cluster. widely reflected is POe *pitaquR, inherited
                                                 from PMP, and it is reasonably clear that it de-
noted 'Calophyllum inophyllum' . The only evidence we have for the POe retention of PMP
*-R is found in the reflexes in New Georgia languages: Nduke vizolo, Roviana vi-vizolo and
Marovo vi-vijolo. However, the expected form in these languages is tvita(y)uru, and the ac-
tual forms must be outcomes of borrowing. The languages of the western Solomons have
complex and ill understood borrowing histories (Ross forthcoming) .

                                                               The coastal strand   153


    Other reconstructions glossed 'Calophyllum inophyllum' are PMM *bu(y)ap (possibly
of POe antiquity) and POe *dalo (probably inherited from PCEMP). It seems unlikely that
POe had more than one term for C. inophyllum and thus it is possible that *dalo denoted
some other species. POe *tamanu and PNGOc *sabwa(r,R)i denote unidentified Calophyllum
species, whilst PEOc *bakuRa probably denoted C. kajewskii.

<
PMP *bitaquR 'Calophyllum inophyllum' (AcD)
POe *pitaquR 'Calophyllum inophyllum' (Blust 1984): Calophyllum sp.
  Adm: Mussau         [!J]itau    'Calophyllum, coastal variety, tree from which
                                  slitgong is made'
  Adm: Lou           pi to        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Adm: Seimat         hita        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Adm: Loniu         pi tow       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Adm: Nauna         piti?        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Adm: Au a          pi?aw        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Adm: Titan         pi tow       'tree sp.'
  MM: Meramera vi tau             'Calophyllum'
  MM: Teop            vitawa      'large tree, about 20m. tall, Pentaspadon
                                  minutijlora (Anacardiaceae)' (Record 1945)
  MM: Nduke           vizolo      'Calophyllum vitiense'
  MM: Roviana         vi-vizolo   'Calophyllum vitiense'
  MM: Marovo          vi-vijolo   'Calophyllum vitiense'
PROc *vitaquR 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  SV:    Sye          na-vi"ru    'Meryta neo-ebudica'
  SV:    Anejom       na-hitau    'tree sp.'
  NCal: NyeHlyu      phic         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Pije          vhic        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Fwai          vhic        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Nemi         fie          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Jawe         phic         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Nyelayu      phic         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  NCal: Nelemwa      fek          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Mic: Kiribati       itai        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Mic: Kosraean       itl1.       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Mic: Mokilese       ic:Jw       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Mic: Ponapean       isow        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
PCP *vetaqu 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Fij:   Bauan        vetau       'tree sp., Mammea odorata yielding a dye and a
                                  useful timber' (AcD)
  Fij:   Wayan        vetau       'tree sp., probably Mammea odorata'
  Fij:   Rotuman      hefau       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    Tongan      feta?u       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    Niuean      jetau        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    E Futunan feta?u         'tree sp., Calophyllum sp.'
  Pn:    Emae        jetau        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    Samoan      jetau        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    Pukapukan wetau          'large tree, excellent for making canoes'
  Pn:    Rennellese heta?u        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    Tikopia     jetau        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
>

154      Malcolm Ross


    The cognate set below supports the reconstruction ofPMM *bu(y)ap 'Calophyllum ino-
phyllum' . If the Tokelauan form is also cognate:, then the form can be reconstructed to POe.
Biggs & Clark ( 1993) attribute Tokelau an pua to the cognate set reflecting PPn *pua 'Fagraea
berteroana or other tree with showy flowers ' (which I take to reflect POe *buRat 'Fagraea
berteroana'; §5.6), but it may well be cognate with the Meso-Melanesian terms below.

<
PMM *bu(y)ap 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  MM:       Kara (E)     vuaf         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  MM:       Tabar        buau         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  MM:       Lihir        boio         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  MM:       Patpatar     boiah        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  MM:       Nehan        beu          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:       Tokelauan    pua          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
>

   POe *tamanu evidently contrasted with *pitaquR 'C. inophyllum', and probably denoted
one of the tall inland species listed above, as suggested by the Mussau gloss. The Fijian and
Niue an reflexes denote Calophyllum vitiense, one of these inland species.

<
POe *tamanu 'Calophyllum sp. ' (AcD: C. inophyllum')
  Adm: Mussau            tamanu       'large-leafed Calophyllum sp. found in the interior
                                      (ACD)
  Fij:      Wayan        damanu       'Calophyllum vitiense'
  Fij:      Bauan        damanu       'Calophyllum vitiense, very tall and straight,
                                      excellent for canoes '
  Pn:       Niue an      tamanu       'an inland tree, Calophyllum vitiense'
  Pn:       Tongan       tamanu       'Calophyllum neo-ebudicum' (Whistler
                                      1991b: 118-119)
  Pn:       E Futunan    tamanu       'tree sp., Calophyllum sp.'
  Pn:       Samoan       tamanu       'Calophyllum neo-ebudicum' (Whistler 2000: 201)
  Pn:       Tahitian     tamanu       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:       Hawaiian     kamani       'large tree, Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:       Tuamotuan    tamanu       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:       Rarotongan   tamanu       'the native: mahogany, Calophyllum inophyllum'
cf. also:
  SES:      Kwara' ae    kaumanu      'Calophyllum casiferum'
>

   Although a number of the reflexes below are glossed Calophyllum inophyllum, the Gela
and Sa' a reflexes point to an inland species, probably C. kajewskii, as the gloss of PEOc
*bakuRa.

<
PEOc *bakuRa 'Calophyllum sp., probably C. kajewskii' (Geraghty 1990)
  SES:      Gela         bayula       'large forest tree sp. '
  SES:      Lau          baule        'Calophyllum sp. '
  SES:      Kwaio        ba?ula       'Calophyllum kajewskii'
  SES:      Kwara' ae    ba?ula       'Calophyllum kajewskii'
  SES:      Sa' a        paule        'tree growing on the hills, makes good boat masts'
     SES:    Arosi           ba?ura          'tree sp.'
     NCV:    Mwotlap         b[u]wuy         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCV:    Mota           pawura           'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCV:    NEAmbae         bagure          'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Araki           (vi)Jaura       'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCV:    Raga            bayura          'tree sp.'
     NCV:    Uripiv          baur            'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Nese            na-qayro        'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Paamese         voule           'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Lewo            (puru)pala      'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Baki            (buru )beulo    'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Namakir         bakir           'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    Nguna           na-pakura       'Calophyllum sp.'
     NCV:    S Efate        pakur            'Calophyllum sp.'
     SV:     Sye            poyur            'Calophyllum neo-ebudicum'
     SV:     Anejom          (n)peye         'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCal:   Pije           pio              'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCal:   Jawe           pio              'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NCal:   Nelemwa        fiiyo            'Calophyllum caledonicum'
     NCal:   NyeHlyu        phio             'Calophyllum. montanum'
>

                                                                          The coastal strand   155


    The forms reconstructed below also denoted a Calophyllum species.

    PCEMP *talo is reconstructed on the basis of the data here and Ngadha (CMP) talo
'Calophyllum inophyllum' (Verheijen 1990) . PCP *dilo below may well be a case of chance
resemblance, as the -i- of the Central Pacific cognate set cannot be reconciled with the -a- of
the cognate set supporting POe *dalo.

<
PCEMP *talo 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
POe *dalo 'Calophyllum inophyllum' (Milh 1968)
  PT:    Muyuw       dan         'Calophyllum streimannii, C. vexans'
  SES: Gela          dalo        'shore tree sp.'
  SES: Sa'a          dalo        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  SES: Kwara'ae      dalo        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  SES: Lau           dalo        'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Fij:   Bauan       dalo(vooi) 'Hernandia olivacea' (Keppel et al. 2005)
cf. also:
PCP *dilo 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Fij:   Bauan       dilo          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Fij:   Wayan       dilo          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
  Pn:    E Futunan tilo            'Calophyllum inophyllum' 18
  Pn:    Takuu       tilo          'crown of a tree'
>

[18] Probably borrowed from Fijian (Geraghty 2004: 84).

156    Malcolm Ross


    The reconstruction below depends on the inference that Muyuw apul is cognate with
the two NNG items. From its sound correspondences apul seems to be a borrowing from a
Bwaidoga or Are-Taupota language; it is not directly inherited.

<
PNGOc *sabwa(r,R)i 'Calophyllum sp.'
     NNG:    Takia             sabor              'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     NNG:    Manam             saboari            'tree sp.'
     NNG:    Kairiru           sapar              'Calophyllum inophyllum'
     PT:     Muyuw             apul               'Calophyllum peekelii'
>


5.5.4 Casuarina equisetifolia, casuarina, beach she-oak, TP yar, Baeantri, oktri (Casuarinaceae)

Casuarina equisetifolia is a large coastal tree with an oddly feathery appearance caused by
its needle-like leaves. Typically it grows to 20m, but Frederick Damon (pers.comm.) reports
specimens on Woodlark Island of 40--45 m, towering above the rest of the forest. It yields
heavy hard dark red-brown wood. The casuarina is used for building throughout most ofNW
Island Melanesia. In Kwara' ae country, clubs and axe handles are also made from it (Floyd
1954, Peekel1984: 123, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 143, Whistler & Elevitch 2006b) .

                                                    The POe term for the casuarina was *aRu,
                                                but a compound form can also be recon-
                                                structed, namely POe *aRu-tmJis, consist-
                                                ing of *aRu plus *tmJis 'weep '-perhaps a
                                                metaphorical reference to the feathery and
                                                sometimes hanging foliage of the casuarina.
                                                However, I have no independent evidence of
                                                Oceanic speakers who make this connection.
                                                    The term for casuarina in Polynesian lan-
                                                guages reflects PPn *toa, itself a reflex of POe
                                                *toRas 'Intsia bijuga' (ch.7, §4.9). This shift
                                                in denotatum presumably reflects the fact that
                                                both the casuarina and Intsia bijuga yield ex-
                                                cellent hardwood.
                                                    So many reflexes of *aRu have an initial
      Figure 5.10 Casuarina equisetifolia .     y- (or other accretion) that it is tempting to
                                                reconstruct t*yaRu. This would be an error,
however. Frantisek Lichtenberk (1988) has shown the accretions in the SE Solomonic lan-
guages below are part of the regular reflexes of POe initial *a- . The same is evidently true in
many other Oceanic languages, as accretions occur regularly in this context, as illustrated by
a number of items reconstructed in volumes 1 and 2 for which non-Oceanic evidence requires
the reconstruction of POe initial *a-. [19]

[19] In vol. 1, *asa(q) ' grate, sharpen' (ch. 9, §2.1), *asu 'ladle, bailer ' (ch. 7, §7.4); in vol. 2, *alito(n) ' firebrand '
(ch. 3, §8.2), *anin ' wind ' (ch. 5, §4.1), *aparat 'NW wind ' (ch. 5, §4.2), *api 'fire ' (ch. 3, §8 .1), *atas 'top,
space above' (ch. 8, §2.2.6).

                                                                              The coastal strand      157

<
PMP *[q]aRuhu 'a shore tree: Casuarina equisetifolia' (Acn)
POe *aRu 'a shore tree, Casuarina equisetifolia' (Blust 1972b)
     Adm:   Seimat        yary       'Casuarina equisetifolia'(Sorensen 1950)
     NNG:   Maenge        lalu       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     NNG:   Bariai        eat        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     NNG:   Gitua         yaru       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     NNG:   Tami          yal        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     NNG:   Sio           yari-yari  'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     NNG:   Takia         yar        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     PT:    Muyuw         yay        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     PT:    Tawala        (ke)yalu   'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     PT:    Suau (Saliba) (kai)yalu  'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     PT:    Misima        (e)yalu    'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Vitu          yeru       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Bulu          aru        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Nakanai       (le)alu    'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Tolai         iara       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Nehan         ol-ol      'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Solos         yan        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Taiof         (ar)ari    'Casuarina equisetifolia'
     MM:    Banoni        dzaru      'tree with dense hard red wood used for digging
                                     stick' (P. Lincoln, pers. comm.)
  MM: Babatana        zaru           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Nduke           (n)aru         'Casuarina equisetifolia' 20
  MM: Roviana         (n)aru         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Marovo          aru            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Kia             n-aru          'Casuarina equisetifolia' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                     comm.)
  MM: Maringe         fi-aru         'Casuarina equisetifolia' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                     comm.)
PEOc *yaRu 'Casuarina equisetifolia' (Geraghty 1990)
  SES: Bugotu         aru            'Casuarina equisetifolia' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                     comm.)
  SES: Lau            salu           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SES: Kwaio          lalu           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SES: Kwara'ae       salu           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SES: 'Are'are       raru           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SES: Sa'a           salu           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV: Mwotlap        ey             'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV: Mota           aru            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV: NEAmbae        aru            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV: Araki          (vi)aru        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Tamambo          (vu)aru       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Uripiv           n-ur          'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Neve'ei          n-iar         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Nese             n-iar         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Paamese          e-ai          'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Lewo             (puru)yalu    'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Namakir          ne-ar         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    Nguna            n-earu        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCV:    S Efate          n-ar          'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SV:     Sye              n-yar         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SV:     Lenakel          n-iel         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SV:     Kwamera          n-ier         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  SV:     Anejom           n-ya          'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCal:   Jawe             yok           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  NCal:   NyeHlyu          n-ayi         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
>

[20] Nduke and Roviana naru seems to be a borrowing :from a (now lost?) language retaining the POe article *na
on nouns.

158   Malcolm Ross


<
POe *aRu-tmJis 'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Adm: Muss au       atmJisi       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Lavongai       aiJfa!JiS     'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Kara (E)       iata!Jis      'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM: Tabar          eta!Jis       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
>

    The set below was gleaned from Guppy ( 1896), who gives Malagasy jilau and Fijian ve-
lau, both Casuarina equisetifolia'. To these may be added Ngaju Dayak (kayu) walau (Heyne
1950: 514). Although thin, the set allows the reconstruction ofPMP/POc *pila(q)u.

<
PMP *pila(q)u 'Casuarina equisetifolia'
POe *pila(q)u 'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Fij:   Bauan        velau         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Fij:   Wayan        velau         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
>


5.5 Erythrina variegata (syn. E. indica), coral tree, Indian coral tree, TP palpal, Bnarara (Fabaceae)

Typically growing to 10--15 m, but sometimes to 20m, Erythrina variegata (Figure 5.11, left)
occurs in two common forms. One has the variegated or yellowed leaves that have given
rise to its name, as well as thorn-covered branches. The other form has green leaves and
sometimes no thorns or just a few at the base of the trunk (Will McClatchey, pers. comm.).
There are distinctive orange-red flowers in a spiral at the end of each branch. The bole is
usually short and the trunk branches low with numerous ascending branches.

    E. variegata is typically found in sandy soill in littoral forest, but it is also often planted
as an ornamental tree and as a support for the betel vine (Peekel1984: 249, Wheatley 1992:
139-141, Whistler & Elevitch 2006c). Gowers (1976: 75)-but not Wheatley-says that in
Vanuatu it is an introduced tree, but the NCV and SV reflexes of POe *rarap 'Erythrina
spp.' speak against this. Indeed, Vanuatu is one of the locations where the flowering of E.
variegata is the marker ofthe yam-planting season (ch.9, §2.1).

                                                                                 The coastal strand      159




          Figure 5.11     Left Erythrina variegata, Indian coral tree. Right F agraea berteroana.




    Among the Nakanai E. variegata saplings are used to make pig spears and the leaves to
dress wounds. It is widely used to make living fences (Floyd 1954, Arentz et al. 1989). Boiled
in coconut milk the leaves make an excellent vegetable. Sorensen (1950) writes that they are
eaten by immigrants to Ninigo but not by its natives.

    POe appears to have had two terms denoting E. variegata, *[baR]baR and *rarap, both
inherited from PMP. Philippine cognates, however, suggest that PMP *baRbaR21 denoted
E. variegata and *dapdap one or more other species, as Madulid (2001b: 121) lists Ilokano
bakbak and Tagalog bagbag as 'E. variegata' but Bagobo dadap and Hiligaynon Bisayan
dapdap as 'E. subumbrans' and Tagalog dapdap as 'E.fusca, E. subumbrans'. E.fusca is
a swamp species and E. subumbrans differs from other species in having flowers that are
greenish to pale red (Whistler & Elevitch 2006c). It is thus likely that POe *rarap denoted a
taxon of Erythrina spp. rather than just E. variegata.

<
PMP *baRbaR 'coral tree, Erythrina variegata'
POe *[baR]baR 'coral tree, Erythrina variegata'
  NNG: Gitua          bar(am)       'Erythrina variegatam
  NNG: Gedaged        hal           'Erythrina variegata'
  NNG: Takia          bar           'Erythrina variegata'
  NNG: Kairiru        bar           'Erythrina variegata'
  MM: Kara (E)        val-val       'Erythrina variegata'
  MM: Madak           ban-ban       'Erythrina variegata'
  MM:     Patpatar      bal-bal       'Erythrina variegata'
  MM:     Tolai         bal-bal       'Erythrina variegata'
  MM:     Ramoaaina     bal-bal       'Erythrina variegata'
  Mic:    Woleaian      paz_          'Erythrina variegata'
>

[21] PMP *baRbaR is reconstructed on the basis of the Ilokano, Tagalog and Oceanic forms listed here.

[22] The final -am of Gitua baram is unexplained, but the non-Oceanic evidence indicates that it does not reflect
part of the POe form.

160   Malcolm Ross



    As noted in §4.1.8, the expected reflex of POe *rarap 'Indian coral tree, Erythrina varie-
gata' is PPn t*lala, but this was replaced by PPn *!Jatae, apparently because the PPn reflex
of POe *drala 'a shrub, Vitex trifolia' was also *!ala.

<
PMP *dapdap 'coral tree, Erythrina spp.' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *rarap 'coral tree, Erythrina spp.' (Blust 1972b *rara)
PWOc *rap 'coral tree, Erythrina spp.' (see text)
  PT:    Bwaidoga         Ia/ava        'Erythrina variegata'
  PT:    Wagawaga         lalawa        'Erythrina variegata' (Holdsworth 1975a)
  PT:    Tawala           lawa-lawa 'tree type, large red flowers at end of July (probably
                                        Erythrina variegata)'
  MM: Sursurunga          rara          'tree type, fast-growing, looks like poplar'
  MM: Nehan               rau-rau       'Erythrina sp.'
  MM: Roviana             rapo-rapo     'Erythrina sp.'
  MM: Maringe             grara         'Erythrina orienta/is' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                        comm.)
PEOc *rarap 'Indian coral tree, Erythrina variegata'
  SES: Gela               rara          'Erythrina sp.'
  SES: Lau                rara          'Erythrinafusca'
  SES: Sa'a               rara          'Erythrina variegata'
  SES: Arosi              rara          'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Mwotlap            yay           'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Mota               rara[v]       'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: NE Ambae           rara          'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Raga               rara          'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Araki              (vi)rara      'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Tamambo            (vu)rara      'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Paamese            a-re          'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-"re             'Erythrina variegata'
  NCV: Lewo               (puru)te      'Erythrina variegata'
PSV *na-rap 'Indian coral tree, Erythrina variegata' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye              na-rap        'Erythrina variegata'
  SV:    Lenakel          na-iiJv       'flame tree'
  SV:    Anejom           na-ra         'Erythrina variegata'
  NCal: Pije              dalep         'Erythrina variegata'
  NCal: Nemi              dalep         'Erythrina variegata'
  NCal: NyeHiyu           dalap         'Erythrina sp.'
  Fij:   Bauan            drala         'Erythrina variegata'
  Fij:   Wayan            rara          'Erythrina variegata'
>

                                                                             The coastal strand      161


    The forms Tawala lawa-lawa and Roviana rapo-rapo above suggest at first sight that
the full reduplication of PMP *dapdap was exceptionally preserved in POe as t*raprap.
Blust (1977a) has shown that in reduplicated forms, as elsewhere, POe normally lost the first
member of a medial consonant sequence. Hence POe *rarap. Tawala and Roviana are both
languages in which a vowel is added after a POe final consonant, and this vowel forms part of
the reduplicand. The simplest interpretation is that *rarap was reduced to PWOc *rap, then
reduplicated again to avoid the monosyllabicity which POe abhorred. The Roviana form in
any case looks like a borrowing from an unknown source (the expected form is t*ra[va]rava).

5.5.6 Fagraea berteroana (syn. F. peekelii) (Loganiaceae)

Of the three species of F agraea that concern us here, one, F . berteroana,23 grows in the
Bismarcks (Peekel 1984: 437) and is the principal denotatum of the reconstructions below
(Figure 5.11 , right) . A second, F. racemosa (syn. F. ligustrina, F. maingayi, F. pauciflora)
is not reported from the Bismarcks, although it is found on the New Guinea mainland and
Bougainville and in the Solomons (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 171 , Conn & Damas 2006).
The third, F. gracilipes, is reported only from the western Solomons and from Fiji (Hviding
2005: 104, Capell1941).

     F. berteroana takes several forms. Peekel describes two. In the Bismarcks it is either
a foreshore shrub, 2-6 m tall, with no bole--it branches at ground level-or an epiphyte,
growing on another tree, commonly Inocarpus, Intsia or Calophyllum, without a stem of
its own and without taking nutrients from its host. The epiphyte form is also described by
Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 228) and mentioned by Wheatley (1992: 146) and Whistler & Ele-
vitch (2006d) . The latter two sources also describe a third form, a small tree growing to
15-20 m, with a bole that is rarely straight and often branches low. Frederick Damon (pers.
comm.) reports that the bole is very durable and on Woodlark Island is sometimes used for
houseposts instead of Intsia bijuga. In whatever form, F . berteroana has wonderfully scented
tubular white flowers which are white for the first two days, turning yolk-yellow on days 3
and 4. Its wood is light brown and durable.

     F. racemosa resembles the small-tree form of F . berteroana, ranging from 2 to 10m in
height, and occasionally reaching 16m. (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 171 , Conn & Damas
2006). F. gracilipes is a lowland forest tree that grows in swamps or mud (Hviding 2005: 104).
It is effectively in complementary distribution with F. racemosa, which abhors such habitats.

     The three species are apparently used in much the same ways. The flowers serve as per-
sonal decoration. Posts cut from Fagraea shrubs are used to establish living fences. Fa-
graea poles are used in canoe and house construction at a number of locations, e.g. SE Papua
New Guinea (Kinch 1999) and parts of the Solomons (Waterhouse 1949, Henderson & Han-
cock 1988: 171), because the branches grow straight and erect and, according to Hviding
(2005: 102, 104, 11 0), the wood never rots and is resistant to white ants. Hviding and Capell
report that F. gracilipes is used for house posts at Marovo and in Fiji respectively, Wheatley
( 1992: 146, 148) that F . berteroana is similarly used in Vanuatu, and especially on Aneityum.


[23] Also sometimes spelled berteriana or berterana in the literature, but IPNI and APNI give berteroana. The
species name is derived from the French surname Berteron.

162     Malcolm Ross


     In the light of these observations the etymon below may be identical with POe *bou,
denoting the main bearers or central post of a house (vol.l , ch.3 , §3.4). The Sye cognate
apparently denotes two tree species, neither of them a F agraea species, but both are used
for house construction. It is also possible that *bou may be identical with *bau 'hardwood
taxon' (ch. 7, §4.10), given that almost all the examples supporting the latter are from Central
Pacific languages and may reflect a change of denotation in PCP.

<
POe *bou 'Fagraea spp.'
  NNG: Mangap        bou              'tree sp. used for building'
  MM: Teop           bao              'Fagraea racemosa'
  MM: Nduke          bou              'a forest tree that grows in swamps in muddy
                                      places, F agraea gracilipes'
  MM:       Roviana     bou           'tree with hard timber useful and impervious to
                                      white ants, perhaps Guettarda sp.'
  MM:       Marovo      bou           'a swamp tree, Fagraea gracilipes (?),ant-resistant'
  MM:       Kia         bou           'Fagraea gracilipes' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:       Gao         bou           'Fagraea gracilipes' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES:      Ghari       bou (kora)    'Fagraea racemosa'
  SV:       Sye         na-mpou       'Dysoxylum gaudichaudianum, Alphitonia
                                      zizyphoides'
  SV:       Anejom      no-pou        'Fagraea berteroana'
>

     PPn *pou-muli 'Flueggea flexuosa' was apparently a compound reflecting POe *bou
'Fagraea spp.' as its first element and POe *muri[-] 'back part, rear' (vol.2, ch.8, §2.3.7)
as its second. We assume the association in meaning was that the tree(s) denoted by reflexes
of POe *bou and by PPn *pou-muli were all used in house-building. Milner ( 1966) notes
that in Samoa the Flueggea species denoted by pou-muli provided timber 'used for outrigger
booms, house posts etc.'.

<
PPn *pou-muli 'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  Pn:   Tongan       pou(muli)   'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  Pn:   E Uvean      pou(muli)   'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  Pn:   Samoan       pou(muli)   'Flueggeaflexuosa'
cf. also:
  Pn:       E Futunan   pou(tea)      'tree sp., Flueggea samoana'
>

    POe *buRat was apparently the specific term for F agraea berteroana. Central Pacific
reflexes quite often instead denote Guettarda .speciosa, another plant with sweet-smelling
flowers but a quite different appearance. Pawley & Sayaba (2003) gloss the Wayan reflex
as denoting a taxon including various species that have pretty and sweet-scented flowers.
If PCP *bua had such a range of meaning, then the application of its reflexes to Guettarda
speciosa is readily explained. However, things were apparently more complicated than this,
as a reduplicated PCP form *bua-bua is also reconstructable and it is not clear how this
differed in meaning from *bua. PCEMP *buRat is perhaps also reconstructable in the light
of a single putative cognate, Ende bore (Flores, CMP; Verheijen 1990: 213).

<
POe *buRat 'Fagraea berteroana'
  MM: Roviana            bu-burata         'Fagraea berteroana'
  MM:     Marovo          hu-hurata      'a woody climber ofthe elevated barrier reef
  SES:    Kwara'ae        hula           'Fagraea herteroana' (Whitmore 1966: 138)
  SES:    Lau             hule           'Plume ria acutifolia'
  NCal:   Jawe            guec           'Fagraea schlechteri'
  NCal:   Nemi            guec           'Fagraea schlechteri'
  NCal:   Nelemwa         huak           'Fagraea schlechteri'
  NCal:   Xaracuu         hue            'Fagraea schlechteri'
  Mic:    Ponapean        pwur           'Fagraea herteroana' (Whistler & Elevitch 2006d)
  Fij:    Rotuman         pua            'Plumeria acutifolia'
  Fij:    Wayan           hua            'taxon of trees with pretty, sweet-scented flowers:
                                         includes Gardenia augusta, Plumeria ruhra and
                                         F agraea spp.'
                           hua (ni viti) 'Fagraea spp.'
                           hua(toka)     'Guettarda speciosa'
  Fij:    Bauan            hua           'Fagraea spp.'
PPn *pua 'taxon including Fagraea herteroana and Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:    Niuean            pua         'bud; tree sp, Fagraea herteroana'
  Pn:    Tongan            pua         'Fagraea herteroana'
  Pn:    E Uvean           pua         'Fagraea herteroana '
  Pn:    E Futunan         pua         'Fagraea herteroana'
  Pn:    Anutan            pua         'flower; plant with flowers (v.)'
  Pn:    Tikopia           pua         'Fagraea sp.'
  Pn:    Rennellese        pua              with fragrant flowers'
                           pua (?atua) 'Fagraea herteroana'
                           pua(hano) 'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:    Samoan            pua         'Gardenia taitensis' (traditional usage; (Whistler
                                       2000: 194))
  Pn:    Tuvalu            pua         'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:    Kapingamarangi pua            'Guettarda speciosa'
                           hua         'Fagraea herteroana or other plant with showy
                                       flowers'
  Pn:    Nukuria           hua         'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:    Tongareva         pua         'bloom (v.)'
  Pn:    Rarotongan        pua         'Fagraea herteroana'
  Pn:    Tahitian          pua         'Allamanda cathartica' (R. Gardner, pers. comm.)
  Pn:    Tuamotuan         pua         'blossom, flower (v.)'
>

                                                                  The coastal strand    163


<
PCP *hua-hua 'Guettarda speciosa or F agraea sp.'
  Fij:    Bauan       hua-hua       'tree with very hard incorruptible wood, used for
                                    making the posts of houses, F agraea gracilipes'
PPn *pua-pua 'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:     Tongan      puopua        'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:     W Uvean     puapua        'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:     Pukapukan   puapua        'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:     Samoan      puapua        'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      T okelauan   puapua         'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      Maori        puapua         'a white-flowered climber, Clematis paniculata)'
>


164     Malcolm Ross


5.7 Flueggea jlexuosa (syn. Securinega jlexuosa), B namemiwa, namamao (Euphorbiaceae)

                                         Flueggea flexuosa is a medium-sized tree of
                                         10--15 m which grows on coral in coastal locations
                                         and also, in the Solomons, in lowland forests. Its nat-
                                         ural range extends from the Philippines to northern
                                         Vanuatu, but it is absent from New Guinea and the
                                         Bismarcks (Thomson 2006b).

                                             It provides moderately heavy hard straight wood
                                         which is slow to rot in contact with dry soil. It is con-
                                         sidered to be among the best building timbers in the
                                         Solomons and so is used for posts and for house con-
                                         struction by the Nduke, as well as for pig fences. It
                                         is best for largescale construction, since it cracks as
                                         it dries, and for this reason is not used for carving
                                         (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 107, Hviding 2005: 129,
                                         Scales n.d.). At Marovo scrapings ofthe bark are an
                                         ingredi1;:nt in many medicines.

                                             Although the Madak reflex refers to Fa/cataria
                                         moluccana, a tree vastly different in size (at 60 m the
                                         tallest in the forest), Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001: 107)
                                         perceive its leaves to be similar to the leaves of F.
                                         flexuosa.
  Figure 5.12 Flueggeaflexuosa: tree         The gloss of POe *mapuqan is marked as doubt-
        and fruit-bearing shoot.         ful below because F. flexuosa was apparently not
                                        present in the Bismarcks and thus perhaps unknown
 to POe speakers. However, this is problematic, as regular reflexes denote F.flexuosa in NW
 Solomonic, SE Solomonic and North-Central Vanuatu languages, and the most recent inter-
 stage that these groups are commonly descended from is POe. (For Polynesian terms for F.
flexuosa, see §5.6.)

<
POe *mapuqan 'Flueggeaflexuosa' (?)
  MM:      Madak        [vap]mavu  'Albiziafalcataria'
  MM:      Mono-Alu     ma-mahuana 'Flueggeaflexuosa' (Thomson 2006b)
  MM:      Nduke        mavuyana   'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  MM:      Roviana      mavuana    'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  MM:      Marovo       mavuana    'Flueggeaflexuosa'
  MM:      Kia          mafuna     'Flueggeaflexuosa' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES      Bugotu       mavua      'Flueggeaflexuosa' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES      Ghari        mavua      'Flueggeaflexuosa'
     SES:    Kwara' ae       ma-mufua         'Flueggeaflexuosa ' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
     SES:    Kwaio           ma-mafua         'Flueggeaflexuosa ' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
     NCV:    Mwotlap         mo-mou           'Flueggeaflexuosa '
     NCV:    Apma            ma-mau           'Flueggea flexuosa '
     NCV:    Vera' a         ma-mau           'Flueggea flexuosa '
     NCV:    Tamambo         (vu)ma-mau       'Flueggeaflexuosa ' (Thomson 2006b)
>


                                                                                  The coastal strand        165


5.8 Guettarda speciosa (Rubiaceae)

Guettarda speciosa is a hardwood tree with a short bole
that grows to a height of 3-12 m in a variety of coastal
habitats. Hviding (2005: 151) reports that at Marovo it
grows on the landward margin of the mangrove swamp
and is tolerant of salt water. It is included here among lit-
toral forest trees because Peekel ( 1984: 533) writes that in
New Ireland it is '[c]ommon on the foreshore ; as abundant
on the cliffs as on the sand'. Wheatley ( 1992: 198) reports
that it is infrequent in Vanuatu.

    This tree has a number of uses: in the small islands of
the Calvados chain (off the southeastern tip of the New
Guinea mainland) it is used in house construction (Kinch
1999). At Marovo it is used for firewood and for making
barkcloth mallets (Hviding 2005: 151 ).

    G. speciosa is sometimes labelled with the same term
                                                              Figure 5.13 Guettarda speciosa .
as the epiphyte F agraea berteroana, apparently because
both are sweet-smelling (§5.6), but the POe term for G. speciosa was *pwano or *pwano-pwano.

<
POe *[pwano]pwano 'Guettarda speciosa'[24]
  PT:      Muyuw       pano-pan     'Guettarda sp.'
  NCV: Mwotlap         pwon-pwon    'Guettarda speciosa'
  NCV: S Efate          n-fan       'Guettarda speciosa'
PSV *na-(v,w)an(vu) (?) 'Guettarda speciosa'
  SV:      Sye          uven-uven   Guettarda speciosa
  SV:      Lenakel      n-uen       'Guettarda speciosa' [25]
  SV:      Anejom       na-vanhu    'Guettarda speciosa' [25]
  NCal: Iaai            cpem        'Guettarda speciosa'
PPn *(f,p )ano 'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      Niuean      pano-pano 'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      Marque san hano          'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      Rarotongan ano           'Guettarda speciosa'
  Pn:      Tahitian     (ta)fano    'Guettarda speciosa'
>

[24] Tagbanwa banayon (Madulid 2001b: 150) appears to reflect a possible PMP *banayen. Ifthis is ancestral to
the forms listed here, then the POe form was *(p,b )an(e )on, with possible deletion of *-e- because the sequence
*-eo- was not a part of POe phonotactics.

[25] Recorded by Wheatley (1992 : 198), but not by Lynch (2004a). Spelling may be incorrect.

166    Malcolm Ross


5.5.9 Gyrocarpus americanus, canoe tree, Bna01'Je, kenutri (Hernandiaceae)

Wheatley (1992: 114) comments that the canoe 1tree, Gyrocarpus americanus, is a key indica-
tor of a region with a distinct dry season. It is confined to coastal strips and low coral plateaus
which lie in a rain shadow during the drier season when the SE trades are prevalent. Because
of its location and because its soft wood is easily worked, it is the tree from which dugout
canoes are made in north and central Vanuatu-and this is its only use. It is used for the
same purpose in New Ireland (Peekel1984: 192). On Waya Island the soft wood was used to
construct simple in-shore fishing rafts, and the bark was made into a tonic and medicine for
high blood pressure (Gardner & Pawley 2006).

     The canoe tree grows to a height of 30-40 m. It has a smooth grey-brown trunk, which
can be huge (Peekel reports a specimen 8.25 min diameter), and a sparse crown which loses
its leaves in the dry season.

     According to Peekel, the leaves and the flowers both smell unpleasant, the leaves like
garlic, the flowers acrid, hence its name in Patpatar, i-bore, and Tolai, i-boroi, literally 'pig
tree'.

     POe *qope appears to have been the term for Gyrocarpus americanus. Only one reliable
reflex is outside NCV, namely Titan fiow. Titan fi- reflects Proto Admiralty *n-q-, where *n-
in tum reflects the POe article *na which in Admiralties languages often combines with the
initial consonant of a noun (Ross 1988: 340--341 ). The phonological history of Drehet is not
sufficiently well known to be sure whether Drehet nip also reflects *qope.

<
POe *qope 'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  Adm: Titan           fi-ow       'tree sp . used for making canoes
PNCV *(q)ove 'Gyrocarpus americanus' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: Mota            ovi         'tree sp . '
  NCV: Raga            ove         'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  NCV: Nokuku          ova         'canoe'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-ov         'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  NCV: Paamese         uh-uh       'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  NCV: Lewo            (puru)iove 'Gyrocarpus americanus'
cf. also:
  Adm: Drehet               n-ip          'softwood tree sp. used to make canoe hulls and
                                          house frames'
>


5.5.10 Neisosperma oppositifolium (syn. Ochrosia oppositifolia, 0. parviflora), twin apple, Btufrut (Apocynaceae)

Perhaps because of a lack of relevant data, no POe term is reconstructable for N eisosperma
oppositifolium although it occurs in the Bismarc:ks. A small tree restricted to the coastal edge
of the littoral forest and growing to 5-8 m, it has dense clusters of white flowers a centimetre
in diameter at the ends of its branches and pairs of fruit which in shape and size resemble
a betelnut with a pointed and slightly turned tiJP. Hence its Kwara'ae name ai-kikiru 'betel
tree' (kikiru 'betelnut palm, Areca catechu). Internally the fruit is betelnut-like, too: it has a
thick dry husk enclosing the nut which contains two seeds.

                                                                       The coastal strand     167


     The tree provides good straight poles for the lighter parts of house construction, as well
as being good firewood. The thick latex beneath the outer bark has medicinal uses (Peekel
1984:443-445, Wheatley 1992:48-50, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 124, Gardner & Pawley
2006).

     At present no term is reconstructable at an interstage earlier than PROc *vaRo. Gedaged
(NNG)fa'lolj 'tree sp., the trunk ofwhich is used to make canoes' looks cognate but reflects
POe t*pa(r,R)oijV, which has an extra syllable not reflected in the Remote Oceanic cognate
set.

     The PSOc form *vato, reconstructed by Lynch (2004a), seems to be an irregular reflex
ofPROc *vaRo.

<
PROc *vaRo 'Neisosperma oppositifolium'
  NCV:    Mota        varo-varo        'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  NCV:    Vera' a     var-var          'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  NCV:    Araki       (Jara-(Jara      'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  NCV:    Raga        varo-varo        'Neiso:c.perma oppositifolium' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV:    Uripiv      (bi)var-var      'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Mic:    Marshallese (kdc )pwarw      'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Fij:    Rotuman     hao-hao          'tree with white flowers'
  Fij:    Wayan       vao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Fij:    Bauan       vao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Pn:     Tongan      fao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Pn:     E Uvean     fao              'tree sp.'
  Pn:     Emae        fao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Pn:     Samoan      fao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Pn:     Tuvaluan    fao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
  Mic:    Kiribati    pao              'N eiso:c.perma oppositifolium'
>

<
PSOc *vato 'Neisosperma oppositifolium' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: S Efate           (n)fato       'Neisosperma oppositifolium'
  NCV: Sye               (ye)vat       'Neisosperma oppositifolium'
>


5.5.11 Pisonia spp. (syn. Geodes spp.), Bnambuka, sofsofwud (Nyctaginaceae)

Two species of Pisonia occur in the Bismarcks: P. umbellifera (syn. P. excelsa, P. brunoni-
ana) and P. grandis (Figure 5.14, left). The main difference between them is their habitat. P.
umbellifera is common in secondary forest, whilst P. grandis is confined to the littoral strip,
just above the high-water mark. In Vanuatu it is occasionally cultivated in coastal villages.

    Both are trees growing to 10--20 min height, with a bole which divides low into several
erect branches. Both species have sweet-smelling white flowers. Their fruit are narrow (2-
5 mm across) and cylindical (3 em long) and have a sticky exudate which attaches them to
anything, including bird feathers. Their soft wood is useless, even as fuel, but the fruit were
traditionally used in bird traps. The leaves of P. grandis were consumed as a vegetable in
Vanuatu (Wheatley 1992: 186--189).

168       Malcolm Ross


    Two forms denoting Pisonia species are reconstructable. POe *[a]nuli!J may well have
denoted both Pisonia species. PEOc *buka evidently denoted a taxon of littoral trees, includ-
ing Pisonia species and Gyrocarpus american us, expanded in PCP to include H ernandia
nympaefolia.[26]

<
PMP *anuli!J 'Pisonia umbellifera' (AcD)
POe *[a]fiuli!J 'Pisonia sp.' (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  MM: Tolai             nula          'tree sp., fruit and young leaves of which are edible'
  MM: Maringe           fiuli         'Pisonia grandis' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Bugotu           fiuli         'Pisonia grandis' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Kwara'ae         nuli          'Albizia salomonensis'
  NCal: Nelemwa         66/i          'Pisonia grand is'
>

<
PROc *buka 'taxon of littoral trees, including Pisonia spp. and Gyrocarpus americanus'
  (Geraghty 1983 *puka 'Hernandia pisonia')
  NCV: NE Ambae             boya              'Pisonia umbellifera'
  NCV: Nduindui             na-mbuka          'Pisonia umbellifera'
  NCV: Raga                 buyo              'Pisonia umbellifera'
  NCV: Namakir              bik               'Pisonia or Hernandia sp.'
  NCV: Nguna                na-puka           'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  NCV: S Efate              na-puk            'Gyrocarpus americanus'
                            na-puk(-mokul) 'Pisonia umbellifera'
  SV:    Sye                na-mpyai          'Pisonia umbellifera'
  NCal: NyeHiyu             vic               'Pisonia aculeata'
  Mic: Kiribati             buka              'Pisonia grandis'
  Mic: Ponapean             puek              'tulip tree sp.'
PCP *buka 'taxon of littoral trees, including Pisonia spp., H ernandia nymphaefolia and
  Gyrocarpus americanus'
  Fij:  Bauan               buka(ni vuda) 'Guioa rhoifolia'
  Fij:  Rotuman             puka              'creepers of various kinds'
  Pn:   Niuean              puka              'Pisonia sp.'
  Pn:   Tongan              puko              'Pisonia grandis'
                            puko (viii)       'Gyrocarpus americanus' ('spinning puko', so
                                              named because of aerodynamics of thrown fruit)
                                              (Whistler 1991b: 109)
  Pn:    Samoan             pu?a (vai)        'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:   E Uvean             puko              'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
  Pn:   E Futunan           puka              'Pisonia sp.'
  Pn:   Pukapukan           puka              'Pisonia umbellifera'
  Pn:   Rennellese          puka              'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:   Tikopia             puka              'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
  Pn:     WFutunan       puka                  'a kind of native cabbage'
  Pn:     Anutan         puka                  'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:     Emae           puka                  'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele     puka                  'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  Pn:     Tuvalu         puk                   'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
                         puka                  'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:     Tokelauan      puka                  'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
                         puka(kakai)           'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:     Kapingamarangi puka(ria)             'M orinda citrifolia'
                         puke                  'Pisonia grandis, H ernandia sp.'
  Pn:     Nukuoro        buga                  'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:     Marque san     puka                  'tree sp.'
                         puka (pipiri)         'Pisonia umbellifera'
  Pn:     Rarotongan     puka                  'H ernandia nymphaefolia'
  Pn:     Maori          puka                  'M eryta sinclairii, Eugenia maire'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan      puka                  'Pisonia umbellifera ?, Pisonia grandis ?'
PPn *puka-tea 'Pisonia sp. or spp.' (*puka 'Pisonia sp.', *tea 'white')
  Pn:   Niuean        pukatea         'Pisonia grandis'
  Pn:   Manihiki      pukatea         'tree sp.'
  Pn:   Tahitian      puatea          'Pisonia umbellifera'
  Pn:   Tuamotuan pukatea             'Pisonia spp.'
  Pn:   Rarotongan pukatea            'large tree spp., Pisonia grandis, P. umbellifera'
  Pn:   Maori         pukatea         'a large tree with white bark, Laurelia
                                      novaezelandiae'
>

[26] This assumes that the terms in the cognate set are all correctly glossed.

                                                                      The coastal strand    169




Figure 5.14 Left Pisonia grandis: A, tree; B, shoot; C, flowering shoot with small leaves. Right
Premna corymbosa: A, tree; B, flowering shoot with leaves .


170   Malcolm Ross



5.5.12 Pongamia pinnata (syn. P. glabra) (Fabaceae)

Pongamia pinnata is a beach tree, 5-10 m tall, with white
flowers (Peekel 1984: 241). Its crushed roots are sometimes
used as fish poison, which explains why the Marovo call it
tuva (reflecting POe *tupa 'Derris sp. '), as Derris is the com-
monest fish poison in NW Island Melanesia. The Nakanai also
used the crushed leaves for medicinal purposes (Floyd 1954,
Hviding 2005: 188-149).

     The only POe candidate for a name for P. pinnata is *pesi.
It is clear from the glosses below that it denoted a coastal for-
est tree (or a taxon of such trees). On the evidence of Wayan
Fijian, its PCP reflex denoted a taxon of coastal forest trees,
including Pongamia pinnata and Intsia bijuga (and in Poly-
nesian languages its denotation is limited to       latter). With
only one cognate (Teop) outside Central Pacific, it is difficult  Figure 5.15 Pongamia
to know whether the denotatum of *pesi wasP. pinnata alone,              pinnata.
or a taxon as in Wayan.
     PoLLEX2 and Geraghty (2004: 90) compare PCP *vesi with Malay besi 'iron' and related
forms, but it is unlikely that POe *pesi/PCP *vesi reflects PMP besi 'iron', as this would
give POe t*posi!PCP t*vosi. Geraghty suggests that it reflects a borrowing from a Western
Malaya-Polynesian language, but this seems implausible in the light of the evidence below.

<
POe *pesi 'a coastal forest tree, perhaps Pongamia pinnata'
  MM: Teop              pes             'Pongamia pinnata'
PCP *vesi 'a coastal forest tree taxon including Pongamia pinnata and Intsia bijuga'
  Fij:    Bauan         vesi            'Intsia bijuga'
  Fij:    Wayan         vesi (wai)      'Pongamia pinnata'
                        vesi, vesi (du) 'Intsia bijuga'
PPn *fesi 'Intsia bijuga'
  Pn:     Tongan        fehi            'Intsia bijuga'
  Pn:     E Uvean       fesi            'tree from which tapa-cloth beaters made; probably
                                        I ntsia bijuga'
>

                                                                                 The coastal strand   171


5.5.13 Premna spp. (Verbenaceae)

Two Premna species concern us here. P. integrifolia (syn. P. divaricata) is reported in the
Bismarcks, P. corymbosa (syn. P. serratifoUa) in the Solomons and Vanuatu (Figure 5.14,
right). 27 Both are small trees, 4--8 m tall, usually growing immediately behind the beach,
although P. integrifolia is reportedly also found in primary forest. At Marovo P. corymbosa
grows mainly on coral islets on ocean-facing reefs, typically together with Pemphis acidula.

    Both Premna species tend to branch at the base, with several erect branches, but some-
times they sprawl horizontally. They have hard yellowish wood, white flowers and blue-
black to black berries 6--9 mm across, reminiscent of European elderflower and elderberries
(Peekel1984:479, Henderson & Hancock 1988:169-171 , Wheatley 1992:244, Kwa' ioloa
& Burt 2001: 164, Hviding 2005: 107-108).

    Sometimes planted as live fences, Premna species provide rafters and fast-burning wood
for the cooking fire. They are particularly known, however, for two uses: they provide good
wood for traditional fireploughs, and they are commonly used for various medicinal purposes.
A common cure for headache is to insert he:ated leaves and shoots in the nose or to inhale
the vapour from a hot infusion. The leaves and shoots are also used to treat pain by rubbing
them on the afflicted body part. Arentz et al. (1989: 91) also report that the leaves are boiled
and the infusion is drunk against diarrhoea.

    The POe term was *arop, with a reduplicated reflex in PCP (and Bugotu). In Proto Po-
lynesian an alternant *walo-walo appears alongside *alo-alo. This may have been the result
of glide epenthesis, i.e. *alo-w-alo, followed by reanalysis of *-w- as part ofthe root and its
inclusion in reduplication, giving *walo-walo.

<
POe *qarop 'Premna spp.'
     Adm: Mussau                alo              'tree sp., used for firewood, and traditionally used to
                                                 make fireploughs '
  MM: Varisi          arovo                      'Premna corymbosa' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Babatana        yarovo                     'Premna integrifolia'
  SES: Bugotu         aro-aro                    'Premna corymbosa' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Kahua         ?aro                        'Premna corymbosa' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  NCV: Vera' a        n-ar                       'Premna taitensis' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Mota           aro                        'Premna taitensis'
  NCV: Raga           aro                        'Premna sp. ' (Walsh 2004)
  Mic: Marshallese (ka)ar                        'Premna integrifolia'
  Mic: Puluwatese y5r                            'a common tree, possibly Premna integrifolia'
  Mic: Woleaian      yaro                        'Premna integrifolia'
PCP *aro-aro 'Premna spp. '
  Fij:   Wayan        ar-aro                     'Premna spp.'
  Fij:   Bauan       yaro-yaro                   'Premna sp.'
PPn *alo-alo 'Premna sp. '
  Pn:    Niuean       alo-alo                    'Premna sp.'
  Pn:    Samoan       alo-alo                    'Premna corymbosa'
                      alo-alo (tai)              'a beach shrub, Clerodendrum inerme'
PPn *walo-walo Premna spp.'
  Pn:   E Uvean     valo-valo   'Premna taitensis'
  Pn:   E Futunan valo-valo     'Premna taitensis'
  Pn:   Anutan      varo-varo   'Premna integrifolia'
  Pn:   Rennellese bago-bago    'Premna gaudichaudii'
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele  varo-varo   'shrub sp.'
  Pn:   Tikopia     varo-varo   'Premna spp.'
  Pn:   Tuvalu      valo-valo   'Premna taitensis'
  Pn:   Nukuoro     valo-valo   'Premna integrifolia'
  Pn:   Luangiua    valo-valo   'big tree with fragrant leaves'
  Pn:   Mangareva varo-varo     'an odorous plant'
  Pn:   Tahitian    (a)varo     'Premna sp.'
cf. also:
  MM:       Roviana   varo      'Premna integrifolia' (borrowing from a Polynesian
                                language?)
>

[27] A third species, P. taitensis, is apparently native to eastern Polynesia.

172    Malcolm Ross




6 Wildplants ofthe mangrove swamp


6.1 Introduction

Mangrove forests are located on the strip of waterlogged land between mean sea level and
the highest tide levels. Mangrove plants thrive in this intertidal zone because they are salt-
tolerant, but they also require a supply of fresh water. One salt-resisting mechanism is ul-
trafiltration, which costs the plant no energy but removes sodium and chloride ions from
seawater as it is absorbed for normal physiological processes. Mangrove plants are popu-
larly recognised by the stilt roots characteristic of trees toward the seaward margin of the
swamp. The exposed roots have speciallenticels (pore-like structures) which enable them
to exchange carbon dioxide and oxygen, allowing them to survive in anaerobic soils, while
flooding tides bring water-borne nutrients and disperse their buoyant seeds (Duke 2006). Not
all mangroves have stilt roots, however.

     Serious deforestation of the intertidal zone occurred on many Pacific islands after the
arrival of European colonisers, thanks to a perception that mangrove areas were unproduc-
tive marginal lands (Thaman 1994: 157), but Hviding's (2005) study of plant use on Marovo
Lagoon shows vividly that this perception was false: the trees and shrubs of the mangrove
swamp have numerous and often important uses for Oceanic speakers. The larger trees pro-
vide strong building materials and good and abundant fuel for cooking fires, and their fruits
provide food.

    Mangrove forests occur on stretches of coastline sheltered from wave action, along es-
tuaries, and occasionally on coral reefs that are protected from the surf. A mangrove swamp
needs regular rainfall to wash salt out of the soil, which is inundated with sea water at high
tide twice a day. Inundation on the seaward edge lasts longer and is normally deeper than on
the landward side. This means that growing conditions change progressively as one moves
landward. The soil is saltiest on the seaward 1;:dge and least salty on the landward side, where
there is usually an abrupt transition to freshwater swamp forest.

    This means that species that thrive on the seaward edge need to be the most adapted to
waterlogged conditions and do not necessarily occur on the landward margin. Species on
the landward margin often also grow in freshwater swamp or lowland rainforest. Biogeo-
graphic literature divides the gradient from the seaward to the landward margin into three
or four bands, although these obviously shade into each other. A convenient division is (a)
the seaward edge; (b) the Rhizophora zone; (c) the Bruguiera zone; and (d) the landward
margin (Lear & Turner 1977). Sources describing mangrove forests in the Bismarcks and
the Solomons generally agree as to which species are common in which band.

174   Malcolm Ross


     Common species of the seaward edge are Avicennia marina (the white/grey mangrove),
Sonneratia caseolaris, S. alba and sometimes Ceriops tagal (the yellow mangrove). I am
unable to reconstruct labels for any of these species. The major proximate reason for this
is that even sources that provide plant names aplenty often give only a generic term for
mangroves. Sometimes this is because they are simply unknown to speakers because there
are no mangrove swamps nearby or because these species do not grow in local swamps.
But it is also likely that names for these speci1es have often not been collected because of
their relative inaccessibility to landbased fieldworkers who have no particular interest in the
swamp environment.
                                                 Behind the seaward edge the outer zone of the
                                            mangrove forest consists generally of Rhizophora
                                            species (§2.1 ).
                                                 Behind the Rhizophora zone the mangrove for-
                                            est canopy begins to assume the stature of a land-
                                            based forest as Bruguiera species ( §3.1) take over
                                            fromRhizophora. Depending on local conditions, Ce-
                                            riops tagal sometimes occurs between Bruguiera and
                                            the landward margin.
                                                 On the landward margin the mangrove forest be-
                                            comes more diverse, forming a canopy up to 25 m
                                            tall, which in the Bismarcks includes Camptoste-
                                            mon schultzii (no reconstruction), Cerbera manghas
                                            (§4.1 ), Excoecaria agallocha (§4.3), H eritiera lit-
                                            toralis (§4.4), Inocarpus fagifer (ch. 11, §2.2), In-
                                            tsia bijuga (ch.7, §4.9), Lumnitzera littorea (no re-
                                            construction) and Xylocarpus granatum (§4.6). I ntsia
                                            bijuga and Inocarpus fagifer are also common low-
Figure 6.1 Rhizophora apiculata, the land swamp forest and rain forest trees and the lat-
tall-stilted mangrove, prop-root man- ter is also a nut tree. They are not treated here but
grove: A, stilt roots and trunk; B, flower;
                                            in chapters 7 and 11 respectively. Because the land-
C, leaves, fruit and hypocotyl (viviparous
                                            ward margin of the mangrove forest is more open, it
seedling).
                                            has an undergrowth of shrubs and low-stature trees
including Dolichandrone spathacea (§4.2) and Myristica hollrungii (no reconstruction). The
Nypa fruticans palm also grows on the landward side of estuarine swamps (§4.5) (Paijmans
1976:31-34, Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998:50--5 1).

     The following sections present reconstructions for plants which grow in the Rhizophora
(§2) and Bruguiera (§3) zones ofthe mangrove forest and on the landward margin (§4).


6.2 The Rhizophora zone of the mangrove forest

6.2.1 Rhizophora spp., P manguru, Bnatongtong (Rhizophoraceae)

                                                                   The mangrove swamp        175


The outer zone of the mangrove forest in the Bismarcks and the Solomons is dominated by
trees of the genus Rhizophora, in the Bismarcks usually by R. apiculata, known as the tall-
stilted mangrove or prop-root mangrove, which usually grows to between 5 and 8 min height,
but can grow as tall as 40 m. The trunk is usually not erect and branches irregularly.

     R. apiculata is also found in the Solomons, Vanuatu and New Caledonia. There are two
other, rather similar, Indo-Pacific Rhizophora species, R. mucronata, which does not grow
east of the Bismarcks, and R. stylosa, the re:d mangrove, whose range stretches to western
Polynesia.

     The pale yellow flowers of R. apiculata grow in pairs just below the base of the leaf
stalk. The mature fruit are irregular ovoids (shaped like an upsidedown pear) and grow to
around 4--5 em. All Rhizophora species are viviparous, i.e. the seed, hidden in the mature fruit,
germinates on the tree and produces a hypocotyl, a viviparous seedling, which eventually falls
into the mud below. Hypocotyls are long narrow green cylindrical structures with irregular
small brown lenticels (pores). They vary in length from 15 to 80 em but are only about 2cm
in diameter at their widest point (Peekel1984: 400--401 , Duke 2006).

     The Bola of New Britain use Rhizophora species as building timber (Powell1976). On
Waya Island, Fiji, the roots were used to make baskets and fish-traps, and the bark was boiled
to give a red dye which was also used as a preservative for ropes. The crushed tips of the roots
provided medicine for thrush and coughs (Gardner & Pawley 2006).

     The Proto Oceanic (POe) term for Rhizophora species was perhaps POe *wako(t), re-
peated here from ch.4, §2.4. Since it is Rhiz:ophora species that have stilt roots, it is likely
that the intended meaning of 'mangrove ' in these glosses is Rhizophora, and the glosses of
the Tawala, Mokilese and Ponapean reflexes suggest that POe *wako(t) may have been used
metonymically for the whole tree and not just the roots.

<
PMP *waket 'mangrove root' (ACD)
POe *wako(t) 'mangrove root'
  PT:   Tawala       wakoya      'mangrove '
  Mic: Kosraean      nk-nk       'mangrove root'
  Mic: Mokilese      ak          'mangrove '
  Mic: Ponapean      ak          'generic for mangroves '
>

   PWOc *haul perhaps denoted Rhizophora: its Tolai reflex, haul 'mangrove, Rhizophora
apiculata', contrasts with tmyor, the generic term for mangroves including both Rhizophora
and Bruguiera species.

<
PWOc *haul 'mangrove, Rhizophora sp. (?)"(Ross 1996c)
 NNG: Kove           vale         'mangrove '
 NNG: Yabem          (ka)h:J?     'k.o. mangrove tree '
 PT:   Duau          pauli        'mangrove '
 PT:   Suau (Daui) pauli          'mangrove '
 PT:   Suau (Saliba) pauli        'mangrove (generic) '
 MM: Patpatar        haul         'mangrove '
 MM: Tolai           haul         'mangrove, Rhizophora apiculata'
>

As a generic, Saliba pauli includes Ceriops tagal, Rhizophora spp. and Bruguiera spp. (Mar-
getts 2005h).

176   Malcolm Ross


6.3 The Bruguiera zone of the mangrove forest

6.3.1 Bruguiera spp., P ko 'a (Rhizophoraceae)

                                          In the Bismarcks Bruguiera gymnorrhiza, the or-
                                          ange or large-leafed mangrove, dominates the inner
                                          zone of the mangrove forest. It often grows in stiff
                                          mud, as well as in tidal areas, and tolerates a wide
                                          range of salinity levels. It contrasts sharply in ap-
                                          pearance with Rhizophora apiculata, as it is taller,
                                           15-30 m tall, and has an erect trunk and regularly
                                          arranged lateral branches. Its rounded or plank-like
                                          buttresses branch over and over again as they near
                                          the ground. Sometimes there are also stilt roots.
                                          Traditionally, the fruit was rarely eaten. When it
                                          was, it was processed to remove the tannin, then
                                          cooked in coconut cream as a vegetable (Henderson
                                          & Hancock 1988: 105, 107, Allen & Duke 2006).

                                              The wood of B. gymnorrhiza is hard, but it is
                                          not durable in water and is therefore used only for
                                          internal construction, e.g. rafters. It is also used to
                                          make charcoal (Streicher 1982, Peekel1984: 400).
                                          TheN akanai also use it for axe handles and digging
                                          sticks (Floyd 1954). In areas where people depend
                                          on sago because they have little dryland agricul-
                                          ture, sprouted Bruguiera fruits are sometimes col-
Figure 6.2 Bruguiera gymnorrhiza, or- lected and subjected to lengthy processing so that
ange mangrove: A, tree; B, shoot bearing they can be eaten (Barrau 1955: 25-26). The bark
edible fruit.                             was used as an abortifacient in Malaita and for the
                                          treatment of bums in the western Solomons.
    POe *tof}oR was fairly clearly the generic term for mangroves. It also seems to have
been the term for Bruguiera species. This is the denotatum of its reflexes in non-Oceanic
languages and in some of the Oceanic languages listed below (and I suspect that where the
gloss is simply 'mangrove ', this is sometimes simply the result ofpoor glossing).

<
PAn *tef}eR 'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.' (Blust 1972b)
POe *tof}oR 'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.; mangroves (generic)' (Ross 1996c)
  Adm:    Mussau         tof}o         'mangrove sp. with edible fruit '
  NNG:    Malai          tof}or        'mangrove'
  NNG:    Tami           tof}          'mangrove'
  NNG:    Mindiri        tUOfj         'mangrove'
  NNG:    Bilibil        tO f)         'mangrove'
  NNG:    Gedaged        tO f)         'mangrove'
  NNG:    Yabem          (ka)to?       'mangrove'
  NNG:    Numb ami       tolof}a       'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.'
  PT:     Sud est        rof}we        'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.'
  PT:     Motu           to-toa        'Rhizophora mucronata' (Lane-Poole 1925)
  MM: Lavongai        tOf)Of}      'mangrove'
  MM: Tiang           tOf)Oi       'mangrove'
  MM: Minigir         tOf)Or       'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.'
  MM: Patpatar        tO f)        'mangrove'
  MM: Tolai           tOf)Or       'mangrove, Bruguiera and Rhizophora spp.'
  MM: Taiof           tOf)On       'mangrove'
  MM: Mono-Alu        toto         'Rhizophora spp.' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
PEOc *tof}oR 'mangrove'
  SES: Gel a          tOf)O        'a mangrove'
  SES: Sa'a           Of]O         'mangrove'
  SES: 'Are'are       ono          'mangrove'
  NCV: Araki          (vi)COf]O    'Rhizophora sp.'
  NCV: Raga           tOfj-tOf)O   'mangrove'
  NCV: Naman          ne-dofJ      'mangrove'
  NCV: Avava          o-dofJ       'mangrove'
  NCV: Uripiv         na-rof}      'Ceriops tagal'
  NCV: Lonwolwol tO f)             'mangrove'
  NCV: Paamese        a-tof}o      'mangrove'
  NCV: Namakir        tof}otof}    'mangrove'
PSV *na-dof}a(q) 'mangrove, Rhizophora spp.' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye          (ne)tuf}o    'mangrove, Rhizophora sp.'
  SV:    Lenakel      tof}o        'mangrove'
  SV:    Anejom       ne-cef}      'mangrove, Rhizophora sp.'
  NCal: Nemi          }en          'mangrove'
  NCal: NyeHlyu       jan          'mangrove'
  NCal: Nelemwa       kan          'Bruguiera gymnorrhiza'
  Mic: Kiribati       tOf)O        'mangrove (generic); Bruguiera gymnorrhiza and
                                   Rhizophora mucronata
  Mic: Ponapean        c;:of}      'mangrove sp., bark of which is used for dyeing'
PCP *tof}o 'mangrove, probably Bruguiera gymnorrhiza; mangroves (generic)'
  Fij:    Wayan        tof}o       'Bruguiera gymnorrhiza; also generic for mangrove
                                   spp. including Bruguiera gymnorrhiza and
                                   Rhizophora spp.'
  Pn:     Tongan       tOf)O       'mangrove'
  Pn:     Niue an      tOf)O       'legendary tree, said to be the mangrove'
  Pn:     Rennellese tOf)O         'mangrove, Bruguiera gymnorrhiza'
  Pn:     Tikopia      tOf)O       'mangrove'
  Pn:     Samoan       tOf)O       'taxon of mangrove species inc. Bruguiera
                                   gymnorrhiza and Rhizophora mangle' (Whistler
                                   2000: 204)
  Pn:     Mangarevan tof}o-tof}o   'mangrove'
>

                                                           The mangrove swamp       177


178      Malcolm Ross


6.4 The landward margin of the mangrove forest

The landward margin of the mangrove forest looks more like a dryland rain forest than a
mangrove swamp. Indeed, apart from Excoecaria agallocha, the plants below are described
as growing 'behind' mangroves, i.e. behind the various stilt-rooted species. They are trees
of the foreshore or the freshwater swamp rather than specialised plants of the mangrove
swamp. The landward margin is more diverse:, and accommodates an understorey which
includes Dolichandrone spathacea (§4.2). Not all prominent plants of the landward margin
have reconstructable POe labels. Terms for Lumnitzera littorea, Camptostemon schultzii and
Myristica hollrungii cannot at present be reconstructed.


6.4.1 Cerbera spp. (Apocynaceae)

Three Cerbera species are associated with mangrove swamps. All three grow in coastal loca-
tions and are often associated with muddy habi1cats. Two, C. manghas and C. manghas (syn.
C.floribunda), are similar to each other, and some languages treat them as a single taxon.
They are trees 10-20 m tall and about a metre in girth. The third, C. odollam, is a large shrub
or small tree about 10m in height. All three hav1e shiny green leaves and sweet-scented white
flowers with a red (C. manghas) or yellow (C. odollam) centre. The seed is surrounded by
a thick fibrous husk which gives the fruit buoyancy and makes for easy dispersal on ocean
currents.

                                               The genus is named after Cerberus, the Greek
                                           mythological dog of Hades, because all its parts
                                           are highly toxic: they contain cerberin, a substance
                                           that blocks electric impulses in mammals, includ-
                                           ing the heart beat. Even smoke from burning Cer-
                                           bera wood is toxic. In parts of the Pacific Cerbera
                                           sap was used to poison animals and people (Pow-
                                           ell1976, Tomlinson 1986). Whistler (1992) reports
                                           that the fruit was eaten by suicides in the Marque-
                                           sas. On Waya Island an extract of the bark in oil
                                           was used to exorcise demons (Gardner & Pawley
                                           2006}.

                                               Two reconstructions are presented below:
                                           PWOc *p(wJawa(t) 'Cerbera spp., probably C.flori-
                                           bunda and C. manghas' and PCP *rewa 'tree, Cer-
                                           bera sp., probably Cerbera odollam'. Milke (1968)
                                           also offers POe *pasa 'Cerbera sp. ', based on
   Figure 6.3 Cerbera odollam: bottom      Gedaged safa (metathesis), Bauan vasa 'C. odol-
      left, longitudinal section of fruit. lam', Samoanfasa, 'Uvea' 1 faha, both 'variety of
                                           pandanus'. The alleged metathesis and the seman-
tic discrepancies make cognacy too uncertain for one to accept this reconstruction without
further comparisons.

[1] It is not clear whether Milke intends East Uvean or West Uvean.

                                                                  The mangrove swamp       179


    The initial rounded bilabial of POe *p (wJawa(t) is reconstructed on the basis of Teop p-
(the usual Teop reflex of *pis v-. The final *-tis uncertain because it is reflected in Misima,
but not where it is also expected, in Teop, Nduke, Roviana and Marovo.

<
POe *p (wJawa(t) 'Cerbera spp., probably C.floribunda and C. manghas'
  PT:     Misima       pawat          'Cerbera manghas'
  MM:     Lavongai     bau            'Cerberafloribunda'
  MM:     Kara (E)     vau(kip)       'Cerbera manghas'
  MM:     Teop         pau            'Cerbera manghas' (Record 1945)
  MM:     Nduke        vao            'Cerbera spp. inc. C.jioribunda and C. manghas'
  MM:     Roviana      vao            'Cerbera spp. inc. C.jioribunda and C. manghas'
  MM:     Marovo       vao            'Cerbera spp. inc. C.jioribunda and C. manghas'
  SES:    Gel a        vao-vao        'large-leaved shrub sp. (possibly C. odollam)
  SES:    Arosi        hao-hao        'tree sp.'
  SES:    Lau          fao-fao        'tree sp., Bombax malabaricum'
>

<
PCP *rewa 'tree, Cerbera sp., probably Cerbera odollam'
  Fij:    Wayan         rewa          'Cerbera manghas'
  Fij:    Bauan         rewa          'Cerbera odollum, with long, narrow leaves'
  Pn:     E Uvean       leva          'Cerbera lactaria '
  Pn:     E Futunan     leva          'Cerbera odollam'
  Pn:     Rennellese    gef3a         'Cerbera odollam'
  Pn:     Tikopia       reva          'tree that grows only on the mountain'
  Pn:     Emae          reva          'Cerbera odollam'
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele    reva          'Cerbera odollam'
  Pn:     Samoan        leva          'Cerbera odollam'
  Pn:     Rurutu        (e)reva       'Cerbera manghas'
  Pn:     Tahitian      reva          'Barringtonia sp.'
  Pn:     Rarotongan    reva          'Cerbera lactaria; false sea-mango, Cerbera
                                      odollam'
  Pn:     Maori         rewa-rewa     'tree, Knightia excelsa, with long narrow leaves'
>


6.4.2 Dolichandrone spathacea (syn. Bignonia spathacea) (Bignoniaceae)

A tree of the understorey, 5-12 m tall, Dolichandrone spathacea grows behind mangroves
and around the swampy mouths of streams from India to New Caledonia. Its fruit are up to
45 em long, flattened and curved like a bean pod with dark grey squarish seeds with thick
corky wings. The large white flowers open after sunset and fall in the morning.

    It is used in New Ireland to make propeller-like shark fishing floats (Peekel 1984: 508).
In Marovo the wood is used for various canoe parts and sometimes for carving (Hviding
2005: 148) and in parts ofMelanesia is used £or hourglass drums (Record 1945). The Nakanai
rub the bark on dermatitis and grille (Tinea imbricata, a disfiguring fungal skin infection)
(Floyd 1954).

180     Malcolm Ross

<
PMP *tui? 'Dolichandrone spathacea' (Blust 1986)
POe *tui 'Dolichandrone spathacea'
  NNG: Gedaged        tui          'tree sp., Fabaceae, the stem ofwhich is used to
                                   make canoes'
  NNG: Kairiru        tui          'Dolichandrone spathacea'
  MM: Nakanai         tiu          'Dolichandrone spathacea'
  MM: Madak           (va)ti       'Dolichandrone spathacea'
  MM: Babatana        tui          'Dolichandrone spathacea' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                   comm.)
  MM: Ririo           tui          'Dolichandrone spathacea' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                   comm.)
  MM: Roviana         tui          'tree with inedible bean-like fruit'
  MM: Marovo          tui          'Dolichandrone spathacea'
  SES: Gel a          tui          'tree sp.'
>


6.4.3 Excoecaria agallocha, milky mangrove (Euphorbiaceae)

                                 Excoecaria agallocha is a shrub or small tree with a thick
                                 trunk that mostly grows in saltwater inland of A vicennia,
                                 Rhizophora and Bruguiera species (Peekel 1984:316,
                                 Hviding 2005: 135). According to Hviding the sap is
                                 harmful to people's eyes. He also notes that its dead, dry
                                 wood is very good for slow-burning firesticks and for fuel
                                 for cooking fires. On New Britain an infusion made from
                                 the leaves is mixed with the sap of a Liliaceae species and
                                 used against fever (Arentz et al. 1989: 91).

                                     Lynch (2004) reconstructs PSOc *(t,d)oto(q), noting,
                                 'Final *-o is overtly reflected in at least Lenakel and the
                                 New Caledonian languages, suggesting final *-q.' I re-
                                 construct POe *dotoq 'sticky liquids including the sap of
                                 (some?) trees'; 'a mangrove tree, probably Excoecaria
                                 agallocha' with initial *d- and final *-q because it appears
                                 to be an im;:gular reflex (for expected POe t*ditoq) of
Figure 6.4 Excoecaria agallocha, PAn *diteq 'sticky substance' (ACD). There are two sets
         milky mangrove.         of reasons for thinking that items meaning 'sticky sap'
                                 and items denoting Excoecaria agallocha (or in some
cases Cerbera manghas, also a mangrove) reflect the same POe etymon.
      • In the cognate set below, Marovo ototo 'E. agallocha' and Kwara'ae toto(1y'"ala) 'C.
        manghas' are descriptive terms which allude to sticky sap. According to Hviding the
        Marovo name ototo means 'with much sap', an assertion supported by the fact that in
        closely related Nduke oto- means the 'sap or gum of trees and some fruits'. 2 Kwa'ioloa
        & Burt (2001: 162) gloss toto(1y'"ala) as 'sticky sap; Cerbera manghas'.

[2] Marovo normally reflects POe *-q as -k- , followed by an echo vowel, but if this is the directly possessed
(suffixed) noun 'sap', then loss of root-final *-q is regular.

                                                                        The mangrove swamp            181


     • Reflexes in the cognate set below share: in irregular developments which affect reflexes
       of POe *dotoq 'sticky liquids .. . '. Kwara' ae toto(1j'"ala) reflects PSES *soso 'sap ' 3 in-
       stead of expected PSES t*doto. Most other reflexes share in a voicing assimilation
       which reflects a variant *totoq. This idiosyncratic change affects both reflexes glossed
       'sticky sap' 4 and reflexes glossed 'E. agallocha' (below), suggesting that they are in-
       deed the same term.

<
POe *dotoq 'sticky liquids including the sap of (some?) trees' ; 'a mangrove tree, probably
  Excoecaria agallocha' (Lynch (2004a): PSOc *(t,d)oto(q))
  MM: Bola             toto          'Cerbera manghas' (Powell 1976)
  MM: Marovo           ototo         'Excoecaria agallocha'
  SES: Kwara' ae       toto(1j'"ala) 'Cerbera manghas' (irregular: see text above)
  NCV: Mwotlap         no-dot        'Excoecaria agallocha'
  NCV: Mota            noto          'Excoecaria agallocha'
  NCV: Tamambo (vu)toto              'tree sp. with sticky sap, grows near water'
  NCV: Uripiv          na-tot        'Excoecaria agallocha'
PSV *na-tetaq 'Excoecaria agallocha' (Lynch 200lc)
    SV:     Sye              yate             'Excoecaria agallocha'
    SV:     Lenakel          tara             'Excoecaria agallocha'
    SV:     Anejom           ne-tet           'Excoecaria agallocha'
    NCal:   Nemi             dao              'Excoecaria agallocha'
    NCal:   NyeHlyu          jayo             'Excoecaria agallocha'
    NCal:   Iaai             xic              'Excoecaria agallocha'
    Pn:     Tongan           toto             'Cerbera odollam'
>


6.4.4 Heritiera littoralis (Sterculiaceae)

Heritiera littoralis typically grows in sand at the high-tide
limit of estuaries and mangrove swamps in the Bismarcks,
the Solomons, Vanuatu and New Caledonia. Up to 25m tall,
it has a short bole, straight trunk, planklike buttresses, and
large conspicuous hard brown nuts about 7 em long and 4
em in diameter. Its wood is very strong when it has dried
out, and is used among other things for rafters, planks and
spear shafts (Peekel 1984: 374, Wheatley 1992:223-225,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 136, Hviding 2005: 101).

    The cognate set below has few members, but they are
widespread enough to support a POe reconstruction which
entails the POe term *qone 'sand, sandy beach' or *qone-
qone 'sandy' (vo1.2, ch.3, §7.5). If the interpretation of the
Patpatar prefix i- offered in chapter 2, §7.1 is correct, then         Figure 6.5   H eritiera littoral is

[3] Cf Gela sososo 'sap, juice', Arosi toto 'sap '.

[4] Cf Vitu (MM) toto 'milk', Mota (NCV) totoa- 'juice of tree, thick fluid in bark', Raga (NCV) toto 'sap' ,
Nguna (NCV) totoa 'sap, exude sap' (NCV items from Clark 1996b), PPn *toto ' blood, sap' (POLLEX) .

182   Malcolm Ross


Patpatar i-kon points to POe *kayu qone, 'tree of beach, beach tree'. Although Tolai ka-
is not a regular prefix in tree names, it quite possibly reflects *kayu in this instance, as the
latter must have been an intrinsic part of the name. NyeHiyu khon reflects *kV -kon at a recent
interstage and has a history like that of the Tolai reflex. Proto SE Solomonic *(q)one-(q)one
reflects POe *qone-qone 'sandy'.

<
POe *kayu qone 'H eritiera littoralis'
  MM: Patpatar          i-kon            'H eritiera littoralis'
  MM: Tolai             ka-kono          'H eritiera littoralis' (Record 1945)
  NCal: NyeHlyu         khon             'H eritiera littoralis'
>

<
Proto SE Solomonic *(q)one-(q)one 'H eritiera littoralis'
  SES:    Kwara'ae      one-one          'Heritiera littoralis'
  SES:    Lau           one-one          'Heritiera littoralis'
  SES:    Arosi         one-one          'large tree sp. with brightly coloured foliage'
>


6.4.5 Nypa fruticans, nipa(h) palm (Arecaceae)

The nipa palm, Nypafruticans, grows from the Bismarcks to Fiji in soft mud and slow moving
tidal and river waters that bring in nutrients. It is the only palm (member of the Palmae family)
that is also a mangrove, i.e. grows in soft mud. It has a horizontal trunk that grows beneath the
ground; only the leaves and flower stalk grow vertically above the surface. From a distance,
it looks like a clump of coconut fronds growing straight out of the water or the mud.

     Its fronds are used for matting (Peekel 1984: 66) and for roofing, but it is not nearly as
durable as sago thatch (Floyd 1954).

     Final POe *-q of *nipaq is attested by the presence of paragogic -i in Saliba, which occurs
only after a present or earlier word-final consonant.

<
PAn *nipaq 'Nypafruticans' (Wolff 1994: 532-533)
POe *nipaq 'Nypafruticans' (Chowning 2001: 84)
  PT:     Suau (Saliba) lihai             (1- for *n- unexpected)
  MM:     Nduke         niva              'Nypafruticans'
  MM:     Kia           nifa              'Nypafruticans' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:     Kokota        nifa              'palm sp.; has enormous multiple fruit'
  MM:     Maringe       nhiva             'Nypafruticans' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES:    Gel a         niva              'sago palim sp. smaller than sao'
  SES:    Kwara'ae      niva              'Nypafruticans' (Whitmore 1966)
>

                                                                            The mangrove swamp           183


6.4.6 Xylocarpus spp. (syn. X obovatus, Carapa obovata), puzzlenut tree (Meliaceae)

Xylocarpus granatum and X. moluccensis ar·e fore-
shore trees or shrubs, with a trunk 3-15 metres
tall and up to 70 em in diameter. The wood is
reddish and the old bark peels off to reveal new,
papery bark inside. Both are widespread between
mangrove stands and near the beach. X. granatum
has smaller fruit than X. moluccensis, which has a
large red fruit with flesh surrounding a seed which
is triangular-pyramidal in shape and 5-8 em across.
The fruit of X. moluccensis hangs heavily and is
larger than the fruits of other trees, earning the tree
the name 'testicles tree' in Kwara'ae (ja?i lalato;
Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 122) and in Uripiv (n-ai
las/as; J. Lynch, pers. comm.). 5 The fruit is di-
vided into four quadrants, each containing 3-5 ir-
regular woody seeds (Johns 1976: 206). The: seeds
                                                          Figure 6.6 Xylocarpus granatum,
are used by children as a puzzle, the goal of which     puzzlenut tree: leaves flowers and fruit.
is to put the fallen seeds together as a ball (Peekel
1984: 285). Hence the English label 'puzzlenut'.

     POe *tapi(l) is problematic because only the Muyuw reflex has a secure gloss, and because
Gela tavili-if it is cognate-reflects a POe final consonant and a paragogic -i, suggesting
that it is a loan from a nearby NW Solomonic language. The only secure reconstruction is
PCP *legi-legi 'puzzlenut tree, Xylocarpus granatum'.

<
POe *tapi(l) 'puzzlenut tree, Xylocarpus granatum' (?)
  PT:  Muyuw                tavi            'Xylocarpus granatum' (Damon 2004)
  SES: Gela                 tavili          'mangrove species'
  NCV: Lemerig              n-?av-?av       'Rhizophora sp.'
>

<
PCP *legi-legi 'puzzlenut tree, Xylocarpus granatum' (Biggs 1965)
  Fij:    Rotuman      leki-leki      'Xylocarpus granatum'
  Fij:    Wayan        legi-legi      'Xylocarpus granatum'
  Fij:    Bauan        legi-legi      'Xylocarpus granatum'
PPn *leki-leki 'puzzlenut tree, Xylocarpus sp.'
  Pn:     Tongan       leki-leki      'Xylocarpus granatum and X. moluccensis'
  Pn:     Samoan       le?i-le?i      'Xylocarpus moluccensis'
>



[5] These items may reflect a PEOc etymon with a form something like *kayu ni laso-laso, but it is also possible
that the Kwara'ae and Uripiv terms are independent coinages.




7 Wild plants of primary lowland tropical rain forest


7.1 Introduction

This chapter focuses principally on the lowland tropical rain forests ofNew Britain and New
Ireland, the large islands of the Bismarck Archipelago, as these are the forests whose mar-
gins-at the very least-would have been familiar to Proto Oceanic (POe) speakers. It would
be appropriate also to include the rain forests of the Admiralties, but little is known about
them (World Wildlife Fund 2007a). Some attention is also given to the other islands ofNW
Island Melanesia, namely Bougainville and the Solomons, as they were occupied by speakers
of early Oceanic dialects which were perhaps barely distinct from POe.

     Also included here are trees which grow in freshwater swamp forest, a habitat that is
not common in the Bismarcks, though more widespread in Bougainville and parts of the
Solomons (ch.2, §3.1.3). Excluded are (i) plants that mainly occur in littoral forest (see chap-
ter 5) and (ii) plants that occur in the wild but are also tended or cultivated to some degree
(see chapters 9-11 and 13 ).

     In POe times, the Bismarcks would have been almost completely covered in rain forest,
and much of their area remained so until30 years ago, although there were of course substan-
tial portions of secondary forest resulting from the agricultural activities of Oceanic speakers
over 3000 years (ch.2, §3.2). 1

     Although New Britain and New Ireland have two distinct soil types, one limestone-based,
the other volcanic, there is surprisingly little: difference in their species composition. Major
lowland rain forest tree genera include Pometia, Octomeles, Alstonia, Campnosperma, Can-
arium, Dracontomelon, Pterocymbium, Crytocarya, Intsia, Ficus, Terminalia and Vitex.

[1] Much of the primary forest with which this chapter is concerned has disappeared in the past quarter-century,
logged and replaced by coconut, oil palm and timber plantations. Surveys conducted in 1993- 94 indicated that
the few remaining natural portions of lowland forest on New Britain's north coast were in danger, and it was
predicted that without active conservation all of the lowland forest ofNew Ireland would be selectively logged
within a few years. There is already almost no primary forest left on the St Matthias Islands (World Wildlife
Fund 2007b).

186   Malcolm Ross


    Compared with mainland New Guinea the overall diversity of tree species in Bismarcks
lowland forests is not impressive. Missing are the two conifers Araucaria hunsteinii and A.
cunninghamii that tower above the lowland broadleaf forests in New Guinea. The diptero-
carps (Dipterocarpaceae) that dominate much of peninsular and island southeast Asia are
represented by only three species in New Guinea, and probably not at all in the Bismarcks
(World Wildlife Fund 2007b).

    Freshwater swamp forests on New Britain and New Ireland include Campnosperma bre-
vipetiolata (§4.1 ), Terminalia brassii, the sago palm (M etroxylon sagu ), and species of Pan-
danus. Limestone forests near the coast of southern New Ireland and along the coast and
interior ofNew Britain are dominated by Vitex cofassus (World Wildlife Fund 2007b).


7.2 Rain forest layers

A rain forest typically has four or five layers (opinions differ on the division of the lower
layers), and these provided the basis for the organisation ofthis chapter. [2]

    The tallest trees, spaced well apart, jut out above the forest canopy with umbrella-shaped
crowns at heights of over 50 m. These emergeltlt trees, treated in §3, have straight, smooth
trunks with few branches. They need to be            to withstand high temperatures and drying
winds and tend to have small, pointed leaves. Some species lose their leaves during the brief
dry season in monsoon rainforests.

    The canopy (§4) contains a majority of the larger trees, typically 30--50 m tall, and its
adjacent treetops provide a more or less continuous cover of broad-leaved evergreen foliage.
The branches of the upper portion of the canopy often support a rich flora of epiphytes,
including orchids, mosses, and lichens. The canopy receives plenty of sunlight, but allows
only a small amount to penetrate to the layers below. The leaves are formed in such a way
as to allow rain to run off. This keeps them dry and prevents mold and mildew from forming
in the humid environment. Many canopy tree species have large buttresses at the base of
the trunk. Formerly believed to help support the tree, it is now believed that the buttresses
channel dissolved nutrients to the shallow root system.

    The understorey has two parts: a lower caltlopy (§5) consisting of trees around 20m in
height and a shrub layer (§6) of small trees, shrubs, herbs and ferns able to survive on the
5% of sunlight which reaches the understorey. U nderstorey plants tend to have large leaves in
order to catch as much as possible of the sparsely dappled sunlight: they are largely protected
from winds which would damage large leaves in the canopy. Some trees have larger leaves
when they are shorter but smaller leaves when they reach canopy height. Large woody vines
climb the trees to capture sunlight. There is little air movement and constantly high humidity
in the understorey.

    The forest floor (§7) receives only 2% of the rainforest's sunlight, and only specially
adapted plants can grow under these conditions. Away from river banks, swamps and clear-
ings, where dense undergrowth is found, the forest floor is relatively empty of vegetation. It
also contains decaying plant and animal matter, which decays rapidly in the warmth and hu-
midity to be absorbed by the trees' shallow roots. Many forms of fungi grow here, assisting
in the decay.

[2] This section owes much to Benders-Hyde (2000). The assignment of plants to the various layers in subsequent
sections is largely due to Conn & Damas (2006).

                                                                     Primary rain forest    187


7.3 Emergent trees

Emergent trees are those which regularly grow to 50 m or more. There are also a number of
canopy trees that grow taller and acquire emergent status in some localities. These are noted
in the various subsections of §4.

7.3.1 Alstonia scholaris, milky pine, canoe tree, TP kanu (Apocynaceae)

Alstonia scholaris is an emergent or tall canopy tree. growing straight to a height of 30--50 m
or more, with few branches on its trunk. It grows only in the forest, often near rivers (Hviding
2005: 146). It is a salient tree in the Bismarcks and the Solomons, but it is rare in Remote
Oceania, probably because its use there in constructing large canoes has put the survival of
at least taller specimens under pressure (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.).

    The straight trunk with its lightweight wood is used in many locations for making ca-
noes, for beams, for shark-trap and fishing-net floats and for carving (Powell 1976, Peekel
1984:441, Hviding 2005: 146). At Teop (north Bougainville), the tree is known simply as
sinivi 'canoe' (Record 1945). Wood from buttresses was used for the tall prows of Marovo
war canoes.

    On New Britain the latex is said to relieve colds (Floyd 1954). At Marovo the sap or bark
scrapings boiled in water is a medicine for stomach ache.

    At Marovo too, the dead were commonly buried in a sitting position between the but-
tresses of A. scholaris, and so it was associated with the departure ofthe spirits ofthe dead,
resulting in taboos against felling it.

    A PMP form for 'A. scholaris', namely *ditah, is reconstructable (ACD ), but I have found
no Oceanic reflexes of this. Despite their apparent variation, the reflexes of POe *sabakap
below are largely regular. Kara, Patpatar and Nehan reflect regular loss of *-k- but retain
the final consonant. NNG languages, Nakanai and SES languages lose the final consonant.
The Choiseullanguages Varisi, Avaso, Ririo, Babatana and Sisingga reflect Proto Northwest
Solomonic *bayava (for t*abayava) in which initial *s-is lost through lenition (a sporadic
process) and the final consonant is retained with the addition of an echo vowel.

<
POe *sabakap 'Alstonia scholaris' (Chowning 2001: 84)
  NNG: Longeinga samvaga            'Alstonia scholaris' (Panoff 1972)
  NNG: Kairiru        sabok         'Alstonia scholaris'
  MM: Nakanai         sabaka        'Alstonia sp.'
  MM: Kara (E)        savaf         'Alstonia scholaris' ( -! unexplained)
  MM: Patpatar        sabau         'Alstonia scholaris' ( -u unexplained)
  MM: Nehan           habau         'Alstonia scholaris' ( -u unexplained)
  MM: Varisi          bayava        'Alstonia scholaris' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Avaso           boava         'Alstonia scholaris' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Ririo           bo?o          'Alstonia scholaris' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Babatana        bua           'Alstonia scholaris' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Sisingga        bayava        'Alstonia scholaris' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Gel a          habaga        'Alstonia scholaris'
  SES: Kwaio          taba?a        'Alstonia scholaris'
  SES: Kwara'ae       taba?a        'Alstonia scholaris'
  SES: Ulawa          taba?a        'Alstonia scholaris'
>

188    Malcolm Ross


7.3.2 Fa/cataria moluccana (syn. Albizia fa/cataria, A. moluccana, A. falcata, Paraserianthes fa/cataria) (Mimosaceae)

F. moluccana was until recently known as Albi.zia fa/cataria. Because there are items in the
data glossed 'Albizia sp.' which may in fact denote F. moluccana, the genera Fa/cataria and
Albizia are handled together here.

                                               The small-leafed crown of Fa/cataria moluc-
                                           cana emerges above all other trees in Bismarcks
                                           rain forests. It grows to between 30 and 60 m in
                                           height with a trunk up to 1 m in diameter (Peekel
                                           1984: 207-208), but it is brittle and can come crash-
                                           ing to the ground (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.).
                                               On New Britain and on Manus its trunk is used
                                           for canoe hulls, on New Britain also for slitgongs
                                           (Powe:ll1976, Arentz et al. 1989:94, O'Collins &
                                           Lamo1che 1989). However, McClatchey points out
                                           that it does not serve these purposes well, as objects
                                           made from it don't last. It is more likely to be given
                                           to learner carvers or canoe-makers for practice.
                                               The reconstruction of a term (or terms) for
                                           F. moluccana is difficult. Kwa'ioloa & Burt
                                           (200 1: 107), discussing the similar Albizia salomo-
                                           nensis on Malaita, say that it only grows close to
                                           rivers and prefers sandy soils. If the same is true
                                           of F. moluccana, then its occurrence in Bismar-
    Figure 7.1 Falcataria moluccana.       cks rain forests three thousand years ago may have
                                           been rather rare, resulting in the frequent loss of in-
herited terms for the species. Alternatively, the fact that it has little use may account for the
dearth of cognates (ch.14, §2).

    All three reconstructions below entail uncertainties. POe *babak has just two reflexes.
With regard to POe *pail and *kai(k), POe vowd sequences like *-ai- were fairly rare, and it
is possible that *q intervened between *a and *i, but *-q- is reflected in none of the modem
languages nor in the CMP cognates which support the reconstruction of PCEMP *baiz3 and
*ka(w )iak. 4 The latter is reconstructed with an uncertain medial -w-, reflected in E Sumba
kawia[ka]. If -w- was present at an earlier stage, it is irregularly lost in Nakanai kai.

<
POe *babak 'Fa/cataria moluccana'
  Adm: Bipi          pap          'Fa/cataria moluccana'
  MM: Kara (E)       vavak        'Fa/cataria moluccana'
>

[3] The reconstruction ofPCEMP *bail 'Falcataria moluccana or Albizia sp.' is supported by the Oceanic data
here, by Ambai (EMP, Yapen) bai 'Falcataria moluccana' (Price & Merasi n.d.), and by CMP items given
by Verheijen (1990: 189): Far-east Manggarai (Lengkosambi) wail, Far-east Manggarai (Mulu)fail, Rembong
fae , Rongga, Ngadha, Endefai, Sika (ai) bei, Solorese bae, all Albizia chinensis.

[4] The reconstruction ofPCEMP *ka(w)iak 'Albizia sp.' is supported by Nakanai (MM) kai and by CMP items
given by Verheijen (1990: 189): Kepo, Razong, Rembong kae, Waerana kaek, E Sumba kawia[ka], all Albizia
chinensis.

                                                                           Primary rain forest    189

<
PCEMP *bail 'Fa/cataria moluccana or Albizia sp.'
POe *pail 'Fa/cataria moluccana'
  Adm: Nyindrou         bei           'Fa/cataria moluccana'
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) pai-pai           'tree sp. with light wood used for making canoe's
                                      outrigger'
  MM: Tolai             vail-ail      'a beach tree, Pongamia pinnata'
  MM: Nehan             puil          'Fa/cataria moluccana'(-ui- for t-ei-)
  MM: Babatana          va-vae (miga) 'Albizia saman' (introduced from S America)
  MM: Kia              fai            'Fa/cataria moluccana' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                      comm.)
  SES: Longgu           pai           'tree sp. used to make canoes'
  SES: Kwara'ae        fai            'Fa/cataria moluccana'
>

<
PCEMP *ka(w)iak 'Albizia sp.'
POe *kai(k) 'Albizia sp.'
  MM: Nakanai          kai               Albizia sp. (Floyd 1954)
>


7.3.3 Octomeles sumatrana, TP erima (Datiscaceae)

Octomeles sumatrana is one of the tallest trees
in the Bismarck Archipelago and Bougainville,
at 40-80 m tall with huge buttresses, above
which the trunk of soft white wood is up to
2.5 m in diameter (Peekel 1984: 391). The
nectar-rich flowers attract flying foxes (Record
1945). The wood is widely used in the Bis-
marcks to make canoes (Floyd 1954, Peekel
1984:391, Arentz et al. 1989:93, Floyd 1954,
Bugenhagen & Bugenhagen n.d.).

     0. sumatrana is apparently of little signif-
icance in the Solomons (Whitmore 1966) 5 and
does not occur at all in Vanuatu, to judge from
its absence from Gowers (1976) and Wheatley
(1992).

    The reconstruction below is for PWOc only,
but this is not surprising in view of the
limited distribution. Two versions of the re-
construction are supported, *kuRim(a,o) and
*iRim(a,o). They overlap geographically, and                 Figure 7.2    Octomeles sumatrana.
their initial syllables may simply reflect diff1er-
ent prefixes (ch.2, §7.1.2).


[5] It is absent from Henderson & Hancock (1988), Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001) and Hviding (2005).

190   Malcolm Ross

<
PWOc *kuRim(a,o), *iRim(a,o) 'Octomeles sumatrana' (Acn: *iRimo)
 NNG: Mangap         kurzmi       'Octomeles sumatrana'
 NNG: Yabem          (ka)kelim    'tree with large leaves and thick, strong trunk'
                                  (identified as Octomeles sp. by Lane-Poole 1925)
 PT:   Motu          irimo        'tree sp. from which canoes are generally made'
 PT:   Ubir          irim         'tree sp., used for canoes'
 PT:   Taw ala       ilimo        'large tree sp., used for war canoes'
 MM: Nakanai         (ko)imu      'Octomeles sumatrana' (zero for t-1- < *-R-)
 MM: Kara (E)        ima          'Octomeles sumatrana'
 MM: Madak           ima          'tree sp.'
 MM: Patpatar        irime        'Octomeles sumatrana'
 MM: Tolai           irima        'Octomeles sumatrana'
 MM: Label           irimu        'Octomeles sumatrana'
 MM: Teop            inimo        'Octomeles sumatrana' (Record 1945)
 MM: Babatana        vurima       'Octomeles sumatrana' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
>


7.4 The forest canopy

As a rough rule of thumb, trees of the forest canopy are assumed to be those which grow to
between 30 and 50 m. There are also several species, noted in the subsections of §5, which
are usually sub-canopy trees but which grow taller in some localities and become part of the
canopy itself.

    Certain trees of the forest canopy are treated elsewhere in this volume. Strangler figs
become part of the forest canopy by using an existing tree as host to piggyback their way into
the light (ch.1 0, §4). Canarium species and Terminalia species, especially T. kaernbachii,
and Pometia pinnata, are canopy trees in the Bismarcks, but have also long been cultivated,
the first two for their nuts and P. pinnata for its fruit, and are thus treated in ch.11 (§§2.1, 2.4
and 3.5 respectively).

    There are several canopy trees that are only reported from lowland rain forests in the
Solomons but not in the Bismarcks, and for some of these no POe term can be reconstructed.
This is perhaps significant, given that the POe homeland is believed to have been in the
Bismarcks (vol.2, ch.2). These trees are Gmelina moluccana, Pterocymbium species, Schizo-
meria serrata and Terminalia calamansanai (Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 53-54).

7.4.1 Campnosperma brevipetiolatum (Anacardiaceae)

Campnosperma brevipetiolatum is a large canopy tree, growing up to 50 m in height. Its
straight smooth trunk has a cylindrical bole, usually up to 1.2 min diameter and occasionally
as much as 2m (Conn & Damas 2006).

    The Bola ofNew Britain use it for canoe hulls (Powell1976). The Marovo consider it in-
ferior to Gmelina moluccana for this purpose, but good for house planks (Hviding 2005: 134).

    C. brevipetiolatum is apparently not found in Remote Oceania, and its distribution in the
Bismarcks and the Solomons seems to be patchy, as it is missing from the usually very thor-
ough Peekel (1984) and Henderson & Hancock (1988). There is just one weakly supported
POe term for the species, namely *ola!Ja.

                                                                             Primary rain forest       191

<
POe *ola!Ja Campnosperma brevipetiolatum
  Adm: Bipi          la!J         'Campnosperma brevipetiolatum' (O'Collins &
                                 Lamothe 1989)
  Adm: Nyindrou     lam           'Campnosperma brevipetiolatum' (O ' Collins &
                                 Lamothe 1989)
  MM: Marovo                      'Campnosperma brevipetiolatum'
>


7.4.2 Cinnamomum spp., wild cinnamon (Lauraceae)

Trees of the genus Cinnamomum grow to 30 m. They are known for their barks, which are
widely processed to make spices and to extract essential oils. Only one of the items in the
cognate set supporting POe *m (wJaso(q)u 'Cinnamomum sp.' includes a species-level iden-
tification within the genus Cinnamomum: Lou moso is glossed as C. xanthoneuron, a 'wild
cinnamon'. This is not one of the three species that provide commercial cinnamon bark,6
but one of two tree species exploited by German traders on the north coast of New Guinea
under German colonial rule and into the 1930s for their essential oils. The other was not a
Cinnamomum species but Cryptocarya aromatica (syn. C. massoy, Massoia aromatica), and
there was much confusion as to which oil came from the bark of which tree. The oils from
these two species are known as lawag oil and massoia oil. 7 It is possible that Mager' s gloss of
the Bing and Gedaged reflexes as Cryptocarya aromatica reflects this confusion and that the
intended denotatum was Cinnamomum xanthoneuron. At any rate, it seems likely that POe
*m (wJaso(q)u did indeed denote C. xanthoneuron. The fragrance of C. xanthoneuron (and/or
Cryptocarya aromatica) bark was known to the traditional residents of north New Guinea
and the Bismarcks, as Mager ( 19 52: 204) reports in his gloss of the Gedaged and Bing items,
       The bark is used a great deal in sorcery. It is chewed and spit [sic] out into the face of
       the spirits, so as to drive them away. A piece of bark is carried in the net bag to keep evil
       spirits from harming the child.

Arentz et al. (1989: 92) also report that on New Britain the bark is consumed as a medicine
against fever and stomach pain.

    POe *m (wJaso(q)u has cognates in the languages of Java: Sundanese ma!Jsoi, Javanese
masoyi, masogi, Madurese masoji, all denoting massoia oil rather than a tree species. The
species label 'massoy' and the term 'massoia' are probably derived from the Javanese term,
but, as a result of the confusion between the two oils, are applied to Cryptocarya aromatica,
syn. massoy, and its essential oil, rather than to Cinnamomum xanthoneuron. It seems likely,
incidentally, that Are masoyi (fort masou) is a borrowing, perhaps indirectly, from Javanese,
rather than a directly inherited reflex of *m (wJaso(q)u.8

[6] They are C. cassia , Cassia cinnamon, C. zeylanicum , Ceylon cinnamon and C. saigonicum , Saigon cinnamon.

[7] The history of this confusion is recounted in the September 2000 Newsletter of the company Essen-
tially Oils (http : I /www . essentiallyoils . com/Newsletters/2000/September _2000 _Newsletter/
september_2000_newsletter . html , accessed 8 November 2007), citing Meijer (1940), who clarified the
origins of the two oils.

[8] POe *-q- is lost in Are . I do not know how a Javam:se term might have found its way into Are- perhaps the
name arrived in New Guinea with traders and spread along with its valued denotatum.

192    Malcolm Ross

    The reflexes of POe *m(wJaso(q)u reveal a further set of complications. (Blust 1981a)
glosses the Lou and Nauna terms 'Cananga odorata' (§5.2), rather than a Cinnamomum
species, and this is also the gloss of the Meso-Melanesian reflexes. Fijian has two terms:
Bauan maoou 'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.' and Bauan makosoi/Wayan makosoi, both
'Cananga odorata'. The latter appear to be metathesised forms of a PCP compound *m(wJaso-
koi 'perfume tree, Cananga odorata'. 9 This raises the possibility that POe *m(wJaso(q)u de-
noted C. odorata as well as cinnamon, i.e. that it denoted a taxon of perfumed trees. PCP then
seems to have distinguished between *m(w)aso 'cinnamon' and *m(w)aso-koi 'C. odorata'.

    The possibility that there was such a taxon is strengthened by an observation by Will
McClatchey (pers. comm.) that the quote from Mager above could also be applied to the
Fijian and Western Polynesian use of C. odorata.

    The Meso-Melanesian forms below, apparently reflecting PMM *mud(e)u (rather than
t*moso(u)) are problematic. They may reflect a PMM borrowing or a non-cognate chance
resemblance.

<
POe *m(w)aso(q)u 'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp., probably C. xanthoneuron; possibly
  also Cananga odorata' (Milke 1968)
  Adm: Mussau         mosou        'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.'
  Adm: Lou            moso         'tree with redolent bark, the cinnamon,
                                   Cinnamomum xanthoneuron'
  Adm: Baluan         mwasow       'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.'
  Adm: Nauna          moso         'Cananga odorata' (Blust 1981a)
  NNG: Maenge         miau         'Cinnamomum sp.'
  NNG: Kove           modou        'aromatic plant, possibly cinnamon, used in healing'
                                   (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG: Yabem          mus1         'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.'
  NNG: Bing           miyou        'Cryptocarya aromatica' (Mager 1952: 204)
  NNG: Gedaged        mio          'Cryptocarya aromatica' (Mager 1952: 204)
  NNG: Megiar         muyou        'cinnamon bark' (Kasprus 1945)
  PT:    Are          masoyi       'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.' (borrowed ?)
  MM: Kara (E)        miJdeu       'Cananga odorata'
  MM Nehan            mudu-mud 'Cananga odorata'
  MM: Varisi          mudu-mudu 'Cananga odorata' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
  MM: Ririo           mud-mud      'Cananga odorata' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Babatana        mudu-mudu 'Cananga odorata' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
  MM: Nduke           mu-mudu      'Cananga odorata'
  MM: Marovo          mudu         'a tree of1che secondary forest, with yellow fragrant
                                   flowers that are used in coconut oil'
  Fij:   Bauan        maoou        'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp.'
PCP *m(w)aso-koi 'perfume tree, Cananga odorata' (Milke 1961)
  Fij:   Wayan        makosoi      'Cananga odorata' (metathesis)
  Fij:  Bauan       makosoi                   'Cananga odorata' (metathesis)
PPn *mosokoi 'Cananga odorata'
  Pn:   Tongan      mohokoi                   'Cananga odorata'
  Pn:   E Futunan mosokoi                     'Cananga odorata'
  Pn:   Tikopia     mosokoi                   'Cananga odorata'
  Pn:   Samoan      moso?oi                   'Cananga odorata'
cf. also:
     SES:     Kwara' ae         mudu          'Dillenia ingens'
     Fij:     Rotuman           moskoy        'tree with greenish-yellow flowers and clusters of
                                              fruit; timber used for canoes' (Polynesian
                                              borrowing)
>

[9] Geraghty (2004 : 86--87) suggests that the Fijian form makosoi can be analysed as mako 'a forest tree, Cyatho-
calyx sp.' and soi, perhaps 'cut'. In view of the cognate set given here it seems more likely that the Fijian form
reflects metathesis, perhaps as a result offolk-etymologising. However, on this hypothesis Fijian-s- (for t-o-)
remains unexplained.

                                                                                  Primary rain forest        193


7.4.3 Dillenia schlechteri (syn. Dillenia macrophylla) (Dilleniaceae)

There are many Dillenia species in SE Asia and Oceania, some of them tall canopy trees,
others smaller trees ofthe lower canopy. 10 Only one species is reported from the Bismarcks
(Peekel 1984: 375, Conn & Damas 2006), Dillenia schlechteri, a canopy tree 30--50 m tall
with a light red trunk. However, there is linguistic evidence in the form of POe *drokol
(§5.4) that at least one sub-canopy species was known to POe speakers.

    In the Admiralties D. schlechteri is used for house construction. The timber is said to last
over 30 years if it is not exposed to the elements (O ' Collins & Lamothe 1989).

    The second and third vowels and the possible final consonant of POe *kulapu(R) 'Dillenia
schlechteri' are due to the reconstruction of PMP *kelabuR 'large Dillenia species' on the
basis of the data below and ofBlitManobo klambug (daka) 'D. megalantha' (cf§5.4), Bagobo
kalambok, Lanao kalambuguy, 11 both 'D. philippensis' (Madulid 2001b: 100).

<
PMP *kelabuR 'large Dillenia species'
POe *kulapu(R) 'Dillenia schlechteri'
  Adm: Nyindrou       kun           'Dillen ia sp.
  MM: Patpatar        (e)kulap      'Dillen ia schlechteri'
  Fij:   Bauan        kuluva        'Dillenia biflora' (Keppel et al. 2005)
  Fij:   Wayan        kulu-kulu     'Dillenia biflora' 12
>

[10] Two tall Dillenia species, D. papuana and D. montana grow respectively in the lowlands of the southeast
peninsula of New Guinea and in the highlands (Corm & Damas 2006). Another, D. salomonensis, is reported
from the Solomons (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 140, Hviding 2005 : 120). The smaller D. biflora is found in Van-
uatu and in Fiji (Wheatley 1992: 790, Keppel et al. 2005 .)

[11] Final-uy is unexplained.

[12] Gardner & Pawley (2006) attribute the name to the fact that its leaves are 'not unlike those of the breadfruit',
since it appears to be a reduplication of Wayan kulu 'breadfruit' ( < POe *kuluR, ch, 9, §4). The Fijian forms
reflect metathesis of the second and third vowels and this has perhaps generated a folk etymology associating
the Wayan form with 'breadfruit' .

194   Malcolm Ross


7.4.4 Dracontomelon dao (syn. D. mangiferum, D. edule), New Guinea walnut, Dragon plum, TP man, Bnakatambol (Anacardiaceae)

                                  The New Guinea walnut tree, Dracontomelon dao, is massive,
                                  usually reaching 30-35 m, and occasionally 50 m, in height. It
                                  has large buttresses and above the buttresses often has a cir-
                                  cumference of 3-5 m. At a height of about 7-10 m the trunk
                                  divides into a pair of large branches. Each of them continues
                                  to divide upwards and sideways recursively to form a large
                                  umbrella-shaped crown. The leaves are made up of 6 to 10
                                  leaflets with a smooth edge (Figure 7.3 ). The fruit are small, 2-3
                                  em in diameter, and have five flecks around them. The small
                                  amount of flesh around the flattened seed is edible but tart and
                                  is consumed fresh (Peekel 1984: 323, French 1986: 238). Dra-
                                  contomelon dao occurs from SE Asia to the Solomons (Walter
                                  & Sam 2002: 158).

                                       Bourke (in pneparation, n.d.) writes that although D. dao
                                  was traditionally a significant fruit in the area around Madang,
                                  it is unimportant or absent elsewhere in the lowlands of New
                                  Guinea. Places where it is recorded as being eaten are the
                                  Schouten Islands off the mouth of the Sepik River, some of
 Figure 7.3 Dracontomelon the small islands in the Admiralties, some islands in SE Papua,
  dao, New Guinea Walnut.         the Duke of York Islands (between New Britain and New Ire-
                                  land), Nissan Island (between New Ireland and Bougainville)
and Bougainville. The only report of cultivation comes from French, who says it is sometimes
planted from seed.

     Two terms are reconstructable: POe *raqu(p) and PNCV *katabola. The final bracketed
*-p of *raqu(p) is added to take account of th1e final consonants of the Patpatar and Tolai
reflexes. However, there are no known non-Oceanic reflexes of *-p. The PCP *tawa-raqu
'Dracontomelon vitiense' contains a reflex of POe *tawan 'Pometia pinnata' (ch. 11, §3.5) as
its first element, as the fruits of the two plants are similar in appearance (Geraghty 2004: 80).

<
PAn *daqu 'Dracontomelon dao' (Blust 1986)
POe *raqu(p) 'New Guinea walnut, Dracontomelon dao'
  Adm: Mussau         ra           'Dracontomelon dao'
  Adm: Nyindrou       "rau         'Dracontomelon sp.'
  Adm: Baluan         you          'Dracontomelon dao'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) rak           'Dracontomelon dao'
  NNG: Takia          rau          'Dracontomelon dao'
  MM: Nakanai         lahu         'a tall tree (Anacardiaceae) used for planks'
  MM: Tolai           laup         'Dracontomelon dao' (for trau)
  MM: Patpatar        loh          'Dracontomelon dao' (for tro)
PROc *raqu 'dragon plum tree, Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Mwotlap        ye           'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Mota           rau          'a fruit tree'
  NCV: Paamese        e-au         'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Lewo            (puru-)lu    'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Namakir         ra?          'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Nguna           na-rau       'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Nguna           na-rau       'Dracontomelon dao'
  SV:    Sye           na-ray       'Dracontomelon dao'
  SV:    Kwamera       na-rai       'Dracontomelon dao'
PCP *(tawa)raqu 'dragon plum tree, Dracontomelon vitiense'
  Fij:   Wayan         (tawa)rau    'Dracontomelon vitiense'
  Pn:    Rotuman       (jav)rau     'Dracontomelon vitiense' (Geraghty 2004: 80)
  Pn:    Emae          (tava)rau    'Dracontomelon vitiense' (Geraghty 2004: 80)
  Pn:    W Futunan     (tave)rau    'Dracontomelon vitiense' (Geraghty 2004: 80)
>

                                                                   Primary rainforest   195

<
PNCV *katabola 'Dracontomelon dao' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: NE Ambae gatabo/a         'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Kiai         atapolo      'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Raga         yatabola     'tree sp.' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Tamambo      (vu)hatabola 'tree sp.'
  NCV: BigNambas na-hatapul 'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Uripiv       ni-tapol     'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Naman        n-atabal     'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Neve'ei      na-?atebwel  'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Avava        atibol       'Dracontomelon dao'
  NCV: Nese         yatabol      'Dracontomelon dao'
>


7.4.5 Dysoxylum spp., stinktree, stinkwood, Bstingwud (Meliaceae)

A number of Dysoxylum species grow in NW
Island Melanesia, ranging from the tall canopy
tree D. gaudichaudianum (syn. D. amooriodes)
sometimes growing to 35 m, to the sub-canopy
tree D. kaniense. An important tree between
these extremes is D. arborescens, also a canopy
tree, but usually only 20--30 m high (Wheatley
1992: 157-160, Kwa' ioloa & Burt2001: 181 , Conn
& Damas 2006).

    A salient feature of all Dysoxylum species is
their strong smell, which varies from species to
species: some are unpleasant, some pleasant (W.
McClatchey, pers. comm.). The unpleasant smell
of certain Dysoxylum species has earned them the
English name 'stinktree ' or 'stinkwood' : when the
bark is stripped off and fresh wood is exposed, D .
gaudichaudianum is said by the Kwara' ae to smell
                                                      Figure 7.4   Dysoxylum arborescens.
like a man who has not washed and D. kaniense to
196      Malcolm Ross


have a smell that induces vomiting (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 122, 181). Whistler (1991b: 93)
comments that the leaves have 'a disagreeable odor'. Despite the smell, the wood of Dysoxy-
lum species is a useful hardwood, and the timber of the larger species is widely used for
house posts (Floyd 1954, Whistler 1991b: 93, \Vheatley 1992: 157, 162, Kwa'ioloa & Burt
2001: 122).

    POe *maqota perhaps denoted a taxon including several Dysoxylum species. All the
species mentioned in the glosses below are tall canopy trees except Dysoxylum kaniense and
D. spectabile, but this is perhaps because the larger species are more widespread and more
salient.

    Lynch (200 lc: 242) attributes the SV members ofthe two cognate sets below to a single
PSV etymon *ni-m(d,t)awan, but they appear to reflect two etyma. PSV *na-mtaw reflects
metathesis of a variant form *mawota, also reflected in Bauan Fijian mavota. Proto Erakor-
Tafea (Lynch 200 1c: 189) *tuan is a separate etymon. 13

<
POe *maqota 'Dysoxylum spp.'
  PT:   Muyuw       (a)mwakot     'a 20-metre Dysoxylum sp.'
  SES: Kwara'ae     maoa          'Dysoxylum kaniense'
  NCV: Mwotlap      ma-mot        'Dysoxylum arborescens'
  NCV: Mota         ma-maota      'tree sp.'
PSV *na-mtaw 'Dysoxylum sp.' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye         ni-mtu        'Dysoxylum aneityense'
  SV:   Anejom      ne-mtav       'Dysoxylum aneityense'
  Fij:  Bauan       mavota        'Myristica grandiflora' (for tmaota)
  Pn:   Tongan      mo?ota        'taxon of three Dysoxylum spp., but primarily D.
                                 forsteri' ('Whistler 1991b: 92-93)
  Pn:   Niue an     moota         'tree, Dysoxylum richii, timber used to build main
                                 hull of canoe' (also maota)
  Pn:   E Uvean     ma?ota        'Dysoxylum samoensis'
  Pn:   E Futunan ma?ota          'shrub sp., Dysoxylumforsteri'
  Pn:   Rennellese ma?ota         'tree sp., D. gaudichaudianum, valuable for house
                                 timbers'
  Pn:   Samoan      maota         'Dysoxylum spp.' (Whistler 2000: 181)
  Pn:   Takuu       maota         'hard, red, wood that drifts to Takuu'
  Pn:   Maori       maota         'Dysoxylum spectabile'
>

<
Proto Erakor-Tafea *tuan 'Dysoxylum spp.'
  NCV: S Efate        ne-tue      'Anthocarapa nitidula' (Wheatley 1992: 157)
  SV:    Lenakel      ne-tuan     'Dysoxylum gaudichaudianum'
  SV:    Kwamera      na-tuan     'Dysoxylum gaudichaudianum'
>

[13] Proto Erakor-Tafea is the immediate putative ancestor of S Efate and Proto Southern Vanuatu.

                                                                    Primary rain forest    197


7.4.6 Elaeocarpus spp. (Elaeocarpaceae)

Elaeocarpus species in NW Island Melanesia include the large canopy trees E. angusti-
folius (syn. E. sphaericus) with its distinctively cornflower-blue fruit and E.floridanus, more
common in the Solomons than the Bismarcks, with dark blue or black fruit (syn. E. pseu-
dosepikanus), both 25 or more metres tall, as well as shrub-sized trees of the understorey
like E. edulis (syn. Aceratium oppositifolium), 3-6 m tall, with its 4 x 3 em ellipsoid apple-
red fruit. The fruits of all species are inedible (Peekel 1984: 352-353, Wheatley 1992: 85,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 123).

    The large species provide wood for house beams at various locations (Record 1945, Ar-
entz et al. 1989: 94), but Will McClatchey (pers. comm.) finds that it is not useful in the
traditional communities which he has studied.

    Although plenty of names for Elaeocarpus species have been collected, surprisingly few
of them form cognate sets-none at all for POe or Western Oceanic, and one each for PEOc
and PSV. The absence of a POe or PWOc lterm perhaps exemplifies the principle that the
names of less useful plants are easily forgotten (§2), so that present-day names reflect new
coinages at different island Melanesian localities. Alternatively, it may be that Elaeocarpus
species were rare in the environments of early Oceanic speakers: the botanical literature
suggests that large Elaeocarpus species are significant contributors to the canopy of lowland
rain forests in Bougainville and the Solomons but not in the Bismarcks where POe was spoken
(Paijmans 1976:64--65, Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998:53-54, 60--61).

    Two reconstructions are presented below. PEOc *melo 'Elaeocarpus angustifolius' is
supported by just two reflexes, but the languages are sufficiently far apart to preclude bor-
rowing.

<
PEOc *melo 'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
  SES: Kwara' ae    melo          'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
  NCV: Vera' a      mel           'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
>

<
PSV *na-(s,j)u(v,w)as 'Elaeocarpus angusti:fi'olius' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:   Sye            ne-yoh       'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
  SV:   Kwamera        na-suvas     'k.o. tree with edible seeds in a hairy pod'
  SV:   Anejom         na-wo8       'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
>


7.4.7 Endospermum spp., cheesewood, milkwood, whitewood, PNG basswood, Bwaetwud, melektri (Euphorbiaceae)

Within island Melanesia E. medullosum (Figure 7.5, left) is present in the Bismarcks, the
Solomons and Vanuatu; E . moluccanum is reported only from the Bismarcks (Peekel1984: 313,
Wheatley 1992:91 , Hviding 2005: 135). Occasionally an emergent tree, otherwise a large
canopy tree up to 45 m high, Endospermum medullosum has a markedly fluted bole of 45-100
em diameter, sometimes crooked, sometimes straight and up to 25 m long. It has a distinc-
tive crown, shallow, fiat-topped and umbrella-like. Its distribution is limited by the fact that
it does not tolerate shade: it grows well only where there are gaps in the canopy (Thomson
2006a).

198       Malcolm Ross



Figure 7.5 Left Endospermum medullosum, cheesewood,: A, tree; B, leaves and flowers; C, fruit.
Right Pterocarpus indicus, New Guinea rosewood: A, tree; B, portion ofleafwith leaflets; C, shoot
with pods.


    A somewhat smaller but similar member of the genus is E. moluccanum (syn. E . formi-
carum), 14 sometimes a canopy tree up to 25m high, sometimes a sub-canopy tree (Conn &
Damas 2006).

    Both species have lightweight wood that is used for fishing-net floats. Peekel ( 1984: 315)
reports from New Ireland that the pith of the t\¥igs of E. moluccanum is usually destroyed
by black ants, which inhabit the resulting space. Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 115) report from
Kwara' ae that E. medullosum is not used in house construction because the wood is eaten by
insects.

    POe *koma(r,R)(o,u) may have referred to either or both species. Like the large Elaeocar-
pus species (§4.6), Endospermum species are not prominent in Bismarcks rain forests, and
appear to have undergone a good deal of local re-naming.

<
POe *koma(r,R)(o,u) 'Endospermum sp.'
     MM:      Nakanai           ko-komalu        'Endospermum moluccanum'
     NCV:     Mwotlap           no-komwa         'Endospermum sp.'
     NCV:     Araki             (vi)ku!Jaro      'Endospermum medullosum'
     NCV:     Tangoa            (vi)kumaro       'Endospermum medullosum' (Gowers 1976: 73)
     NCV:     Sakao             (du)gomara       'Endospermum medullosum' (Gowers 1976: 73)
>

[14] Peekel (1984: 313) incorrectly spells it E . formi carium .

                                                                            Primary rain forest      199


7.4.8 Garuga jloribunda (syn. G. abilo), Bnamalaus (Burseraceae)

Garugafloribunda is a canopy tree which grows to a height of up to 25m in Vanuatu and up
to 35m in Papua New Guinea (Wheatley 1992:63, Conn & Damas 2006). It has a short bole
and steeply rising branches, often with a fiat crown (Johns 1976: 195). According to Paijmans
(1976: 52) its occurrence is limited to the few locations where there is a marked dry season.

    There is apparently a traditional perception that G. floribunda resembles the smaller
Spondias cytherea, noted by Peekel (1984: 283) for New Ireland and reflected in PNCV
*mala-usi 'Garugafloribunda', reconstructed below. The perception is apparently based on
the fact that both trees lose their leaves and are bare between flowering and fruiting. PNCV
*mala-usi consists of a reflex of the POe prefix *mala- 'resembling' (ch.2, §7.1.4) plus PNCV
*usi 'Spondias cytherea' (ch.ll , §3.6), i.e. its original meaning was evidently 'resembing
Spondias cytherea' . As noted below, there are also unprefixed reflexes of PNCV *usi which
denote Garugafloribunda.

    PCP *manaui 'Garugafloribunda' , also below, appears cognate with the PNCV form,
but the medial consonants do not correspond, suggesting that one of the two forms is the
result of borrowing. Since PNCV *mala- regularly reflects POe *mala-, but PCP *mana-
(instead of expected t*mala-) does not, it is lthe Central Pacific forms that appear to reflect a
borrowing.

<
PNCV *malausi 'Garugafloribunda ' (from data in Wheatley 1992)
  NCV: Mota        mwa-mwalau 'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: NE Ambae malawhi          'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Nduindui    malaouk       'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Tamambo (vu)malaus 'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Tangoa      (vi)malaus 'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Tolomako na-malaus 'Garugafloribunda'
PCP *manaui 'Garugafloribunda'
  Fij: Wayan       manawi        'a tree of dry forest, Rhus taitensis' 15
  Pn:  Tongan      manaui        'Garuga floribunda '
  Pn:  E Futunan manaui          'large forest tree, Myristica hypargyraea'
  Pn:   Samoan                   'a large tree, Garugafloribunda' (Whistler
                                2000: 179)
>

<
PNCV *usi 'mummy apple, Spondias cytherea' (from data in Wheatley 1992)
  NCV: Maewo      o-us          'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Nduindui    uhi          'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Tolomako na-us           'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Tangoa     (vi)usi       'Garugafloribunda'
  NCV: Urupiv     na-us         'Garugafloribunda'
>

[15] J. Parham (1972: 176) cites manawi as a Fijian name (dialect unspecified) for Rhus simarubaefolia, so the
Wayan term is apparently representative of a pan-Fijian meaning shift.

200   Malcolm Ross


7.4.9 Intsia bijuga (syn. I. amboinensis, Afzelia bijuga), ironwood, island teak, TP kwila, B natora (Cisalpiniaceae)

One of the larger trees of the forests ofNW Island Melanesia, Intsia bijuga grows 40-45 m
tall and sometimes more (Figure 7.6, left). It is common on the foreshore , but also occurs in
lowland rain forests (Peekel1984: 214-216).

     I. bijuga is considered one of the strongest and most durable woods in NW Island Melane-
sia and Vanuatu. It seasons slowly with very little shrinkage and is durable in the ground, re-
sistant to termites and moderately durable in salt water (Gowers 1976: 91). Its uses range from
house posts and floorboards to axe handles, shtgongs and wooden bowls (Streicher 1982,
Arentz et al. 1989:94, Whistler 1991b: 125, Hviding 2005: 122, F. Damon, pers. comm.).
Damon reports that on W oodlark Island it was used for the steering oars of the large canoes
that plied the eastern half of the Kula ring.

      Superficially, it looks as if there were two POe terms for Intsia bijuga: *toRas and *qipil.
However, Blust' s gloss of PMP *teRas as 'hard, hardwood ' suggests that POe *toRas too
may have denoted 'hardwood ' in general or a taxon of hardwood trees, rather than Intsia
bijuga in particular. This would explain why some of its reflexes denote other hardwood trees.
In particular, its Proto Polynesian reflex, *toa, was reapplied to Casuarina equisetifolia. In
Muyuw the term meikwis used both for I. bijuga and for the hard heartwood of any tree (F.
Damon, pers. comm.). Thus one word for hardwood has been replaced by another in naming
I . bijuga.

      It seems that PMP *teRas/POe *toRas was, in one of its senses, a stative verb mean-
ing 'hard, durable'. PMic had a stative verb *ma-toa 'be firm, hard strong' (Bender et al.
2003: 54), and tree-denoting reflexes sometimes occur with verbal morphology. In CMP lan-
guages we find W Sumba, E Sumba kandora, E Sumba mandora 'Calophyllum inophyllum'
(Verheijen 1990: 197), reflecting the PMP stative prefixes *ka- and *ma- respectively (Evans
& Ross 2001 ).

      Polynesian languages, meanwhile, have reapplied the PCP reflex of POe *pesi 'a coastal
forest tree, perhaps Pongamia pinnata' to Intsia bijuga ( ch.5, §5.12).

<
PMP *teRas 'hard; hardwood' (Blust 1972a)
POe *toRas 'a taxon of hardwood trees including I ntsia bijuga' (?)
  Adm: Seimat            tor        'Intsia bijuga' (Sorensen 1950) (-r fort -IJ:
                                    borrowed?)
  Adm: Lou            to            'Intsia bijuga'
  NNG: Kairiru        tor           'Intsia bijuga'
  MM: Sursurunga toraha             'a hardwood tree '
  MM: Nehan           toraha        'tree sp. with strong yellowish-white wood, used for
                                    carving shtgong drums and paddles '
  MM: Halia           to lasa       'same tree: sp. as Nehan toraha '
  MM: Petats          to las        'Vitex monophylla'
  MM: Teop            tora          'Vitex monophylla'
  MM: Maringe         t"ola         'type of large softwood tree; canoe with two
                                    upraised ends'
PEOc *toRa(s) 'a hardwood tree, Intsia bijuga'
  SES: Lau            ola           'a canoe built of planks sewn together'
  SES:    Kwara'ae     u?ula         'Intsia bijuga' (*o > u: irregular change)
  SES:    Arosi        ora           'tree sp. from which best canoes are made;
                                     plank-built canoe'
  NCV: Mwotlap        no-toy         'Decaspermum neo-ebudicum'
  NCV: Merlav         tor            'Casuarina equisetifolia' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: S Efate        na-tor         'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Mota           tora           'a timber tree'
  NCV: NEAmbae tora                  'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Tamambo (vu)tora              'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Raga           tora           'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Atchin         tor            'tree sp., used for canoes, posts, etc.'
  NCV: Nese           na-tor         'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Uripiv         na-tor         'Intsia bijuga'
  NCV: Paamese        a-to           'tree sp. with sap which stings'
  Fij:    Bauan       do a           'the heartwood of a tree, solid and dark'
PPn *toa 'Casuarina equisetifolia' (POLLEX)
  Pn:     Niue an     to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Tongan      to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     E Uvean     to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     E Futunan to a             'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Rennellese to a            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Emae        to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Tikopia     to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     WFutunan to a              'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele to a            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Samoan      to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Tahitian    to a           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan to a             'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Marque san to a            'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Pn:     Maori       toa-toa        'Phyllocladus glaucus'
>

                                                                  Primary rain forest   201


     The inherited meaning of POe *qipil was apparently 'I ntsia bijuga', but the glosses of
its reflexes suggest that it also denoted 'Casuarina equisetifolia'. Note that 'ironwood' and
'kwila' both refer to 'Intsia bijuga'.

<
PMP *qipil 'a hardwood tree, Intsia bijuga' I(Dempwolff 1938: *ipil; ACD)
POe *qipil 'a taxon of hardwood trees including Intsia bijuga and Casuarina equisetifolia'
  ACD: *(q)ipi/
  Adm: Drehet           ?ih          'ironwood'
  Adm: Likum            ih           'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Adm: Nyindrou         eih          'ironwood'
  MM: Tolai             ip           'tree sp.'
  MM: Teop              ivin         'a hardwood tree, kwila'
  MM: Mon-Alu           ihili        'Intsia bijuga' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Ririo             kivil        'Intsia bijuga'
  MM: Babatana          kivili       'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM:      Marovo        kivili        'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  MM:      Roviana       kifli         'Intsia bijuga' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:      Kia           ivili         'Intsia bijuga'
  MM:      Maringe       khifli        'Intsia bijuga' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  NCV:     Mwotlap       n-ip          'Casuarina equisetifolia'
  Mic:     Kiribati      ibi           'tree like Calophyllum inophyllum, but harder and
                                       heavier'
  Pn:      Samoan        iji(fatu)     'Intsia bijuga'
                         iji(lele)     'a hard-grained Intsia bijuga'
>

202     Malcolm Ross




Figure 7.6 Left I ntsia bijuga, ironwood: A: young tree; B, leaves and flowers; C, seed pod. Right
Vitex cofassus, New Guinea teak: A, tree; B, flowering stem with leaves and portion of terminal in-
florescence; C, portion of fruiting inflorescence and stem.


<
PWOc *bwana 'Intsia bijuga'
 NNG: Man am         bwana              'Intsia bijuga'
 NNG: Yabem          (ka)bwc!J          'ironwood'
 MM: Bola            ban a              'ironwood'
 MM: Nakanai         bala               'Intsia bijuga'
>

                                                                              Primary rain forest       203


7.4.10 Planchonella spp., Bkomtri (Sapotaceae)

Planchonella species range in size from large canopy trees to small trees ofthe sub-canopy.
The species division ofthe genus Planchonella remains controversial (Walter & Sam 2002:
226) , partly, it seems, because there is considerable variation within and across species. This
is perhaps due to past domestication, but the literature gives little indication of present-day
cultivation. 16 Borrell (1989: 134) identifies six species on Kairiru Island, two of which he is
unable to name. There is also an overlap with the genus Pouteria, in the sense that species
that have at one time or another been placed in the genus Planchonella have at others been
placed in the genus Pouteria. Walter & Sam (2002: 226--227) include Planchonella grayana
in their catalogue of fruit trees but say that it is little consumed (because the pulp irritates
the gums) except at Tasmate (west Santo), where the mature fruit is either roasted whole or
peeled, then washed to remove latex before it is eaten.

    Peekel ( 1984: 429-431) describes Planchonella peekelii (syn. Sideroxylon peekelii), a tree
about 15m tall with small ovoid fruit, but he does not mention consumption or any other use.

    Depending on location, P. costata (syn. Sideroxylon costa tum) varies in the Solomons and
Vanuatu between a small sub-canopy tree and a large tree of the canopy. Its bark ranges from
pale grey to black-brown, and it has long narrow leaves and round fruit 3-4 em in diameter. It
has a preference for the beach or inland for moist habitats. Its wood is close-grained and can
be finally worked: combs can be made from a single fiat piece of wood (Gowers 1976: 113,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 140--141). Wheatley (1992) identifies P. grayana as a variety of P.
costata. Gowers (1976: 115) also describes P. linggensis, labelled the 'comb tree ', leading
one to wonder if this also is a variety of P. cos tata.

    In view of this variation we can be sure only that POe *kalaka denoted a species of
Planchonella, and perhaps several. Kairiru lalak may reflect a reduplication of suffixless
*!aka after deletion ofthe (apparent) prefix *ka- 'tree' (ch.2, §7.1.2).

<
POe *kalaka 'Planchonella sp. '
  NNG: Kairiru       lalak                 'Planchonella obovoidea'
  MM: Tolai          kalakala              'tree sp.'
  NCV: Raga          yarmya                'Planchonella sp.'
  NCV: Uripiv        na-klak               'Planchonella/ Pouteria spp.'
PCP *kalaka 'Planchonella sp.'
  Fij:   Bauan       galaka                'Planchonella costata'
  Pn:    Niue an     kalaka                'Planchonella sp. '
  Pn:    Tongan      kalaka                'Planchonella samoensis'
  Pn:    E Futunan kalaka                  'tree sp. '
  Pn:    Emae        kalaka                'tree sp.'
  Pn:    Samoan      ala? a                'Planchonella garberi'
  Pn:    Hawaiian    ?ala?a                'Planchonella sandwicensis'
  Pn:    Tuamotuan karaka                  'tree sp. '
  Pn:    Maori       karaka                'Corynocarpus laevigata'
>

[16] French (1986: 261) mentions that the black fruits, about 4 em in diameter, of several Planchonella species
are sometimes eaten raw in Papua New Guinea but gives little detail. Unlike other authors, he says that the
trees are planted from seed. Since most Planchonella species grow on mainland New Guinea and not in the
Bismarcks, it is probable that his discussion relates to the mainland.

204   Malcolm Ross


    The glosses in the cognate set below imply that PCP *bau had the meaning which it re-
tains in Wayan Fijian: 'Tree . .. taxon: generic, includes species of Burckella, Manilkara,
Palaquium and Planchonella (Sapotaceae)' (Pawley & Sayaba 2003 ; see also ch.3, §3 .1).
They are all medium to large rain forest trees of the family Sapotaceae. I had hesitated to
assume that Teop bau 'Leea tetramera' is cognate, as L. tetramera is a shrub, but Will Mc-
Clatchey (pers. comm.) argues that all the plants listed below except Guettarda speciosa are
hardwoods from which a useful club could be made and that this fact is central to the def-
inition of the taxon. This being so, it is possible that POe *bau is identical with POe *bou
'Fagraea spp. ' (ch.5, §5.6).

<
POe *bau 'hardwood taxon' (see above)
  MM: Teop           bau          'Leea tetramera'
PCP *bau 'hardwood taxon' (see above)
  Fij:  Wayan        bau          'woody trees taxon including Burckella richii,
                                  Manilkara vitiensis, Palaquiumfijiense and
                                  Planchonella species '
  Fij:  Bauan        bau          'Palaquium spp. (Keppel et al. 2005)'
  Fij:  Yasawa       bau          'tree sp., probably Sapotaceae sp.'
  Pn:   Anutan       pau          'Pipturus argenteus'
  Pn:   Tuvalu       pau          'Guettarda speciosa, Mammea glauca'
  Pn:   Rennellese pau            'Planchonella sp. '
  Pn:   Samoan       pau          'tree sp. Manilkara hishinoi, from which clubs are
                                  made '
>


7.4.11 Pterocarpus indicus, New Guinea rosewood, flame wood, Bnananara, navilae, bluwota (Fabaceae)

In the Bismarck Archipelago Pterocarpus indicus grows in lowland rain forests, but in the
Solomons it is more salient in freshwater swamJP forests (Figure 7.5, right). It grows to vary-
ing sizes depending on its immediate environment. Sometimes it is an emergent tree up to
40 m high, often it is a large canopy tree, and under some conditions a tree of the lower canopy
only 10m high. Like most canopy trees, it has a long bole (which is sometimes crooked) and
buttresses which sometimes extend into flutes up the bole (Conn & Damas 2006, Henderson
& Hancock 1988: 165, 320).

     The flowers are small but bright yellow and fragrant. Its fruit comes in the form of disk-
shaped pods. It has red sap, and one of its English names, 'flame wood ', reflects the fact
that its wood is multi-coloured: yellow, red and brown. Its alternative Bislama name bluwota
reflects the fact that the wood and bark tum steel blue when immersed in water (Wheatley
1992: 145).

     P. indicus provides excellent timber, moderately soft, moderately light and permanently
sweet-smelling. In various parts of the Solomons and Vanuatu the trunks are used for dugout
canoes and planks and for carving (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 167, Wheatley 1992: 145,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 119, Hviding 2005: 142). It has similar uses in the Bismarcks, where
it is also used for hourglass drums (Floyd 1954, Powell 1976).

                                                                      Primary rain forest    205


   In a variety of locations from the Bismarcks to Vanuatu an infusion of the young leaves
or of the bark is used against diarrhoea or against excessive menstruation (Henderson &
Hancock 1988: 167, Arentz et al. 1989: 92, Bourdy & Walter 1994).

   Two POe terms for P. indicus are reconstructable: *naRa and *Rigi.

<
PMP *naRa 'Pterocarpus indicus' (Blust 1980a, ACD)
POe *naRa 'Pterocarpus indicus'
  Adm: Lou           na           'Pterocarpus indicus' (Holdsworth & Wamoi 1981)
  Adm: Baluan        nay          'tree with red wood, probably Pterocarpus indicus'
  NNG: Gitua         nara         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  NNG: Tami          nat          'Pterocarpus indicus'
  PT:   Motu         nara         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  MM: Bola           nara-nara 'Pterocarpus indicus'
  MM: Kara (E)       naya         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  NCV: Mota          na-nara      'Pterocarpus indicus'
  NCV: Vera' a       na-nar       'Pterocarpus indicus'
  NCV: Raga          na-nara      'Pterocarpus indicus'
>

<
POe *Rigi 'rosewood, Pterocarpus indicus' (Geraghty 1990: PEOc *rike)
  NNG: Atui           (ki )ri!J    'Pterocarpus indicus' (Arentz 1989:92)
  MM: Nduke           rigi         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  MM: Roviana         rigi         'tree sp. which yields a good red timber'
  MM: Marovo          rigi         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  MM: Kia             grigi        'Pterocarpus indicus' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                   comm.)
  MM: Maringe         grigi        'Pterocarpus indicus' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Bugotu         tigi         'Pterocarpus indicus' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                   comm.)
  SES: Gel a          tigi         'tree sp.'
  SES: Bauro          riki         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  SES: Kwara'ae       tiki         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  SES: Lau            tiki         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  SES: Arosi          rigi         'Pterocarpus indicus'
  NCV: Bieria         (mi)tike(he) 'Pterocarpus indicus'
  Pn:    Rennellese ti[kq]e        'tree sp.; barkcloth mallet'
>


7.4.12 Vitex cofassus, New Guinea teak, TP garamut (Lamiaceae)

Vitex cofassus grows 20-40 m tall (Figure 7.6, right). It has a grey trunk, with a bole up to
18 m long and buttresses up to 6 m high. The wood is smooth, white and durable (Peekel
1984:480, Conn & Damas 2006). At least, this how specimens V. cofassus in the Bismarcks
are described. For the Solomons Henderson & Hancock (1988: 188) describe it as a 'large,
ill-formed tree', apparently because its buttresses often extend up the bole as irregular flanges
and flutings.

206     Malcolm Ross


     A virtue of the hard wood is that it is not eaten by termites (Blewett & Blewett n.d.).
In the Bismarck Archipelago it is used for tool handles, and in both the Bismarcks and the
Solomons as timber for wall planking, house posts, canoe paddles and canoes, drums and for
carving (Powell1976, Henderson & Hancock 1988: 190, Hviding 2005: 150, Scales n.d.).

     The POe term for V. cofassus was *pasa(r,R). 17 Milke (1961: 171) reconstructed an un-
glossed POe *pasa on the basis of the Arosi, Sa'a, Bauan Fijian and Samoan items below, to-
gether with Gedaged safa 'C erbera manghas. He assumes that the latter represents a metathe-
sis, but, given the difference between the two species, this is an ad hoc assumption, and the
Gedaged item is omitted here.

     Riwo and Takia reflect Proto Bel *payaRi. The presence of the final consonant and added
-i points to a loan. Babatana vadaka is also evidently a loan from an unknown source.

<
POe *pasa(r,R) 'Vitex cofassus' (Milke 1961: *pasa)
     NNG:   Man am        oara            'Vitex cofassus'
     NNG:   Yalu          (a)fas          'Vitex cofassus' (Lane-Poole 1925)
     MM:    Nakanai       vasa            'Vitex cofassus'
     MM:    Kara (E)      fasei           'Vitex cofassus'
     MM:    Lihir         pacere          'Vitex cofctssus' (Burley 2006)
     MM:    Madak         pasa            'Vitex cofctssus'
     MM:    Patpatar      vasara          'Vitex cofassus'
     MM:    Tolai         vara            'Vitex monophylla'
     MM:    Mono-Alu      hasala          'Vitex cofassus' (Record 1945)
     MM:    Nduke         vasara          'Vitex cofassus'
     MM:    Marovo        vasara          'Vitex cofassus'
     MM:    Kia           varaha          'Vitex cofassus' (metathesis) (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                          comm.)
     MM:    Maringe       vahara          'Vitex cofctssus' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
     SES:   Bugotu        vaha            'Vitex cofassus' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
     SES:   Gel a         vaha            'Vitex cofassus' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
     SES:   Lengo         vaoa            'Vitex cofassus' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
     SES:   Longgu        vata            'Vitex cofassus'
     SES:   Lau           fata            'Vitex cofassus'
     SES:   Kwara'ae      fata            'Vitex cofctssus'
     SES:   Arosi         hata            'a large tree sp.'
     SES:   Sa'a          hata            'hardwood tree'
     Fij:   Bauan         vasa            'Cerbera odollam'
     Pn:    Samoan        fa sa           'a pandanus species, the leaves of which are used to
                                          make mats' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.); P.
                                          textorius (Whistler 2000: 163)
cf. also:
     NNG: Riwo            paia1:i         'tree with very hard and durable wood' (Mager
                                          1952)
  NNG: Takia            peari         'tree with very hard and durable wood' (Mager
                                      1952)
  MM:     Babatana      vadaka        'Vitex cofassus' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
>

[17]  Heyne (1950 : 1315) lists a Ceram formpasal V. cofassus from an unnamed language, evidence that the POe
form was an inheritance from PCEMP.

                                                                     Primary rain forest    207



7.5 The lower canopy

Trees of the lower canopy are assumed to be those with a usual height somewhere between
15 m and 20 m. Again some species display significant height variations and, as noted in the
subsections below, are canopy trees in some localities. Conversely, of course, some of the
trees described in §4 as canopy trees grow less well in some places and there belong to the
lower canopy.

    Certain sub-canopy species are treated in other chapters. The barringtonias Barringtonia
asiatica, B. novae-hiberniae and B. procera are handled in ch.5, §5.2 because of the strong
tendency for them to grow on the coast. They are an important part of the lower canopy of
the rain forest in parts ofBougainville, however. Other sub-canopy plants, especially in parts
ofBougainville and the Solomons, are the betelnut palm, Areca catechu (ch.l3, §2.2.1), tree
ferns of the genus Cyathea (ch.10, §3.1), fruit trees of the genera Pandanus and Syzygium
(ch.ll , §2.5 and §3 .7) (Paijmans 1976:64--65, Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 60--61).

    No reconstruction could be made for any of the species of Celtis, which are lower canopy
trees in the Solomons (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 157-158), nor for Gnetum latifolium, a large
woody climber of Bougainville and the Solomons.

7.5.1 Bischofia javanica, Java cedar, Bnakoka, redwud (Phyllanthaceae)

Occurring throughout the Pacific, Bischofia javanica (Figure 7.7, left) is often a 30--40 m
canopy tree with a bole a metre in diameter in the New Guinea region, but is usually a
smaller, sub-canopy tree in Vanuatu. Its wood varies from red with red sap to pink or cream
with colourless sap. It has light yellowish green flowers and red or black ovoid fruit half a
centimetre in diameter, each with six small seeds (Johns 1976:223, Wheatley 1992: 55).

    Its occurrence is evidently very patchy. The fact that names for B. javanica have been
collected in NW Island Melanesia from Nakanai, Tolai, Roviana and Lau indicates that this
species is also found in the locations of these languages, and this is confirmed by Conn &
Damas (2006), yet Peekel (1984), Henderson & Hancock (1988), Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001)
and Hviding (2005) make no mention of it, suggesting that in some places it is far from
abundant.

    Will McClatchey (pers. comm.) offers an explanation ofthe distribution of B.javanica,
commenting that 'It seems to be in places where they traditionally make clothing from felted
bark and not in places where the clothing is made from other sorts of materials. It is of course
one of the principal dyes for felted Broussonetia.'

    The wood is hard and moderately durable and is used in Vanuatu and Tonga for ground
posts (Whistler 1991b: 58, Wheatley 1992: 55)

    The PEOc term *koka is reconstructable . The lack of a POe term may simply be due to
its absence from a number of sources listing Western Oceanic plant names, i.e. to its odd
distribution, rather than to an absence from the environment of POe speakers.

208   Malcolm Ross




Figure 7.7 Left Bischofia javanica, Java cedar: A, tree; B compound leaf; C, branch bearing cluster
of fruit. Right Cananga odorata, ylang-ylang: A,      B, leaves; C, flowering shoot; D, fruit cluster.



<
PEOc *koka 'tree sp., Bischofiajavanica' (POLLEX)
  SES: Ulawa           ?o?a         'Bischofiajavanica' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  N CV: Tango a        (vi )yauha   'Bischofia j avanica'
  NCV: Raga            (i)yoya      'Bischofiajavanica' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Lewo            (puru)koa    'Bischofiajavanica'
  NCV: Nguna           na-koka      'tree sp.'
  NCV: Namakir         na-koka      'Bischofiajavanica'
  NCV: S Efate         n-kok        'Bischofiajavanica'
PCP *koka 'tree sp., Bischofiajavanica'
  Fij:  Wayan          koka         'Bischofiajavanica'
  Fij:  Bauan          koka         'Bischofiajavanica'
  Pn:   Tongan         koka         'Bischofiajavanica'
  Pn:   Niue an        koka         'small tree, Baccaurea seemannii'
  Pn:   E Futunan koka              'Bischofia j avanica'
  Pn:   E Uvean        koka         'Bischofia j avanica'
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele koka             'Bischofia j avanica'
  Pn:   Rarotongan koka             'Bischofia j avanica'
  Pn:   Maori          koka         'some edible plant'
>

                                                                     Primary rain forest     209


7.5.2 Cananga odorata, ylang-ylang, perlume tree, nandingori, nadingro, nangungara (Annonaceae)

Cananga odorata (Figure 7.7, right) is usually a lower canopy tree 10--15 metres tall, but
sometimes it reaches the canopy at 30 or 35m (Peekel1984: 183, Conn & Damas 2006).

    C. odorata is known across NW Island Melanesia (and elsewhere) for its fragrant yellow
flowers , which are dried and used to scent coconut oil (Record 1945, Henderson & Hancock
1988:244, Hviding 2005: 130).

    In northern Vanuatu the trunk is hollowed out and used for making drums and the branches
are used for outriggers (Gowers 1976:43, Jauncey In progress). Kwa'ioloa & Burt(2001: 119)
and Wheatley (1992: 42), on the other hand, say that the wood is too soft to be durable and
is useful only for internal construction in places with a smoky atmosphere.

    Use of the bark and flowers for medicinal purposes is widespread (Floyd 1954, Hviding
2005: 130).

    POe *m (w)aso(q)u may have denoted a taxon which included C. odorata (§4.2). POe
*pwi(r,R)a and PSOc *di!Jori(q) both appear to have denoted C. odorata alone.

<
POe *pwi(r,R)a 'Cananga odorata'
  MM:     Lihir         pir           'Cananga odorata'
  MM:     Petats        bin a         'Cananga odorata'
  MM:     Teop          bin a         'Cananga odorata'
  Mic:    Ponapean      p wur         'Cananga odorata'
  Mic:    Mokilese      p wur         'tree species'
>

<
PSOc *di!Jori(q) 'Cananga odorata' (Clark 1996a, Lynch 2004a)
  NCV:    Mwotlap       (na-tweh) di!JJY   'Cananga odorata' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV:    Dorig         (wa)d!Jvr          'Cananga odorata' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV:    NE Ambae      di!Jori            'Cananga odorata'
  NCV:    Tangoa        (ve)ri!Jori        'Cananga odorata'
  NCV:    Kiai          kinori             'Cananga odorata'
  NCV:    Tamambo       (vu)di!Jori        'Cananga odorata'
  NCV:    Raga          di!Jori            'Cananga odorata'
  NCV:    Paamese       a-re!Je            'Cananga odorata'
  SV:     Kwamera       nu-ra!Jri          'tree, sp. wood used for pierced ear and septum
                                           ornaments'
>


7.5.3 Cryptocarya sp. (Lauraceae)

The genus Cryptocarya consists of laurel-like evergreen plants which range in size from
lower canopy shrubs to giant emergent trees (Conn & Damas 2006).

     Among the large trees are C. aromatica, which was exploited by German traders on the
north coast ofNew Guinea for the essential oil in its bark: see §4.2 for discussion. It grows to
a height of 45 m and its bole is as much as 1.2 m in diameter. The bark varies in colour, but
is often red-brown and corky, with a strong resinous smell. It bears globular berries 10 em in
diameter (Johns 1976: 65). C. cordata is a similarly large tree, and Record (1945) notes that
its currant-sized fruit are used in food as a re:lish .

210      Malcolm Ross


    The sources of the data supporting POe *nipus
'Cryptocarya sp. ', O'Collins & Lamothe (1989) and
Damon (2004), do not provide enough information
to allow a species identification, but O'Collins and
Lamothe mention that the timber is used in house-
building on Manus Island, implying that the species
is not too small. 18 The sources of the data supporting
PWOc *kam (wJapaR tell us that the Muyuw tree is more
than 10 m tall, the Patpatar tree, dubbed Cryptocarya
kamahar by Peekel, 20--30 m tall.

    Damon (In preparation) mentions that the nuts
have a rich cinnamon-like smell and are important for
medicinal purposes on W oodlark Island. Curiously,
Muyuw people do not know the tree, as it grows away                   Figure 7.8     Cryptocarya aromatica.
from areas they frequent, but they know its nuts be-
cause birds swallow them whole, then excrete them in
their nests, complete with the endocarp, whence they
are collected.

<
POe *nip us 'Cryptocarya sp.'
  Adm: Bipi            fieu                   'Cryptocarya sp.'
  Adm: Nyindrou       nip                     'Cryptocarya sp.'
  PT:    Muyuw        ni-niwous               'Cryptocarya sp.'
>

<
PWOc *kam(wJapaR 'Cryptocarya sp.'
 PT:   Muyuw        (ka)kamweya 'Cryptocarya sp.'
 MM: Patpatar       kamahar      'Cryptocarya kamahar'
>

7.5.4 Dillenia sp. (Dilleniaceae)

It was noted in §4.3 that Dillenia species range in size from trees of the lower canopy to
tall canopy trees. Although accounts of Bismarcks flora make no mention of the presence
of a smaller Dillenia species, there is linguistic evidence that POe speakers knew such a
species. Only two Oceanic reflexes have been £ound, both from Southern Vanuatu, both de-
noting Dillenia biflora, a tree with reddish brown bark that grows to about 15m (Wheatley
1992: 79). POe *drokol (and PMP *de(k,g)el) is reconstructable on the basis ofthe Southern
Vanuatu data and three non-Oceanic cognates, Blit Manobo (klambug) daka 'D. megalan-
tha'19 (Madulid 2001b: 100), Sundanese saga! and Javanese qagal, both 'D. excelsa' (Heyne
1950: 1071-1072). D. excelsa is also 10--15 min height.




[18] In this instance Damon is describing a sample that has been brought to him: he notes that he has not seen the
tree.

[19] The term klambug is apparently a term for a taxon which includes several Dillenia species.

                                                                         Primary rain forest     211


<
PMP *de(k,g)el 'small Dillenia species'
POe *drokol 'small Dillenia species'
PSV *ne-dyol 'Dillenia biflora' (Lynch 2004a)
     SV:      Sye            ne-tyul
     SV:      Anejom         ne-cyel
>

7.5.5 Diospyros spp., ebony, blackwood, Bblakwud (Ebenaceae)

Diospyros species are sub-canopy trees around 10 m tall with very hard black wood. Dio-
spyros peekelii is used on New Britain for digging sticks, on New Ireland to make clubs for
shark-catching (Floyd 1954, Peekel 1984: 432--433). In the western Solomons the wood of
some species is used for carving (Hviding 2005: 142). The fruit of Diospyros species is the
persimmon. The fruit of some species are edible and are eaten when other food is scarce
(Record 1945).

    Although Diospyros species are well known sub-canopy trees, widely mentioned in the
literature, the only reconstruction that has proven possible is PSOc *numo. Otherwise only
very local cognate sets are found, raising the possibility that the more important species have
been introduced since POe times.

<
PSOc *numo 'Diospyros spp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mwotlap        (y[u])num    'Diospyrosferrea'
Proto South Melanesian *n(e,i)mo 'Diospyros spp.' (Lynch 2004a) 20
     SV:      Sye            nimu(!Jlei)    'Diospyros ferrea'
     NCal:    Jawe           (ce)nemo       'Diospyros austro-caledonicus'
     NCal:    Fwai           (ce)nuum       'Diospyros parviflora'
     NCal:    Nemi           (ce)nuum       'Diospyros parviflora'
     NCal:    Jawe           (ce)nuum       'Diospyros parviflora'
>


7.5.6 Euodia spp. (Rutaceae)

Borrell (1989: 130--131) finds 14 species of Euodia 21 on Kairiru, ranging from small shrubs
a metre high to the medium-sized tree, E. eUeryana (syn. E. tetragona, Melicope elleryana),
15-20 m tall, with a soft white wood that has an unpleasantly musty smell and masses of
rose-pink flowers (Peekel1984: 270).

    Peekel reports that larger trunks were used on New Ireland for small outrigger canoe
hulls. The wood splits easily and is good for planks (Hviding 2005: 104).

    Although POe *bala below is supported by only two reflexes, the notes provided by
Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 158) are informative. Kwara'ae bala is a generic term for species
which include bala ni kwaru [bala of rock] 'E. elleryana', bala kwau (lit. 'white Euodia' ) or
balafufuri (lit. 'patchy Euodia'), and simply bala. The authors provide a scientific name only
for the first ofthe three. Apparently excluded from the bala taxon is E. hortensis, Kwara' ae
fo?oka orfo?aka, which has complex ritual uses both here and at other localities. It is possible
that POe *bala also denoted a taxon of Euodia species, the more so as Motu ebala denotes
E. hortensis, the one species that Kwara'ae bala excludes.

[20] Proto South Melanesian is the putative ancestor of the Southern Vanuatu and New Caledonian languages
(Lynch 2000a).

[21] The name is sometimes spelt Evodia .

212      Malcolm Ross


<
POe *bala 'taxon including various Euodia spp.' (?)
  PT:       Motu        (e)bala        'Euodia hortensis' (Lane-Poole 1925)
  SES:      Kwara'ae    bala           'Euodia spp.'
>

    A reasonable (but not the only) interpretation of the data below is that POe *bosi denoted
a forest tree with white wood, perhaps Euodia elleryana, as the Meso-Melanesian data sug-
gest, and was reapplied to another tree with white wood, Alphitonia zizyphoides, in southern
Vanuatu.

<
POe *bosi 'a forest tree with white wood, probably Euodia elleryana'
Proto NW Solomonic *bosi 'Euodia spp.'
  MM: Nehan          bouh        'Euodia hortensis'
  MM: Nduke          bosi        'Euodia eUeryana'
  MM: Marovo         bosi        'trees of lowland or secondary forest, Euodia spp.'
  MM: Roviana        bosi        'Euodia eUeryana' (Record 1945)
PSV *na-bwus(Vn) 'whitewood, Alphitonia zizyphoides' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye          na-mpo      'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  SV:   Kwamera      na-pa       'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
                     na-pwesan   'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  SV:   Anejom       na-pwo()    'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
>

    Despite the fact that the shrub E. hortensis (island musk) is often cultivated and occurs
in varieties with acrid-smelling leaves of various shapes, green or yellow, which are used to
keep flies away and employed for various medicinal and ritual purposes at many localities
(Ivens 1927:362, Peekel1984: 267-268, Whistler 1991b: 133, Whistler 2000: 119, Wheatley
1992: 91, Hviding 2005: 106; ch.9, §2.1), the only term reconstructed for E. hortensis is PCP
*usi.

<
PCP *usi ' Euodia hortensis'
  Fij:      Bauan       uoi            'Euodia hortensis'
  Pn:       Tongan      uhi            'Euodia hortensis'
  Pn:       Samoan      usi            'Euodia hortensis' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
>

7.5.7 Kleinhovia hospita, puzzle tree, guest tree, Bnamatal (Sterculiaceae)
Kleinhovia hospita is a small to medium-sized tree. In New Ireland it usually grows to 6-10 m
tall, but is sometimes as tall as 20-30 m in primary forest (Peekel 1984: 373). A striking
feature is its short, branching bole: 'it sprouts into many trees' in the words ofKwa'ioloa &
Burt (2001: 135).

                                                                    Primary rain forest    213


                                                  There is remarkable agreement across sour-
                                              ces about its uses, which do not vary much from
                                              the Bismarck Archipelago to Vanuatu. Its bast
                                              (fibrous inner bark) serves as temporary bind-
                                              ing material. The soft light timber provided by
                                              young straight branches is used for rafters and
                                              internal construction. It also provides excellent
                                              firewood, and trees are sometimes ringbarked
                                              to tum them into convenient fuel sources. It is
                                              reputed to be one of the best woods for starting
                                              fires by traditional friction methods (another is
                                              the small forest tree Callicarpa pentandra ac-
                                              cording to Kwara' ae lore) (Powell 1976,Hen-
                                              derson & Hancock 1988: 158-159, Arentz et
                                              al. 1989: 94, Wheatley 1992: 225, Kwa' ioloa &
                                              Burt 2001: 135, Hviding 2005: 115-116).

                                                  Fewer sources mention medicinal uses: the
                                              Bola ofNew Britain use an infusion of the bark,
                                              and the leaves are used medicinally in Vanuatu
                                              (Powell1976, Wheatley 1992: 225).

                                                  Most of the terms below are from NCV
                                              languages, and they present a minor puzzle.
Figure 7.9 Kleinhovia hospita: A, tree; B, Lynch (2004a) divides them into two groups
shoot with a mature and an old inflorescence; and makes two resemblant but seemingly irrec-
C, leaf.                                      oncilable PNCV reconstructions, *ma(t,d)aka
                                              (Banks, Malakula, Epi) and *matala (Banks,
Santo, Malakula, Paama, Efate ). There are also MM and SES reflexes, however, and here the
terms reflect POe *ma(i)tagaR(a). Lynch' s PNCV *ma(t,d)aka, modified here to *ma(t,d)aga,
reflects this unproblematically. This leaves Lynch' s PNCV *matala, which I take to reflect
an early borrowing from a language which had lost *-k- but retained *-R- as -/- (the SES
languages of Malaita reflect this pattern of reflexes, but there is no good reason to suppose
that a language descended from the borrowing source still exists).

<
POe *ma( i )tagaR(a) 'K leinhovia hospita'
  MM: Bola              maitaga       'Kleinhovia hospita' (Arentz et al. 1989: 94)
  MM: Kara (E)          matakak       'Kleinhovia hospita'
  MM: Patpatar          matakara      'Kleinhovia hospita'
  SES: Lengo            mataga        'Kleinhovia hospita' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Santa Ana magaka               'Kleinhovia hospita' (metathesis ofPSES *mataga)
PNCV *ma(t,d)aga 'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Mwotlap          na-mwtak      'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Mota             mwataka       'tree sp. '
  NCV: Uripiv           mwirek        'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Naman            midag         'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Neve' ei         na-mda!J      'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Tape             medek         'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV:      Avava       mida!J        'K leinhovia hospita'
  NCV:      Larevat     medrak        'K leinhovia hospita'
  NCV:      Nese        no-murak      'K leinhovia hospita'
  NCV:      Lewo        (puru)mante   'K leinhovia hospita'
  NCV:      Baki        (buru)minda   'K leinhovia hospita'
>

214    Malcolm Ross

<
PNCV *matala 'Kleinhovia hospita' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Vures          matal         'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Kiai           matala        'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Nokuku         metal         'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Sakao          ne-ntal       'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Araki          (vi)m warala 'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Tamambo        (vu)matala 'tree sp . '
  NCV: Raga           matala        'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Raga           matala        'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: Port Sandwich madre          'Kleinhovia hospita' (I. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Aulua          medel         'Kleinhovia hospita' (I. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Paamese        merai         'tree sp . used to make bow'
  NCV: Nguna          na-matal      'Kleinhovia hospita'
  NCV: S Efate        na-matal      'Kleinhovia hospita'
>

    PMM *p(i,u)lakis and POe *paqu, both 'Kleinhovia hospita' , are also reconstructable.
The forms under 'cf also' appear to reflect a variant *paqi which may represent a confiation
of the two etyma.

<
PMM *p(i,u)lakis 'Kleinhovia hospita'
 MM: Bola             bulai        'Kleinhovia hospita' (for tpulai)
 MM: Nehan            hule         'Kleinhovia hospita'
 MM: Babatana         vilaki       'Kleinhovia hospita' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
 MM: Nduke            valakihi     'Kleinhovia hospita'
  SES: Bugotu         vare         'Kleinhovia hospita' (for tvale ; perhaps borrowed
                                   from a MM language)
>

<
POe *paqu 'Kleinhovia hospita'
  MM: Tolai          vau              'Kleinhovia hospita' (Record 1945)
  MM: Roviana        payo             'Kleinhovia hospita' (Record 1945)
  NCV: Lakon         vuy-vuy          'Kleinhovia hospita' Fran9ois (2004)
  Fij:  Wayan        vau              'Kleinhovia hospita'
cf. also:
  MM:       Mono-Alu    (la)hai       'Kleinhovia hospita'
  SES:      Lau         fai-fai       'K leinhovia hospita'
  SES:      Kwara' ae   fae-fae       'K leinhovia hospita'
  SES:      Kwaio       fae-fae       'tree sp.'
>

                                                                       Primary rain forest      215


7.5.8 Litsea spp. (Lauraceae)

Numerous Litsea species of varying statures occur in the Bismarcks and the Solomons. If
POe *lowa!Ja, reconstructed below, did indeed denote a particular species of Litsea, then
O' Collins & Lamothe (1989) indicate that it was one large enough to make a canoe hull. Of
the species listed by Peekel (1984: 191), two qualify: L. kauloensis and L. dielsiana, each
15-20 m. tall.

    The reconstruction of PCEMP/POc *lowa!Ja 'Litsea sp.' is made possible by the CMP
reflexes recorded by Verheijen (1990: 224): Kepo, Rembong (both CMP) lowa!J 'Litsea sp. ' .
Although N akanai loaga 'Gmelina sp.' is glossed as another species, both are used for canoe
hulls, and the Nakanai term is almost certainly cognate with Nyindrou lowa!J. Nakanai also
provides us with the final vowel for the reconstruction; that there was a final vowel can be
inferred from the fact that final consonants are lost in Nyindrou and in the CMP languages
from which reflexes are drawn.

<
PCEMP *lowa!Ja 'Litsea sp.'
POe *lowa!Ja 'Litsea sp.'
  Adm: Nyindrou        lowa!J          'Litsea sp. ' (O ' Collins & Lamothe 1989)
  MM: Nakanai          loaga           'Gmelina sp.'
>


7.5.9 Myristica spp., wild nutmeg, Bnandae (Myristicaceae)

The most famous Myristica species is the nutmeg, but its easternmost extent is West Papua
(Warburg 1899: 57). Among the species of wild nutmeg which grow in the Bismarcks are
M . schleintzii, a small foreshore tree 3-6 m tall, and M. fatua , a sub-canopy tree reaching
20m on New Ireland (Peekel 1984: 185). M. fatua is a canopy tree in some areas, e.g. in
Kwara' ae country. Both species prefer a damp environment and have stilt roots even in dry
locations (Paijmans 1976: 37). POe *(dr,d )aRa(q,k)a presumably denoted at least one of these
two species and perhaps a taxon including a number of Myristica species.

    The soft wood of both species makes planking for indoor use and good firewood in lo-
cations from New Britain to Vanuatu (Floycl1954, Powell1976, Wheatley 1992:172-174,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 120, 167).

    With regard to reconstructing a PROc term for Myristicafatua Lynch (2004a) writes:

      The Banks and Raga forms suggest *draRaka, other NCV languages something like
      *draRaqi, while the SV forms point rather to PSOc *d(r)ani, *d(r)aRani or *d(r)aqani.
      Ross Clark (pers. comm.) has suggested a possible connection to words meaning 'blood',
      from POe *draRaq: Wheatley (1992: 172) refers to the 'dark red exudate' of the inner
      bark, and Codrington relates Mota naraa to nara 'blood' . The S Efate form is also ho-
      mophonous with 'blood' , and the SV forms almost so (PSV *n-da(q, V) , *n-da(a)-) . The
      form may thus be based on the POe term for 'blood' [*draRaq] , and be something like
      *draRaq-(n)(i,a).

To Lynch's Southern Oceanic cognate set we add Western Oceanic and Kwara' ae (SES)
items. Reconstructing a POe etymon from these data is tricky, as they do not lead to an
unambiguous reconstruction, yet they probably all reflect a single etymon.
    Lynch' s discussion points to three phonological questions:
    • the third consonant: was it POe *k or *q?

216     Malcolm Ross


     • the third vowel: was it POe *a or *i?
     • what is the source of PSV *n?
To these we can add a fourth not raised by Lynch's data:
     • the initial consonant: was it POe *dr or *d?

    I address the last question first. All reflexes except Muyuw, Lihir and Kwara'ae point to
either *dr- or *d-. Muyuw a-yayak and Lihir !ala, however, reflect initial POe *r- or *R-.
These probably reflect assimilation to the medial reflex of *-R-, so they do not help us to
disambiguate the initial. Distinguishing reflexes of *d from those of *dr is difficult, because
*d was a very low-frequency POe consonant: for some languages we have no reflex of *d, and
in some others it merges with *dr. The one language that helps us with this disambiguation is
Kwara'ae, where ka-kala?a at first sight seems to reflect POe *g-. However, a small number of
SE Solomonic lexical items reflect POe *d (but apparently not *dr) as if it were *g, and this is
evidently one of them. This suggests that the initial consonant was *d- and that resemblances
to the word for 'blood' are accidental, but perhaJPS amplified by folk-etymologising, since the
blood-like colour of Myristica sap is widely recognised. 22

    The second question to be addressed concems the third consonant: was it POe *k or *q?
As Lynch notes, the Banks and Raga reflexes (the first six NCV reflexes below) point to *k.
So does Muyuw a-yayak. Other reflexes point to *q. If changes in form took place as a result
of folk-etymologising, then reflexes of *q may be due to reflexes of POe *draRaq 'blood',
leaving *k as the more likely proto-consonant.

    The other two questions-was the third vowel *a or *i? what is the source ofPSV *n?-
may be taken together. Four items below, Kwara'ae ka-kala?a, Vera'a daraya, Mota na-raya
and Raga a-oaya suggest that the vowel was *a, i.e. they point to POe *(dr,d)aRaka. On
the other hand NE Ambae dadai and Uripiv drari reflect a final *-i in *(dr,d)aRaq(a)-i, and
PSV *na-(dr,d )ani reflects a final *-ni in *(dr,d )aRaq(a )-ni (these are languages in which
both *R and *q are lost). The altemation between final *-i and *-ni is suggestive, as both are
reflected in variants of the so-called associative: (non-specific possessor) construction. Thus
'blood of tree' would have been expressed in POe as *(dr,d)aRaq i kayu or *(dr,d)aRaq ni
kayu, depending on whether *(dr,d )aRaq was directly or indirectly possessed; either *i or *ni
has been generalised to both in various                         (Ross 1998). The suggestion is
that *-i and *-ni are accretions brought about by the truncation of something like 'blood of
tree', itself an outcome of folk etymology, and that they are therefore not part of the POe
reconstruction.

    The reconstruction that emerges from the discussion above is POe *daRaka, but there is
enough speculation above to commend prudence, and so I offer POe *(dr,d)aRa(q,k)a below.

<
POe *(dr,d)aRa(q,k)a 'wild nutmeg, Myristica sp.'
     PT:    Muyuw         (a)yayak        'Myristica schleintzii'
     MM:    Kara (E)      de              'Myristicafatua'
     MM:    Lihir         !ala            'Myristica sp.' (Burley 2006)
     SES:   Kwara'ae      ka-kala?a       'Myristicafatua'
>

[22] Such etymologising evidently did not occur in Western Oceanic or SE Solomonic languages: cf Kara (E)
ria, Lihir data and Kwara'ae ?abuan 'blood'. However, Marovo juka-juka 'Myristica sp.' (fromjuka 'blood',
Hviding 2005: 118) also shows that the resemblance of Myristica sap to blood is widely recognised.

                                                                          Primary rain forest      217

<
PNCV *(dr,d)aRa( q,k)(a,i) 'wild nutmeg, Myristica sp. '
  NCV: Mota           na-raya       'nutmeg'
  NCV: Mwotlap        na-d[a]yay 'Myristicafatua' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Vera' a        daraya        'Myristicafatua' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Vures          daray         'Myristicafatua' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Mwesen         (wo)na-ray 'Myristicafatua' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Raga           (a)oaya       'Myristicafatua'
  NCV: NE Ambae dadai               'Myristicafatua'
  NCV: Uripiv         drari         'Myristicafatua'
  NCV: S Efate        n-ra          'Myristicafatua'
PSV *na-(dr,d)ani 'wild nutmeg, Myristicafatua ' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:   Sye           na-nre        'Myristicafatua'
  SV:   Lenakel       ne-tan        'Myristicafatua'
  SV:   Kwamera       n-tan         'Myristicafatua'
  SV:   Anejom        na-jefi       'Myristicafatua'
>


7.5.10 Parinari spp., putty nut (Chrysobalanaoeae)

Finding one ' s way through the maze of synonymous scientific names for Bismarcks species
of the genus Parinari is difficult, but it appears that in NW Island Melanesia there are two
similar species which were perhaps treated as a single POe taxon, *(q,k)atita: 23
    • Parinari laurina (syn. Cyclandrophora laurina, Atuna racemosa) and
    • Parinari glaberrima (syn. Maranthes corymbosa, Parinari corymbosa, Parinari grif-
       fithiana) (Figure 7.10, left) 24

    P. laurina seems to be more common in the Bismarcks, P. glaberrima in the Solomons.
Both are small to medium-sized sub-canopy trees, 10--20 m tall. Their large nuts have a hard
shell. After it has been broken, the tough kernel of the fruit is rubbed over a rough surface
to produce small crumbs of putty-like mash, and the resulting sticky putty is used to caulk
plank canoes, to seal and repair cracks in dugouts, and to fasten shell inlays to wood carvings.
After drying, this coating forms a firm, watertight and breakable-resistant layer (Holdsworth
& Wamoi 1981 , Peekel 1984:202-203, Henderson & Hancock 1988:230-232, Ohnemus
1998, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 165, Hviding 2005: 147).

    In the Carolines a decoction of the pericarp of the P. laurinum fruit is used for painting
canoes red (Christian 1899: 328). In Fiji its long straight branches are used for canoe paddles
and as houses rafters. Its leaves are used to fill in the outer walls of houses (Capell1941). In
the Solomons the bark provides a medicine taken against diarrhoea or dysentery (Henderson
& Hancock 1988: 232).

    Reconstructing the POe term for the putty nut is a little tricky, as Chowning (200 1: 76)
mentions in a footnote, because Oceanic languages appear to reflect three related forms:
*qatita, *katita and *tita. The Admiralties forms below may reflect either POe *katita or

[23] A further complication is that most terms of the genus Parinari also have synonyms in which the genus
is Parinarium and the species modifer has the Latim neuter gender. Hence, Parinari laurina = Parinarium
laurinum . These synonyms are ignored here.

[24] Some recent sources prefer the term Maranthes corymbosa.

218   Malcolm Ross



Figure 7.10 Left Parinari glaberrima: A, tree; B, shoot bearing one mature and one old inflores-
cence; C and D, nut. Right Caryota rumphiana : A, tree; B, leaflet; C, portion of inflorescence; D,
fruiting inflorescence; E, fruit; F, larvae of Rhynocaphorus beetle in a rotting trunk.



POe *qatita. Of the Western Oceanic forms, W ogeo kiJtita and Kara katita reflect *katita,
whilst the rest may reflect either *katita or *qatita. On the simplest interpretation of the data
I reconstruct PWOc *katita. The Eastern Oceanic forms, on the other hand, reflect *qatita.
POe *(q,k)atita below reflects this ambiguity.

<
POe *(q,k)atita 'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima' (ACD:
  *qatita)
  Adm: Likum            ketik         'putty nut, Parinari laurina '
  Adm: Drehet           ketik         'putty nut, Parinari laurina '
  Adm: Lou              kerit         'putty nut,, Parinari laurina '
PWOc *katita 'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima'
  NNG: Kove             atita         'putty nut,, Parinari laurina '
  NNG: Wogeo            kiJtita       'putty nut,, Parinari laurina '
  NNG: Kilenge          atita         'putty nut, Parinari laurina '
  MM: Kara (E)          katita        'putty nut, Parinari laurina '
  MM: Tolai             katita        'putty nut,, Parinari laurina '
  MM: Tinputz           acic          'putty nut,, Parinari laurina '
  MM: Teop              asita         'putty nut"
PEOc *qatita 'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima'
  SES: Baegu            saia          'putty nut"
     SES:     Kwara' ae        saia             'putty nut, Parinari glaberrima'
     SES:     Sa' a            saie             'putty nut'
     SES:     Lau              saia             'putty nut, Parinari glaberrima'
     SES:     Kwaio            laia             'putty nut'
     SES:     'Are ' are       raia             'putty nut'
     Mic:     Carolinian       a is             'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Mic:     Chuukese         ayis             'Parinari tree '
     Mic:     Woleaian         yaise            'tree sp. with fragrant fruit '
     Mic:     Po nape an       ays              'Parinari tree '
>

                                                                               Primary rain forest   219



    Blust (ACD) reconstructs doublets *qatita and *qarita for this item. Supporting data for
medial *-r- , however, are drawn entirely from Admiralties languages and Mussau, a distri-
bution which does not justify a POe reconstruction on the criteria set out in ch. 1, §3.2.3.
Instead, it seems likely that the forms listed below which appear to reflect *qarita are the re-
sult of borrowing( s) from a language or languages that reflects (or reflected) POe *-t- as -r-.
There are a number of these in the Admiral1cies: Lou, Penchal, Baluan, Lenkau, Pak, Koro,
Nali, Lele and Ponam (Ross 1988: 322) (among the data above only Lou has -r- in a directly
inherited reflex of *qatita ).

    Among directly inherited Admiralties reflexes of *qatita, those in Likum, Drehet and
Lou have initial k- . The reflexes below, however, agree not only in appearing to reflect *-r-
but also in loss of the initial consonant. This suggests that they may all reflect a single early
borrowing of a form *arita.

     Adm:     Mussau        a rita                  'putty nut'
     Adm:     Lindrou       alik                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Nauna         alit                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Penchal       alit                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Pak           ehir                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Nali          n-alit                  'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Ere           arit                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Titan         alit                    'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Sori-Harengan a hi?                   'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Leipon        yerit                   'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
     Adm:     Loniu         eit, a?at               'putty nut, Parinari laurina'

    A number of Meso-Melanesian reflexes lack the initial syllable, reflecting a possible
PMM altemant *tita. 25 For clarity' s sake these are listed separately below. There are also
two SE Solomonic reflexes of *tita, in Gela and Bugotu, but both languages are prone to
borrow from NW Solomonic (and thus Meso-Melanesian) neighbours.

    Attempting to account for *tita Blust (ACD) suggests that the initial syllable has been
irregularly lost. He puts forward two possible reasons for such a loss. First, POe roots were
predominantly disyllabic, and this is true of many daughter-languages: this might favour
foreshortening. Second, the POe common article was *a or *na. If initial *k- or *q- was lost
from a reflex, then the resulting initial *a- could be reanalysed as part of the article. A third
possible reason is offered here, namely that *ka- was reanalysed as the 'tree' prefix *ka-,
leaving *tita as the name of the tree (ch.2, §7.1.2).

[25] Both katita and tita are recorded for Tolai.

220      Malcolm Ross


<
PMM *tita 'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima' (Chowning
  1963)
 MM: Nakanai          tita          'Parinari glaberrima'
 MM: Tolai            tita          'Parinari laurina'
 MM: Nehan            tita          'Parinari laurina'
 MM: Petats           tic           'Parinari glaberrima'
 MM: Teop             tita          'Parinari glaberrima'
 MM: Varisi           sita          'putty nut, Parinari glaberrima' (W. McClatchey,
                                    pers. comm.)
 MM: Simbo            tita          'Parinari laurina; gum, glue'
 MM: Nduke            tita          'Parinari glaberrima'
 MM: Marovo           tita          'Parinari glaberrima'
 MM: Roviana          tita          'Parinari glaberrima' (Henderson & Hancock
                                    1988)
  SES: Bugotu         tita          'putty nut'
  SES: Gel a          tita          'Parinari sp.'
cf. also:
  MM:       Babatana    !ita          'Parinari glaberrima'
>

    The cognate set below appears at first sight to be related to Baegu, Kwara'ae, Sa'a and Lau
saia above, but saia is the regular reflex of POe *qatita, since *q- and *-t- are both deleted,
and s- is a regular accretion before the resulting initial a-, corresponding with Kwaio /- in
laia and 'Are'are r- in raia (Frantisek Lichtenberk 1988). These changes are quite different
from those regularly reflected in PCP.

<
PCP *sea 'tree, Parinari insularum' (Milke (1961): POe)
  Fij:   Rotuman       sea           'tree sp.'
  Fij:   Bauan         sea          'Parinari insularum'
  Pn:    Tongan        hea          'Parinari insularum'
  Pn:    E Futunan sea              'Parinari insularum'
  Pn:    E Uvean       hea          'Parinari insularum'
  Pn:    Samoan        sea          'Parinari insularum'
>

    It is not clear what connection (if any) the £:>rm below has with those above.

<
POe *maRakita 'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima'
  MM:       Mono-Alu    malakita      'putty nut, Parinari glaberrima' (W. McClatchey,
                                      pers. comm.)
  Fij:      Wayan       makita        'forest tree with large seeds used to caulk canoes,
                                      Parinari laurina'
  Fij:      Bauan       makita        'putty nut, Parinari laurina'
>

                                                                    Primary rain forest    221


7.5.11 Palms

7.5.11.1 Caryota rumphiana, black palm, fishtail palm, TP waillimbum (Arecaceae)

Caryota rumphiana is the only palm in NW Island Melanesia with bipinnate fronds, i.e. the
leaflets on either side of the midrib themselves have a central rib and are leaf-like (Figure
7.10, right). C. rump hi ana stands 10--20 m high and has fruit the size of a cherry which hang
in bunches from the top of its blackish trunk (Peekel (1984), Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 187).

    Throughout NW Island Melanesia, the trunks are split to make floorboards (Floyd 1954,
Henderson & Hancock 1988: 150, Arentz e:t al. 1989: 93 , Scales n.d. McEldowney 1995,
Margetts 2005a). The wood is also used on New Britain for axe handles, clubs, bows and
spears (Floyd 1954, Powell 1976). The pith from the young trunk is sometimes eaten on
New Britain, and fed to pigs in the Solomons.

    Henderson & Hancock (1988: 150) describe how inland dwellers in the Solomons use a
felled Caryota rumphiana trunk to farm larvae of a large beetle ofthe genus Rhynocaphorus
by cutting notches at 2 m intervals along it, harvesting the larvae and pupae 3--4 months
later. For some households the larvae are a major source of protein, although others find the
accompanying taste of the rotting palm core rather offensive.

    The Oceanic data below were assembled by Blust (ACD ). The reconstruction of PCEMP
*bual(a) 'Caryota sp. ' is based on these data and on W Sumba ?wuola, E Sumba (both CMP)
?wuala 'C. mitis' (Verheijen 1990: 199).

<
PCEMP *bual(a) 'Caryota sp.'
POe *[bual]bual 'species of palm used for making spears and bows; palm-wood spear or
  bow, probably Caryota sp. ' (ACD)
  Adm: Lou             (si )pua      'black palm'
  PT:    Tawala        bua-bua       'smalll tree fern, used for spears'
  PT:    Suau (Saliba) bua-bua       'k tree, used for spears and sticks'
  MM: Lihir            buer          'fern sp. '
  MM: Roviana          buala         'large kind of bow'
  MM: Simbo            buala         'war bow'
  SES: Sa' a           pue-pue       'a palm used for making bows, combs, heavy
                                     spears'
                       pue-pue       'heavy palm-wood spear'
  SES: Ulawa           pua-pua       'a palm used for making bows, combs, heavy
                                     spears'
  Pn:    Hawaiian      pua           'arrow, dart, sometimes made from flower stalks of
                                     sugarcane '
>

   PMP *katipa(l,n) below is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data below and of
Hanunuo, Mangyan (WMP) katipan 'C. cumingii' (Madulid 2001a: 364) and Wandamen
(EMP) kasira 'black palm sp. ' (Smits & Voorhoeve 1992: 222).

<
PMP *katipa(l,n) 'a palm with black wood, Caryota sp. '
POe *kati(p )al 'a palm with black wood, Caryota sp.'
  PT:    Tawala         kahiala      'Caryota sp. '
  PT:    Dobu           kasiala      'Caryota sp. '
     MM:      Tinputz         kacan            'Caryota sp.'
     MM:      Marovo          kacuele          'palm, Drymophloeus sp., black wood used for
                                               bows and spear tips'
>

222       Malcolm Ross


Tiny though the cognate set below is, the membership of its two members in different primary
subgroups of Oceanic justifies a POe reconstruction.

<
POe *j(o,u)abo 'Caryota sp.'
     Adm: Baluan              soap             'Caryota rumphiana'
     MM: Bali                 tuabo            'Caryota sp.' (Hide 1985)
>


7.5.11.2 Licuala spp., fan palm (Arecaceae)

The leaves of the small palm Licuala ramsayi (syn. L. muelleri, L. peekelii), growing to about
5-10 m, serve for roofing in parts of the Bismarcks (Powell 1976, Peekel 1984: 58). The
Nakanai use them to wrap megapode eggs (A. Chowning, pers. comm.). The palm also serves
decorative purposes: in the Ninigo Islands it is planted as an ornamental shrub (Sorensen
1950), and various writers note that its leaves are used for personal decoration.

    POe *piRu denoted one or more Licuala species, a fan palm. As French-Wright (1983: 208-
209) and Chowning (200 1: 84) note, in Fijian and the Polynesian languages its reflexes denote
the fan palm Pritchardia pacifica, found only in Fiji and Polynesia. 26 This is an instance of an
established name being given to a new-found species as Oceanic speakers moved eastward.

    On the basis of the non-Oceanic data supporting Blust's reconstruction of PMP *biRu?
(ACD ), we would expect the POe form *piRu, and this is reflected everywhere except in north-
em Vanuatu, where a local form *piloqi is               NCV forms sporadically retain a POe
final consonant with an added *-i, regularly lost in Volow, Mota and Merlav, and so the final
-y of these items may reflect POe *-q, a possibility recognised in the reconstruction of POe
*piRu(q).

<
PMP *biRu? 'fan palm, Licuala rumphii' (ACD)
POe *piRu(q) 'fan palm, Licuala sp.' (ACD, Chowning 2001)
     NNG:     Kove            pilu 'Licuala sp.'
     MM:      Nakanai          vilu-vilu
                                   'Licuala sp.'
     MM:      Kara (E)        fi   'Licuala lauterbachii'
     MM:      Halia           hi!  'Licuala sp.'
     MM:      Solos           hin  'Licuala sp.'
     MM:      Mono-Alu        hiuru'Licuala lauterbachii' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                   comm.)
PEOc *piRu(q) 'fan palm, umbrella palm' (Geraghty 1990)
  SES: Gela            vilu        'species ofpalm with umbrella-like leaves'
  SES: Lau            filu         'umbrella palm'
  SES: Kwaio          filu         'wild palm species used to make bows'
  SES: Kwara'ae       filu         'Pritchardia pacifica'
                          filu tali'Licuala lauterbachii'
  SES: Sa'a                hilu     'a ridge covering of sago-palm leaves, laid on fiat'
  SES: 'Are'are            hiru     'a palm tree with digital leaves, used for making
                                   bows'
  SES: Arosi          hiru          'a palm sp. used in making a war-bow'
  NCV: Volow          (n-ye)ploy   'Licuala sp., Pritchardia pacifica' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Mota           vi loy        'an umbrella palm; a frond ofthat palm used as an
                                   umbrella'
  NCV: Do rig         (dii)vlu     'Licuala sp., Pritchardia pacifica' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Merlav         (du)vluy     'Licuala sp., Pritchardia pacifica' (Fran9ois 2004)
  SV:    Sye          (lu)vor      'Pritchardia pacifica'
  NCal: Xaracuu       pii           'a kind of palm tree'
PCP *viu 'fan palm, umbrella palm, Pritchardia pacifica'
  Fij:   Bauan        viu          'Pritchardia pacifica'
  Pn:    Tongan       piu          'Pritchardia pacifica'
  Pn:    Niue an      piu          'Pritchardia pacifica'
  Pn:    E Uvean      piu          'Pritchardia pacifica'
  Pn:    E Futunan piu              'fan palm'
  Pn:    Samoan       piu          'Pritchardia pacifica'
  Pn:    Tokelauan piu             'Pritchardia pacifica'
>

[26] Polynesian terms reflect PPn *piu where t*.fiu is expected.

                                                                     Primary rain forest    223



7.6 The shrub layer

The shrub layer is usually patchy because of lack of sunlight. A few small trees, up to a height
of around 15m, grow here, as well as Calamus (§6.3.1), bamboos (ch.l3, §3.1) and gingers
(Henderson & Hancock 1988: 320).

7.6.1 Woody shrubs

7.6.1.1 Abroma augusta (Sterculiaceae)

Abroma augusta is a small shrub 1-2m tall, more common in the highlands ofNew Guinea
than in lowland forests (French 1986, Peekel1984: 373). On Malaita its white bark is used to
make hanging baskets (Kwa'ioloa & Burt2001: 160). In parts ofNew Britain its bast provides
rope for pig nets and for lashing house components and material used in making clothing,
and bags (Powell1976, Lentfer 2003).

    Reflexes of POe *wasi-wasi 'Abroma augusta' are found with this meaning only in Near
Oceania. In Remote Oceania the name denotes a large forest tree, Sterculia vitiensis (ch.
11, §2.6), which does not occur in NW Island Melanesia. Will McClatchey (pers. comm.)
suggests that the change in denotation was mediated by the fact that S. vitiensis is also a
source of fibre.

<
POe *wasi-wasi 'Abroma augusta'
  MM: Kara (E)       (ka)us-vas          'Abroma augusta'
  MM: Patpatar       was-was             'Abroma augusta'
  MM: Nehan          ase-is              'Abroma augusta'
     SES:   Kwara' ae kwasi-kwasi       'Abroma augusta'
PROc *wasi-wasi 'Sterculia vitiensis' (from data in Wheatley 1992, Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: NE Ambae wah-wah                 'Sterculia vitiensis'
  NCV: Tangoa         (vitu)vaha        'Sterculia vitiensis'
  NCV: Raga           wahi-wahi         'Sterculia vitiensis'
  NCV: Apma           wah-wah           'Sterculia vitiensis'
  NCV: Tape           (van)woso-wos 'whitewood'
  SV:  Sye            wo- wo            'Sterculia vitiensis'
  SV:  Lenakel       na-vha-vha         'Sterculia vitiensis' 27
  SV:  Anejom        n-wo8-wa8          'Sterculia vitiensis'
  Fij: Buca Bay       waoi-waoi         'Sterculia vitiensis' (J. Parham 1972) (Buca Bay is
                                        in V anua Levu)
>

224     Malcolm Ross



7.6.1.2 Angiopteris evecta (syn.A. erecta) , mule's foot fern (Marattiaceae)

The plant with the largest fronds (1.5m long) on New Ireland, Angiopteris evecta is a large
fern common in shady inland forest. The fronds rise from a massive rootstock, fleshy and
moist, but fragrant when dry (Peekel1984: 30). Because oftheir moisture, the Kwara' ae lay
them out around garden boundaries to soften the soil in the belief that this will improve the
quality ofthe taro (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 211).

<
PCP *nas( e,i) 'edible roots of certain plants ?' POLLEX2
  Fij:   Bauan          naoi          'the greater roots ofthe yaqona plant'
PPn *nas(e,i) 'giant fern, Angiopteris evecta, with edible root'
  Pn:    Samoan         nase          'the giant ferns A. evecta and Marattiafraxinea '
  Pn:    Marquesan nahe, nahi 'root eaten in times of scarcity'
  Pn:    Rarotongan na?e              'Angiopteris evecta'
  Pn:    Tahitian       nahe          'Angiopteris evecta'
>


7.6.1.3 Donax cannaiformis (syn. Clinogyne grandis, Maranta grandis, Thalia cannaeformis, Actoplanes cannaiformis, Donax arundastrum) (Marantaceae)

A leafy shrub, Donax cannaeformis has a rhizome from which rise erect smooth stems 1.5-3 m
tall with spreading branches about 85 em long. It has elliptical leaves often with yellowish-
white patches and white flowers and fruits, and grows in damp locations (Peekel1984: 111).
Its range is from SE Asia to the Solomons.

     As the glosses below indicate, its stems are used in thatching, basket-making and as arm-
lets.




[27] The spelling n<>-vha- vha represents an attempt to interpret Wheatley ' s ( 1992) nawhawha and is not necessarily
accurate .

                                                                                Primary rain forest   225


<
PMP *niniq 'plant sp., Donax cannaeformis, used as material for making baskets ' (Blust
  1989, ACD)
POe *nini(q) 'shrub, Donax cannaeformis'
  MM: Bola             (natala)nini 'Donax cannaeformis'
  MM: Marovo           nina         'Donax cannaeformis'
  MM: Ririo            nina         'Donax cannaeformis' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                    comm.)
  MM: Babatana         nine         'Donax cannaeformis' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                    comm.)
  SES: Gel a           nini         'sp. of bush used in wristlets'
  SES: Lau             nini         'sp. of shrub; stems used in thatching'
>


7.6.1.4 Garcinia spp. (Clusiaceae)

Garcinia species grow in all sizes from small shrubs to tall canopy trees. The best known
species is G. mangostana, the mangosteen, which grows up to 25 m high, but this is not
indigenous to Oceania. The only indigenous species reported by Peekel (1984: 376-377) in
the Bismarcks is G. novo-guineensis (syn. G. warburgiana ), a tree just 5-10 m tall with small
white flowers . It contains, especially in the roots, yellow latex which is used on New Ireland
for painting ancestor pictures. This yellow is greenish and lighter than that from Curcuma
(ch.l3 , §5.1).

    Another species found in NW Island Mellanesia is G. pseudoguttifera (syn. G. pancheri),
a tree up to 25m high (Wheatley 1992: 112). It is not found in the Bismarcks but occurs from
Bougainville to Tonga. It has edible fruit and displays the considerable variation that reflects
former cultivation (Walter & Sam 2002). Taller Garcinia species appear to play a greater
role in the rain forests ofBougainville than of the Bismarcks (Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg
1998: 61).

    Wood from an unnamed Garcinia species is used for axe handles on New Britain and
for rafters both there and in the Admiralties (Floyd 1954, Arentz et al. 1989, O' Collins &
Lamothe 1989).

     Very little information is available to help us determine the denotata of the species below,
but it is a reasonable inference that POe *bulu denoted the small Garcinia novo-guineensis,
as this is present in the Bismarcks (and is the gloss ofthe Motu reflex).

<
POe *bulu 'Garcinia sp., perhaps G. novo-guineensis'
  PT:    Motu         bio-bio       'Garcinia novo-guineensis' (Lane-Poole 1925)28
  SES: Kwara' ae      (?ai) bulu    'Diospyros maritima'
  SES: Lau            (?ai) bulu    'Diospyros maritima'
  NCV: Vera' a        wu-wul        'Garcinia pancheri' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Lakon          vu-vul        'Garcinia pancheri' (Fran9ois 2004)
  Fij:   Bauan        bulu          'Garcinia spp.' (Keppel et al. 2005)
>

[28] In Motu POe *-l- > -i- before *i. Hence *bulu > *buiu > *biu, then (irregularly) > bio.

226    Malcolm Ross


The denotatum of PWOc *tabun was probably a large canopy tree. Muyuw tob is a large
canopy tree with stilt roots, an apt description of G. latissima (Conn & Damas 2006). Tolai
tabu-tabun is glossed G. scaphopetala, which grows to 30 m. 29

<
PWOc *tabun 'Garcinia sp.'
 PT:    Muyuw       tob                      'large (25m) Garcinia sp. with aerial roots'
 MM: Tolai          tabu-tabun               'Garcinia scaphopetala' (Record 1945)
>

The tree designated by PSV *n-mobwol was evidently also a large species, as G. sessilis and
G. platyphylla are both canopy trees.

<
PSOc *mab(w)ola 'Garcinia sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mota          maploa         'a tree, with smooth scented leaves and bark'
PSV *n-mobwol 'Garcinia sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:   Sye          mompol         'Garcinia sessilis'
  SV:   Anejom       n-mopwol(hat) 'Garcinia platyphylla'
>


7.6.1.5 Phaleria spp. (Thymelaeaceae)

Peekel (1984: 393) describes Phaleria coccinea as a climbing shrub, 2-4m high, with white
flowers and red berries. No term is reconstructable earlier than PEOc *sinu, glossed 'shore
tree with scented white flowers' by Geraghty (1983). The Bauan gloss points to a taxon of
shrubs whose sap causes irritation, including species of Phaleria, an inference supported by
the Tongan and Samoan glosses.

    If the NW Solomonic items under 'cf. also', all glossed Cominsia gigantea (Marantaceae)
(a leafy shrub), are cognate, then POe *jinu is reconstructable but with uncertain denotation.


<
PEOc *sinu 'taxon of shrubs whose sap causes irritation, including species of Phaleria'
  (Geraghty 1983: 139)
  SES: Gela            sinu            'k.o. shore tree'
  Fij:   Wayan         sinu            'small coastal tree, Excoecaria agallocha, with
                                       acrid milky sap, capable of blinding'
  Fij:   Bauan         sinu            'generic name for several trees whose sap is
                                       irritating, including Phaleria spp.'
  Fij:   Rotuman       huni            'flowering bush, Phaleria disperma' (metathesis: Pn
                                       borrowing)
PPn *sinu 'Phaleria sp.'
  Pn:    Tongan        huni            'flowering bush, Phaleria disperma' (metathesis)
  Pn:    Niuean        huni            'various kinds of plants with clustered flowers'
                                       (metathesis)
  Pn:    E Futunan sinu                'a flowering shrub, Hoya bicarinata'
  Pn:    W Futunan sinu                'a tree whose sap is said to cause blindness'
     Pn:      Ifira-Mele      sinu                  'a tree with irritating sap'
     Pn:      Emae            sinu                  'a tree sp.'
     Pn:      Samoan          suni                  'Phaleria disperma; taxon of flowering shrubs, inc.
                                                    Phaleria spp., introduced Ixora spp. and Hoya
                                                    australis' (Whistler 2000: 198-199) (metathesis)
cf. also:
     MM:      Babatana        zi-zinu (mesara)      'Cominsia gigantea' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
     MM:      Nduke           zinu                  'Cominsia gigantea'
     MM:      Roviana         zinu                  'Cominsia gigantea'
     MM:      Marovo          sinu                  'Cominsia gigantea'
>

[29] However, I am inclined to doubt the accuracy of the gloss, since (i) Peekel does not list this species and (ii)
herbarium specimens are all from Bougainville.

                                                                                  Primary rain forest   227




7.6.1.6 Semecarpus forstenii, poisonwood, B naolasi, posentri, posenwud (Anacardiaceae)

Semecarpusforstenii is a shrub or small tree 3-10m tall, with a corrosive black sap which de-
stroys skin and inflicts painful wounds. Peeh:l calls it '[t]he most feared tree in the Bismarck
Archipelago' (Peekel1984: 328, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 121-122).

     S. vitiensis (syn. S. laxiflora) is a medium-sized tree up to 25 m in height, but it has a
black sap with similar effects to that of S.forstenii (Wheatley 1992: 38).

     The distribution of the two species seems to be complementary: S.forstenii in the Bismar-
                                                                                     °
cks and the Solomons and the larger S. vitiensis in Vanuatu and Fiji. 3 For this reason I infer
that POe *walasi denoted S.forstenii. POe *lasi is listed by Tryon (1994) as 'Antiaris toxi-
caria', a gloss maintained by Lynch (2002a), but this seems incorrect in view ofthe reflexes
listed here. 31

     The presence of -i- in Kwaio and Kwara'ae kwailasi and Lau koilasi probably reflects a
folk etymology which interprets the first syllable as kwai 'river, water' ( < POe *waiR), but
there is no other evidence to suggest that this is the origin of POe initial *wa-. Indeed, it is
possible that this folk etymologising accounts for the loss of *wa- in a number of reflexes.

<
PMP *laji 'tree sp. with poisonous sap, Antiaris toxicaria (?))'(Blust 1986, ACD) 32
POe *walasi 'tree sp. with poisonous sap, Semecarpusforstenii'
  Adm: Loniu            walas        'a long seagrass which grows on sandy area near
                                     shore'
  NNG: Takia            walas        'tree sp.'
  PT:    Molima         we nasi      'Semecarpus sp.'
  MM: Patpatar          (i)walas     'Semecarpus forstenii'
  MM: Tolai             ola          'Semecarpus forstenii'
  MM: Gao               na-ulahi     'Semecarpus forstenii' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                     comm.)
  MM:      Maringe          n-olahi         'Semecarpusforstenii' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                            comm.)
  SES: Kwaio         kwailasi               'Semecarpus sp.'
  SES: Lau           koilasi                'Semecarpus sp.'
  SES: Kwara'ae      kwailasi               'Semecarpus forstenii'
  SES: Arosi         warasi                 'sp. of tree with edible yellow fruit'
  SES: Sa'a          lasi                   'tree sp. with juice causing sores'
PSOc *walasi 'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Mwotlap       leh            'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Mota          las             'tree sp.'
  NCV: NE Arnbae walahi             'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Nokuku        aulasi         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Kiai          olasi          'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Araki         (vi)olas       'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Tamambo (vu)alasi             'tree sp.'
  NCV: Sakao         elai           'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Raga          walahi         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: Labo          na-walas       'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCV: S Efate       n-las          'Semecarpus vitiensis'
PSV *na-yilas 'Semecarpus vitiensis' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye          no-ule         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  SV:   Lenakel      ni-lha         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  SV:   Anejom       ne-yla8        'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCal: Pije         wiinit         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCal: Iaai         (i-o )unic     'Semecarpus vitiensis'
  NCal: Nelemwa      wddric         'Semecarpus vitiensis'
>

[30] But Hviding (2005: 107) does not give sufficient information to identify the species at Marovo.

[31] See also the discussion of some ofthe items in this cognate set in Chowning (2001).

[32] Wolff (1994) argues that this term should not be reconstructed for PMP as the non-Oceanic items have
denotata unconnected with S.forstenii. However, the ACD includes Belau ias 'Excoecaria agallocha', a tree
that also has toxic sap, thus supporting the PMP form.

228    Malcolm Ross



7.6.2 Leafy shrubs

The only wild leafy shrub for which a reconstruction has been made isHornstedtia lycostoma.
The genera Alpinia and H eliconia also belong here, but no reconstruction of a name for an
Alpinia species is supported by the data. Heliconias are also cultivated, and are treated in
ch.l3, §6.5.

7.6.2.1 Hornstedtia lycostoma (syn. H. scottiana) (Zingiberaceae)

Hornstedtia lycostoma is a leafy shrub, 3-6m tall, a tall wild ginger with long leaves and red
flowers that issue directly from the stem (Figure 7.11, left). The edible seeds are sweet and
are gathered especially by children who sometimes eat so many that they become constipated
(Powell1976, Peekel1984: 105-106, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 195 Hviding 2005: 110).

<
POe *dali-dali 'Hornstedtia lycostoma'
  MM: Patpatar        dal-dal       'Hornstedtia lycostoma'
  MM: Tolai           (ta)dal-dal 'Hornstedtia lycostoma'
  MM: Ramoaaina dal-dal             'a plant'
  MM:      Maringe         da-dali          'Hornstedtia lycostoma' (Henderson & Hancock
                                            1988)
   SES:    Kwara' ae       ka-kali          'Hornstedtia lycostoma' (Henderson & Hancock
                                            1988)
  Fij:     Wayan           dali-dali        'Polyscias sp.'
>

                                                                           Primary rain forest   229



7.6.3 Climbers and epiphytes

7.6.3.1 Calamus spp., rattan, lawyer cane, TP kanda, P loeaken (Arecaceae)

There is a sense in which rattan could be assigned to the canopy, as it uses canopy trees
as hosts and sometimes climbs as high as 50 m. At the same time, it is not a tree and it is
convenient to treat it alongside other non-treelike plants.

    Peekel (1984: 61) describes two very similar species of rattan, Calamus hollrungii (Fig-
ure 7.11 , right) and C. ralumensis. They are spiny climbing palms from the vines of which
curved thorns protrude to attach it to the host. C. hollrungii is recorded throughout NW Island
Melanesia, whereas C. ralumensis is reported only by Peekel and only on the Gazelle Penin-
sula of New Britain. This raises the possibility that it is identical with C. stipitatus, which oc-
curs throughout the Solomons and is described as similar to C. hollrungii but having longer,
narrower leaflets and a somewhat thinner vine (Henderson & Hancock 1988:208-211 , Hvid-
ing 2005: 134, 147). Rattan appears not to have been present in Remote Oceania until re-
cently.

    Reports from the north coast of New Britain say that pieces of rattan are used for ar-
rowheads, for the binding on arrows, for adzes, for bowstrings and bow bracers, in boats
for lashings, bindings and braces and for the anchor cable, in houses for tying and plaiting,
and for personal adornment as armbands and armlets, belts, necklaces and headbands (Floyd
1954, Powell 1976). A similar range of uses of the cane is reported elsewhere. Hviding re-
ports that split lengths of C. stipitatus are used for sewing roofs and sewing sago-leaf panels
in house construction. Unsplit lengths make ropes for heavy tasks like pulling a dugout ca-
noe from its construction site down to the beach. C. hollrungii has similar uses, according to
Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 205). Hviding mentions that it is used to make tongs to pull items
from the hot stone oven. Other parts of the plant are also used. The Bola make wall insula-
tion from the leaves, sometimes eat the young shoots, and use the sap for various medicinal
purposes. At Kwara' ae the thorns are used as tattooing needles.

    POe *qu(w)e 33 presumably denoted all of the two or three species mentioned above.

[33] It is not clear whether POe *-w- was phonemic in this environment.

<
PAn *quay 'rattan, Calamus sp. ' (AcD)
POe *qu(w )e 'rattan, Calamus spp.' (Grace 1969)
  PT:   Gapapaiwa        kuvei        'rattan'
  PT:   Wedau            uwe          'rattan'
  PT:   Bwaidoga         uwe          'rattan'
  PT:   Dobu             ?uwe         'rattan '
  PT:   Minaveha         ue           'rattan'
  PT:   Taw ala          kuwe         'rattan'
     PT:      Suau (Saliba) kuwe                 'vine type, used for tying sago leafs to roof of
                                                 bushmat1;:rial houses'
     MM:      Bola              hue              'Calamus hollrungii'
     MM:      Nakanai           hue              'a thorny rattan, Calamus sp.'
     MM:      Lavongai          ue               'rattan'
     SES:     Bugotu            yue              'Calamus hollrungii, C. stipitatis and C. vestitus'
                                                 (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
     SES:     Gel a             yue              'rattan'
     SES:     'Are'are          uwe              'a liana'
     SES:     Arosi             ?ue              'rattan'
     SES:     Sa'a              ue               'rattan cane' (AcD)
>

230        Malcolm Ross


7.6.3.2 Dendrocnide andLaportea spp., nettle trees, TP salat,filas, Bnanggalat (Urticaceae)

Dendrocnide and Laportea species are nettles, i.e. plants with stinging hairs, often grouped
together in the literature as 'nettles' or 'nettle trees'. The hairs remain in the skin, enabling
the toxin in them to spread. Those mentioned below range from the 40-metre canopy tree
D. excelsa to the small stinging herb L. interrupta. They are included here as shrubs simply
because this is where a majority of their tokens belong.

    Until1965 the members of both genera were considered to belong to the genus Laportea,
but, as a footnote by the translator, E.E. Henty in Peekel (1984: 151) explains, the genus
Laportea was revised by Chew ( 1965), removing woody species from it and placing them in
a new genus Dendrocnide. At the same time the genus Fleurya was abandoned and its species
transferred to Laportea. Laportea are monoecious herbs whilst Dendrocnide are dioecious
shrubs or trees. 34 In both genera the fruit is dry and has a single seed.

    Species of Laportea and Dendrocnide are often not distinguished by the glosses in the
cognate sets below, but this at least in part reflects the usage of the terms. Wheatley ( 1992: 240)
reports that in Vanuatu languages generally there is a single term for all Dendrocnide species,
despite the fact that in Vanuatu they vary in size from the shrubby D. latifolia, which occa-
sionally grows to 10 m but is usually smaller, to the 25 m canopy tree D. moroides.

    Dendrocnide species are much better described in the literature than Laportea species,
presumably because the latter are simply regarded as nuisance weeds. Species mentioned in
the glosses below are, roughly from largest to smallest:
       • D. excelsa (syn. L. gigas), the giant stinging tree, is a tree of the forest canopy, up to
         40 m tall, with dull green heart-shaped or round leaves covered with stinging hairs. 35
       • D. harveyi (syn. D. milnei, L. harveyi, L. milnei), a tree up to 20m tall, apparently found
         only in Fiji and western Polynesia.
       • D. latifolia, a small shrubby tree, occasionally with a straight bole and reaching 10 m,
         but usually smaller. It is common in secondary forest. It has a serious sting, the pain of
         which lasts for days (Wheatley 1992:238, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 154, Scales n.d.).

[34] Dioecious: a single plant is male or female. Monoecious: a single plant has reproductive units of both sexes.

[35] http: I /www. brisrain. web central. com. au/, accessed 10 November 2007 (Brisbane Rainforest Action
and Information Network).

                                                                          Primary rain forest      231


Figure 7.11 Left H ornstedtia lycostoma: A, plant, about 3 m high, with suckers and inflorescences;
B, inflorescences; C, longitudinal section oflarge fruit. Right Calamus hollrungii, rattan: A, leaf base
and spikes; B, inflorescence; C, fruit; D, portion of leaf tip with barbs.


    • D. sessiflora (syn. L. sessiflora), a shnub or small tree 3-10 m high with a mild sting
      (Peekel1984: 153).
    • L. interrupta (syn. Fleurya interrupta, Urtica interrupta) resembles a small European
      stinging nettle with a serious sting, and is cultivated and eaten by the Tolai of the
      Gazelle Peninsula ofNew Britain (Pee:kel1984: 157).
Apparently none of the trees is used for timber, but Ann Chowning (pers. comm.) reports
that on New Britain Nakanai and Meramera speakers dry Laportea bark over a fire and use
it for roofs and walls. Wheatley (1992: 240) comments that D. moroides (syn. L. moroides),
a canopy tree of 25 m found in central Vanuatu, is considered useless because the wood is
very soft and rots quickly. The leaves and bark of a number of species have medicinal uses.
The leaves of a Dendrocnide species were used medicinally on Manam Island. They were
boiled in water or with grated coconut to cure constipation or general seediness (Wedgwood
1934: 286--287). Peekel (1984: 151) notes that the finely chopped leaves of D. longifolia (a
shrub or small tree, 3-5m high) were mixed in to dogs ' food to make them hunt more keenly.
D. latifolia was used in much the same way on Mwotlap, except that here the recipients were
warriors: they were given a soup made from the leaves to render them quicker tempered and
stronger in battle (Wheatley 1992: 238).

232   Malcolm Ross


     Several forms below reflect PAn *late!J with a prefixed syllable: POe *ja-lato!J, PAdm
*la-lato!J, *fia-lato!J, PNCV *ga-lato!J. The existence of the various prefixed forms indicates
that unprefixed *lato!J was also inherited into POe, and this is borne out by a single unprefixed
reflex below: Kove lato. POe *jalato!J, the most widely reflected form, must also have been
inherited, as non-Oceanic reflexes occur. Apart from a few languages in the extreme north of
Vanuatu-Vures, Mwesen, Dorig, Merlav-which reflect the prefix *ja- regularly (Fran9ois
2004), most known reflexes in Vanuatu, listed separately below, reflect *ga- 'tree'.

<
PAn *late!J 'stinging nettle tree, Laportea harveyi' (Blust 1972b)
PMP *zalate!J 'Laporte a and Dendrocnide spp." (Dempwolff 193 8)
POe *[ja]lato!J 'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Milke 1961: *salato!J; Ross 1989)
PAdm *lalato, *fialato 'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Lou              lalat        'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Wuvulu           lala?o       'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Kele             lulat        'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Lenkau           lalatr       'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Seimat           nalat        'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Bipi             fialak       'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Loniu            fialat       'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Leipon           fiilet       'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Ndrehet          nolok        'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.' (Blust 1996b)
PWOc *[ja]lato!J 'nettle tree, Dendrocnide sp., perhaps D. warburgii'
  NNG: Kove             lato         'Dendrocnide excelsa' (Chowning 2001: 83)
  NNG: Takia            dalat        'nettle tree'
  NNG: Manam            zalato       'tree sp. which causes itching, cooked and eaten
                                     after maternity, used as a medicine'
  NNG: Sissano          talat        'nettle plant; poison oak tree'
  MM: Nduke             zilatOIJO    'Laportea interrupta and L. ruderalis'
  MM: Marovo            zilato!Jo    'Laportea interrupta and L. ruderalis'
  MM: Roviana          jilato!Jo     'k.o. nettle'
PEOc *[ja]lato 'nettle tree, Dendrocnide sp.'
  SES: Gela             (ha!Ja)lato  'Dendrocnide sp.(W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Sa'a             (nunu)lao    'nettle tree'
  SES: Ulawa            (du)lao      'nettle tree'
  SES: Arosi            darao        'k.o. nettle'
  NCV: Vures            silat        'Dendrocnide sp. (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Mwesen           sa/at        'Dendrocnide sp.' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Do rig           (o)slat      'Dendrocnide sp.' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Merlav           ne-silat     'Dendrocnide sp.' (Fran9ois 2004)
  SV:    Sye            n-elyat      'Dendrocnide sp.'
  Fij:   Wayan          salato       'Dendrocnide harveyi' (Geraghty 2004: 83)
  Fij:   Bauan          salato       'Dendrocnide harveyi' (Geraghty 2004: 83)
  Pn:    Samoan         salato       'Dendrocnide harveyi' (Whistler 2000: 196)
>

<
PNCV *ga-lato 'nettle tree' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: Mwotlap          na-hlat        'Dendrocnide spp.'
  NCV: Mota               kalato        'nettle trree '
  NCV: NEAmbae            kalato        'Dendrocnide latifolia'
  NCV: Nokuku             elat          'nettle trree '
  NCV: Araki              kalaro        'Dendrocnide sp. '
  NCV: Tamambo            (vu)kalato    'nettle 1tree'
  NCV: Raga               gala to       'Dendrocnide latifolia'
  NCV: Uripiv             gelat         'nettle trree '
  NCV: Labo               na-!Jgalate   'stinging nettle '
  NCV: Lonwolwol          gela[r,t]     'stinging leaf bush'
>

                                                                      Primary rain forest       233


    Clark (1996a) plausibly suggests that PNCV *kara reflects POe *kaRat 'bite', and the
final-t of Big Nambas n-harat appears to support this etymology.

<
POe *kara(t) 'a small stinging plant, perhaps Laportea interrupta' (Chowning 2001: 83)
  NNG: Kove               gala           'a stinging plant related to lato (D. excelsa)?'
  MM: Tolai               kara           'stinging nettle spp., D. sessiflora, L. interrupta'
  NCV: Tape               na-xarat       'stinging nettle '
  NCV: Big Nambas         n-harat        'stinging nettle '
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-xer              'stinging nettle '
  NCV: Paamese            a-ai           'devil nettle (Dendrocnide sp.)'
  NCV: Lewo               ke             'nettle '
  NCV: Namakir            kar            'nettle tree '
  NCV: Nguna              na-kara        'nettle tree '
>


7.6.3.3 Lygodium spp. (Lygodiaceae)

Ferns of the genus Lygodium are climbing vines which wind around tree trunks. Peekel
(1984: 27, 30) writes that L. circinnatum (syn. L. dichotomum, L.jiexuosum) grows 3-6m
long, L. trifurcatum, more delicate than L. circinnatum, grows 3-5m high, and L. scandens
(syn. L. microphyllum) 1-3m long.

    All are apparently used as binding material. The thicker L. circinnatum and, among the
Roviana, L. trifurcatum are used for binding outrigger booms . The more delicate L. scandens
is used in weaving, for tying bundles and as circlets for the arm or leg (Waterhouse 1949,
Arentz et al. 1989: 93).

<
PMP *qaRsam 'fern sp. ' (AcD)
POe *qasam 'fern used for tying and binding, Lygodium circinnatum' (ACD, Chowning
  2001: 83)
  MM: Nakanai        hara           'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM: Kara (E)       kasom          'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM: Patpatar       sam            'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM: Patpatar       sam-sam        'Lygodium scandens'
  MM: Tolai          em             'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM: Tolai          em-ien         'Lygodium scandens'
  MM: Tangga         as em          'the Lygodium creeper'
  MM: Nehan          heham          'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM:       Petats          aisam             'Lygodium circinnatum'
  MM:       Tinputz         a sam             'Lygodium circinnatum' (Blackwood 1935)
  MM:       Mono-Alu        asam a            'a creeper species ' (Record 1945)
  MM:       Marovo          amasa             'creeping coastal fern, Lygodium sp. (metathesis)'
  MM:       Roviana         asam a            'a trailing fern, Lygodium trifurcatum '
  SES:      Gel a           aha               'species of creeper used for stringe '
  SES:      Tolo            asa               'vine sp. used to bind canoes and weave baskets '
  SES:      Kwara' ae       sata              'Lygodium scandens' (Whitmore 1966)
>

234    Malcolm Ross



7.6.3.4 Merremia spp. (Convolvulaceae)

M erremia peltata (syn. Operculina peltata, Convulvulus peltatus, Ipomoea peltata) is a woody
liana found throughout the rain forest, but it is particularly abundant in disturbed forest areas.
The vine has the thickness of a human arm and grows 15-50 m high, with white-yellowish
funnel-shaped flowers that resemble Morning Glory (Peekel 1984:467, Pawley & Sayaba
2003, W. McClatchey, pers. comm.).

    According to Peekel M. peltata vines are used as binding material in circumstances where
the fastening does not need to be durable. Hviding (2005: 124) reports from Marovo that older
thicker vines contain a milky sap that is good for stopping blood flow in an emergency.

    The Meso-Melanesian forms below other than Tolai valearu reflect POe *paliaRa, but
reflexes of *paliaRua are found in New Ireland, southern Vanuatu and Fiji, and I take this to
have been the POe form.

<
POe *paliaRua 'a vine, Merremia peltata'
  MM:       Nakanai         valiala           'a vine, Ipomoea sp. ' (Floyd 1954)
  MM:       Kara (E)        viliai            'Merremia peltata'
  MM:       Madak           leale             'Merremia peltata'
  MM:       Patpatar        haliara           'M erremia peltata'
  MM:       Tolai           valear[ a,u]      'M erremia peltata'
  MM:       Ramoaaina       waliara           'a creeping plant'
  SV:       Sye             (nos- i )vilyau   'M erremia peltata'
  Fij:      Wayan           veliawa           'Merremia peltata' [36]
>


7.6.3.5 Asplenium nidus, bird's nest fern (Aspleniaceae)

The bird' s nest fern, Asplenium nidus, usually grows as an epiphyte on the trunks or branches
of trees in the rain forest or mangrove swamp. It has large simple fronds visually similar to
banana leaves, growing to 50-150 em long and 10--20 em broad. The fronds are light green,
often crinkled, with a black midrib. The fronds grow in clusters and roll back as they tum
brown, creating a massive leaf nest where they are attached to the tree. It is an ideal under-
storey plant, as it thrives in warm, humid habitats in partial or full shade (Peekel 1984: 17,
Hviding 2005: 124).

    The POe term was *pwete.


[36] J. Parham (1972) gives Fijian veliyawa ' M. pacifica' and viliviwa 'M. peltata ' but does not name dialects.

                                                                          Primary rain forest     235


<
POe *pwete 'bird ' s nest fern, Asplenium nidus'
  MM:      Patpatar       pate           'Asplenium nidus'
  MM:      Tolai          pete           'Asplenium nidus'
  NCV:     Mota           puyet          'Asplenium nidus'
  NCV:     Dorig          bit            'Asplenium nidus' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV:     Lakon          puit           'Asplenium nidus' (Fran9ois 2004)
>


7.7 The forest floor

Because it receives little light, the forest floor is often almost bare of plants that depend for
their existence on photosynthesis. The lower parts of trees and the debris offallen trunks and
branches, however, provide a home for fungi of various kinds.

    The generic term for mushrooms and fleshy fungi was POe *tali!Ja (Ch 3, §4. 7), formally
identical to *tali!Ja 'ear' and presumably reflecting a perception that some fungi resemble
the human ear. Blust (2000) points out that more detailed descriptions specify the referent
of *tali!Ja reflexes as jelly fungus , which do not have the umbrella-like shape of a mush-
room but 'sprout directly from the trunks of dead trees as a collection offolded tissues which
may appear cup-like or ear-like' . Their names include reference to 'ear' in a number of cul-
tures around the world. In Austronesian languages, including some in Oceania, the name
also specifies the ear's owner. Since they grow on tree bark, they are sometimes named 'tree
ear' . Whether one should therefore reconstruct POe *tali!Ja qi kayu 'tree fungus ' (lit. 'ear of
tree ' ) is a little debatable. This may well have been a POe locution, as Blust also notes its
occurrence in non-Oceanic Austronesian languages, but it may also have been coined more
than once in the history of Austronesian languages. Most of the terms below are from Blust
(2000).

  Adm: Mondropolon can-n-i kei    (cane-n 'her/his ear' )
  SV:  Anejom      in-tic!Ja-nyai 'mushroom (arboreal)' (cf. in-yai 'tree')
  Pn:  Maori       tari!Ja rakau

    Some jelly fungi are named 'rat ear', apparently because oftheir shape:

  NCV: Paamese     rali!Je-n asu     'kind of fungus which grows on dry wood'
  Mic: Marshallese l:xil!Ji-n kicrik 'toadstool, Auricularia amp/a, and other ear-like
                                     Basidiomycetes (fungi)'
  Pn:  Rarotongan tari!Ja kiore      'fungus sp. which grows on decaying trees '
  Pn:  Tuamotuan tari!Ja kiore
  Pn:  Maori       tali!Ja ?imoa

    A number of Oceanic terms translate as 'ghost ear'. Blust suggests that this reflects their
spiritual significance, associated with the hallucinogenic properties of some fungi and with
their sudden appearance after a thunder storm-which also accounts for the 'thunder ear'
terms below. The distribution of'ghost ear' terms perhaps justifies the reconstruction ofPOc
*tali!Ja qi qanitu, literally 'ear of spirit of dead ', but the term for 'spirit of dead' varies across
languages.

236     Malcolm Ross


  Adm:     Seimat       taxi!J i paxi    (lit. 'ear of ancestral spirit' )
  Mic:     Po nape an   sale!J en eni
  Mic:     Mortlockese sadi!Ja-n anu     'mushroom' (lit. 'ear of ghost')
  Mic:     Puluwatese hadi!Ja?-n hooma? 'tree fungus , mushroom' (hooma? 'bad ghost of
                                         dead ''
  Mic:     Chuukese     seni!Je-r sooma?
  Fij:     Rotuman     falia!J ne ?atua  'toadstool or fungus '
  Fij:     Bauan       dali!Ja ni kalou
  Pn:      Tikopia      tari!Ja !Ja atua

      The data below support a PMic reconstruction.

<
PMic *tali!Ja ni para 'fungus growing on tree trunks ' (lit. 'ear of thunder')
  Mic:     Kiribati     tani!Ja ni pa   'mushroom-like fungus growing on tree trunks,
                                        Myxomycetes: slime fungus ' (ba 'thunder' )
  Mic:     W oleaian    tali!Je-ri-pa(: 'mushroom' (pa(: 'thunder' )
  Mic:     Satawalese   sali!Ja-ni-pa(: 'kind oftoadstool'
>

   In our data sources terms for different kinds of fungus tend to be very few, and only one
reconstruction is offered, based on work by French-Wright (1983).

<
PWOc *kokoi 'mushroom sp.' (French-Wright 1983)
  NNG: Kove              koko           'edible mushroom sp.' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  PT:  Bwaidoga          kokoio         'mushroom or toadstool sp.'
  MM: Petats             koko           'mushroom or toadstool'
>



8 Wild plants ofsecondary lowland rain forest and grassland


8.1 Introduction

The plants treated in this chapter grow in secondary lowland rain forest or in grasslands,
i.e., in the forest which regrows on old fallow areas and on the grasslands that appear when
regrowth doesn' t occur. The dominant characteristics of secondary forest plants are that they
do not grow large enough to become canopy trees and they are intolerant of shade-they
need sunlight (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 323). As long as secondary regrowth remains
low enough in stature, they survive, but when they lose their dominance to taller trees typical
ofthe primary rain forest canopy, they cease to reproduce at that location (see ch.2, §3.2.2).

     If, as seems to be the case, there was little or no agriculture in the Bismarck Archipe-
lago before the arrival ofthe ancestors of Proto Oceanic (POe) speakers (see ch.2, §4 ), then
one might infer that there was no secondary regrowth and no grassland in the region in POe
times. However, regrowth would certainly have occurred in New Britain in the wake of vol-
canic eruptions which must on occasion have wiped out tracts of primary forest. 1 Because
grasslands occur primarily in drier areas, there is still very little grassland in the Bismarcks.

     If, then, there was relatively little secondary forest in the Bismarcks-and what there
was would ultimately have returned to primary forest-where were today ' s secondary forest
trees located? They would have grown in locations with sufficient gaps in the canopy to let
in sunlight. The more salt-tolerant grew on the coastal edge of the littoral forest, and others
grew along river and stream banks. The immediate pre-Oceanic inhabitants of the Bismarcks
appear to have led fairly sedentary lives and probably sometimes replanted useful trees closer
to their dwellings (see discussion inch. 2, §4). Very little is known about their lifestyle except
by inference, but they presumably lived in clearings, perhaps especially on low hilltops, and
these would also have provided environmen1cs for some oftoday' s secondary forest trees.

[1] Further south, in the Solomons and especially in Vanuatu, tracts of primary forest are frequently damaged or
destroyed by cyclonic storms, providing an environment for secondary regrowth, but the weather closer to the
equator is considerably calmer in this regard (see vol.2, ch.5).

238   Malcolm Ross


    One thing is clear: most of the species treated in this chapter were known to POe speakers
and must have been accessible to them, otherwise POe terms would not be reconstructable
in the quantity that they are.


8.2 Trees and shrubs

8.2.1 Acalypha spp., copper leaf, Bredlif (Euphorbiaceae)

Peekel (1984: 308-309) distinguishes three shmbs of the genus Acalypha, namely A. longi-
spica, A. grandis and A. wilkesiana, all in the 2--4 m range. The first two are indigenous to
the Bismarcks, the last an import from Fiji. They have hairy twigs, their flowers grow in long
spikes, and two ofthem, A . grandis and A. wilkesiana, have red leaves.

    A. longispica is common in secondary forest. A. grandis is grown as an ornamental shrub
in New Ireland, but the Kwarae ' ae take short poles from it, using them in small buildings, to
stake yams and to plant living pig fences (Kwa''ioloa & Burt 2001: 148).

    POe *ka[(r,l)a]qabusi appears to have denoted a taxon including at least A . longispica
and A. grandis. The syllable *-(r,l)a- is absent from the PMM form, but present in PEOc. It
may or may not have been present in POe. Weakly supported PEOc *(k)a(r,l)adro!J appears
also to have denoted one or more Acalypha species. The two PEOc etyma apparently share
the initial element *ka(r,l)a- , with an ambiguous liquid: North/Central Vanuatu and Kiribati
reflexes point to *-r-, SE Solomonic and Tongan to *-1-, and other Polynesian languages
to either. South Vanuatu languages reflect *-n-, which I take to be an idiosyncratic local
innovation.

    Whistler (199lb: 51-52) glosses the Tongan reflex 'eat' s tail' (pusi 'cat' ), arguing that as
the cat was a European introduction to Tonga, the name must be post-contact. However, this
cognate set gives the lie to this interpretation.

<
POe *ka[(r,l)a]qabusi 'Acalypha spp.'
PMM *kaqabusi 'Acalypha spp.'
  MM: Kara (E)         kavus               'Acalypha longispica' (zero for t-1- or t-r-)
  MM: Lihir            buis                'Acalypha wilkesiana'
  MM: Patpatar         kakabus             'Acalypha longispica' (zero for t-1- or t-r-)
  MM: Kia              yabusi              'Acalypha grandis' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Maringe          yabusi              'Acalypha caturus' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
PEOc *ka(r,l)aqabusi 'Acalypha sp. '
  SES: Kwara' ae       ?alabusi            'Acalypha grandis'
  NCV: Neve ' ei       no-xorabis          'tree sp.' (J. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Big Nambas n-iraJ                   'hardwood tree sp. used for digging sticks'
                                           (J. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Uripiv         n-orsus              'Acalypha sp.'
PSV *na-yniabwus 'Acalypha sp.'
  SV:   Sye           no-ynompi            'Acalypha sp.'
  SV:   Anejom        ne-yftopwoe          'Acalypha sp.'
PCP *ka(r,l)aqabusi 'Acalypha spp.'
  Fij:   Wayan         karabusi            'Acalypha repanda'
  Fij:      Bauan       karabuoi          'Acalypha insulana, A. grandis, A.wilkesiana'
  Pn:       Tongan      kala-kala?apusi   'Acalypha spp.' ( -s- fort-h-)
  Pn:       Anutan      kara-karapui      'Acalypha grandis'
  Pn:       Tuvalu      kala-kalapuhi     'Acalypha grandis'
  Pn:       E Futunan   kala?apusi        'Acalypha grandis'
  Pn:       E Uvean     kalapuhi          'Acalypha grandis'
  Pn:       Tikopia     karapusi          'Acalypha hispida and Macaranga spp.'
>

                                                     Secondary forests and grasslands     239


<
PEOc *(k)a(r,l)adro!Ja 'Acalypha sp.'
  SES: Ulawa            alado!Ja     'Acalypha sp.' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  Mic: Kiribati                      'Acalypha amentacea'
>


8.2.2 Alphitonia spp. (Rhamnaceae)

Trees of the genus Alphitonia are sub-canopy trees which are conspicuous because of their
light grey bark and leaves which are shiny brown or green on the upper surface but grey, white
or silver underneath with brown veins (Peeh:l1984: 345). The Bismarcks species named by
Peekel are A. macrocarpa, 8-10 m tall, and Al. excelsa, 10--20 m tall. Apparently very similar
to the latter are A. incana (syn. A. philippensis) and A. zizyphoides (whitewood, B waetwud,
huremi), the latter growing up to 30 m tall. Found respectively in NW Island Melanesia and
from Vanuatu to eastern Polynesia, they are important in house construction and in tradi-
tional medicine. The leaves were used as soap (Powel11976, Whistler 1991b: 126, Wheatley
1992: 193-195, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 116, Thomson & Thaman 2006).

    IfLukep (Pono) (NNG) doi 'Cerbera manghas' is cognate (the two trees are of similar
size and have similarly shaped leaves), then POe *doi is reconstructable, but only with the
vague sense 'a medium-sized tree sp.'.

<
PCP *doi 'Alphitonia spp.'
  Fij:   Wayan        doi             'Alphitonia zizyphoides and A.franguloides'
  Fij:   Bauan        doi             'Alphitonia excelsa'
  Pn:    Tongan       toi             'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  Pn:    Niuean       toi             'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  Pn:    E Futunan toi                'tree sp.'
  Pn:    E Uvean      toi             'Alphitonia excelsa'
  Pn:    Samoan       toi             'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  Pn:    Rarotongan toi               'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
  Pn:    Tahitian     toi             'Alphitonia zizyphoides'
cf. also:
  NCV: Raga             dovae         'Alphitonia zizyphoides' (Walsh 2004)
>

240   Malcolm Ross


8.2.3 Commersonia bartramia (Sterculiaceae)

Commersonia bartramia is a common small
bushy tree which grows up to 15m in height,
and is particularly common in secondary for-
est. It has a thin trunk, often crooked or leaning
when it is competing with other trees for light
(Wheatley 1992: 221).

     C. bartramia grows fast and, if the light al-
lows it, straight, and is thus a valued timber in
the Bismarcks and the Solomons, as it provides
numerous rafters. The wood is lightweight,
tough, cardboard-like and termite-proof. How-
ever, the Kwara' ae regard it as good only
for building cookhouses. On New Britain and
in the Solomons it is regarded as good fire-
wood. In both the Bismarcks and the Solomons
the bast (inner bark fibre) is an important
source of cordage, used to make fishing lines,
nets and baskets, and among the N akanai the
bast is beaten into masks (Floyd 1954, Pow-
el11976, Peekel1984: 371, Henderson & Han-
cock 1988: 194, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 160).

     The POe term for C. bartramia was *Ja-
maR. The Mwotlap, Mota and Vera' a reflexes
include a reflex of the prefix *mala- 'like '. One   Figure 8.1 Commersonia bartramia: A, tree;
would thus expect them to denote a plant that         B, leaf: C, stem bearing leaves and flowering
resembled C. bertramia, but they apparently                    shoot; D, ageing mature fruit.
denote C. bertramia itself (ch.2, §7.1.4).

<
POe *JamaR 'Commersonia bartramia'
  MM: Marovo          Jamar a    'Commersonia bartramia' (Henderson & Hancock
                                 1988: 194)
  TM: Natiigu        tame-tame   'Commersonia bartramia' (Henderson & Hancock
                                 1988: 194)
  SES: W Guadalcanal Jemara      'Commersonia bartramia' (borrowed from a NW
                                 Solomonic language)
  SES: Kwara' ae     da-dame     'Commersonia bartramia' (Henderson & Hancock
                                 1988: 194)
  SES: Kwaio         da-dame     'Commersonia bartramia'
  SES: Lau           da-dame     'Commersonia bartramia'
  NCV: Mwotlap       na-(may)ham 'Commersonia bartramia'
  NCV: Mota          (mara)sama 'Commersonia bartramia'
  NCV: Vera' a       (mar)sama   'Commersonia bartramia'
  SV:  Sye           ne-hemar    'Commersonia bartramia'
  Fij: Bauan         sam a       'Commersonia bartramia' (Keppel et al. 2005)
>

                                                     Secondary forests and grasslands     241



8.2.4 Glochidion philippicum, little cheese tree, Bnamalao (Euphorbiaceae)

The little cheese tree, Glochidion philippicum (syn. G. ramiflorum ), grows 10--20 m tall, and
is common in secondary forest. Its fruit are dry greyish green disc-like capsules shaped like
a Dutch cheese round or a flattened Australian pumpkin, which split open to reveal red or
orange seeds (Peekel 1984: 295).

    The dark brown wood is strong and durable and provides houseposts and other house
members at least in Kwara' ae and in parts of Vanuatu (Wheatley 1992: 93-95, Kwa' ioloa &
Burt 2001: 112). The Kwara' ae also plant it to form living fences . Among the Nakanai the red
seeds provide a dye and the sap provides caulking material and is mixed with clay to make a
paint for decorating canoes (Floyd 1954). The bark has medicinal uses (Record 1945).

    The POe term *mwala(q)u almost certainly denoted the Bismarcks species G. philippicum.
Of the other two species represented, G. stipulare is apparently limited to Vanuatu and G.
perakense is not reported from the Bismarcks.

<
POe *mwala(q)u 'Glochidion philippicum' (Paul Geraghty: *m(e,o)la(q)u, see Lynch
  2001c: 240)
  PT:    Muyuw       (ya)manau 'Garcinia sp. ' (Damon 1995)
  MM: Madak          (vap)mala     'Glochidion philippicum, G. gimi '
  MM: Patpatar       malau         'Glochidion philippicum'
  MM: Tolai          malau         'Glochidion philippicum'
  MM: Teop           muaeru        'Glochidion sp.'
PROc *mwala(q)u 'Glochidion spp. '
  NCV:    Mwotlap    maluw          'Glochidion spp.'
  NCV:    Mota       malao          'tree sp.'
  NCV:    Apma       ma-mlah        'Glochidion spp. '
  NCV:    Raga       mwa-mwalau 'Glochidion stipulare (?)' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV:    Paamese    maiao          'Glochidion spp.'
PSV *na-mel(p)au 'Glochidion spp. ' (Lynch 2001c)
  SV:   Sye          na-melpau 'Glochidion philippicum' (-p-is unexplained)
  SV:   Anejom       na-mlau        'Glochidion perakense'
  Fij:  Bauan        molau          'Glochidion sp.'
>

    PWOc *jimwaR or *jimiR in all probability denoted the caulking substance made from
Glochidion sap rather than the tree itself, but in some languages the word has been applied to
the tree. The distribution of reflexes ofthe alternants *jimwaR (NNG, PT) and *jimiR (NNG,
MM) makes it difficult to know which was the earlier form. However, the Meso-Melanesian
reflexes are from languages close to the boundary between Meso-Melanesian and North New
Guinea, raising the possibility that the MM forms are borrowings from NNG. This would
leave *jimwaR as the more probable PWOc form.

242    Malcolm Ross


<
PWOc *jimwaR or *jimiR 'sap used for caulking' (Ross 1988: 79) 2
 NNG: Malai          dimir               'caulking material'
 NNG: Gitua          simer               'caulking material'
 NNG: Malalamai simai                    'putty nut, Parinarium laurinum ' (Lincoln 1976)
 NNG: Tami          jim                  'caulking material'
 NNG: Mangap         zim                 'tree sp.; sap ofthis tree sp., used as glue and as
                                         caulking'
 NNG: Lukep          dim                 'caulking material'
 NNG: Numb ami dimila                    sap, putty, 'caulking material'
 NNG: Gedaged        dim                 'tree, bark used as putty'
 NNG: Takia          dim                 'tree sp., resin used as putty and as glue to mix with
                                         paints '
 NNG: Wab            lim                 'caulking material'
 NNG: Mindiri        dim                 'caulking material'
 NNG: Dami           dimi                'caulking material'
 PT:    Muyuw        (a )sim wal(gay as) 'Glochidion sp. ' (Damon 2004)
 MM: Bola            dimi                'Glochidion sp. ; the sap is mixed with red clay to
                                         make canoe paint'
 MM: Nakanai         gimi                'Glochidion sp. '
>


8.2.5 Macaranga spp., P sa 'osa 'o, Bnavenue (Euphorbiaceae)

There are a number of species of M acaranga growing
in the Bismarcks and the Solomons and appearing as the
glosses of items in the cognate sets below, but they are
all rather similar. All are shrubs or small tre1es, usually
5-10 m and occasionally 15 m tall. Their saplings need
light and do not flourish in primary forest, so they are
found where the habitat is more open and oflten in gar-
den regrowth or secondary forest (Powell 1976, Peekel
1984:305-207, Henderson & Hancock 1988: 196-197,
Wheatley 1992:99-101 , Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 147,
Hviding 2005: 109, 148).

    From the Bismarcks to Vanuatu much the same uses are Figure 8.2 M acaranga tanarius.
reported for M acaranga species. The lightweight wood is
used for rafters, wall frames and roof battens where better timber is not available, and for
cages for pet birds. The wood is fast-burning and good for roasting food . The leaves are used
to clean children's noses and for personal hygiene. Additionally the Bola of New Britain use
the wood for outrigger booms, the leaves for wrapping, and the fruit for medicinal purposes
(Lentfer 2003 , Powell1976).

[2] In Ross (1988) the items here glossed ' caulking material ' were glossed 'putty nut' , but this was an error, as
more recently available references to the caulking material indicate that it is the sap of a Glochidion species,
not of Parinari. Reflexes of *jimiR listed there included Tabar cim, Lamasong, Madak, Barok sim, all ' canoe' .
They are excluded here because of the doubtful semantic connection.

                                                      Secondary forests and grasslands    243


    The only species singled out for more detailed description in the sources is M. tanarius,
which occurs with green or red leaves, up to 30 em in diameter, the veins of which radiate
out from a point just off the centre where the petiole is attached. Its tiny cream flowers form
large clusters. A bundle ofleaves worn around the neck serves as perfume, and the leaves are
among those rubbed on the body before ceremonial dancing (Record 1945, Peekel1984: 307,
Wheatley 1992: 101).

    Four reconstructions are offered, two for POe, two for PWOc, and all with the meaning
'Macaranga spp. ' . They are POe *koka, POe *pinu(q)an, PWOc *bara and PWOc *kobo. Of
these the only one for which a more specific denotatum can be inferred is POe *pinu(q)an,
glossed as 'taxon of Macaranga spp. , perhaps M . involucrata' .

    POe *koka probably denoted several Macaranga species. Known reflexes with this mean-
ing are found in New Ireland (MM) and in the Banks Islands of extreme north Vanuatu
(NCV). The distribution of the items in the set below suggests that the term was reapplied
to Bischofiajavanica (ch.7, §5 .1) in Eastern Oceanic. The grounds for the reapplication are
unclear, as Macaranga species are 5-10 m tall, whereas Bischofiajavanica is a canopy tree
up to 30m.

<
POe *koka 'Macaranga spp. '
  MM: Patpatar          koka         'Macaranga quadriglandulosa'
  MM: Tolai             koko         'Macaranga quadriglandulosa'
  SES: Kwara' ae        ?o?a         'Glochidion angulatum'
  NCV: Hiw              na-ynya      'Macaranga tanarius'
  NCV: Mwotlap          no-yoy       'Macaranga tanarius'
PEOc *koka 'tree sp., Bischofiajavanica' (POLLEX)
PCP *koka 'tree sp. , Bischofiajavanica' (see ch.7, §5.1)
>

    PMP *binu(q)an below is reconstructed on the basis ofthe Oceanic data and ofTagalog
binua!J 'M. tanarius, M. grandifolia' (Madulid 2001 b: 191 ).

<
PMP *binu(q)an 'Macaranga spp., perhaps M. involucrata'
POe *pinu(q)an 'Macaranga spp., perhaps M. involucrata'
  MM: Solos          hunuan       'Macamnga spp.'
  SES: Gela          vinua        'Macamnga tanarius' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                  comm.)
  SES: Ghari         venua        'Macamnga involucrata'
  SES: Kwara' ae fino-fino        'Macamnga aleuritoides'
                     (ta!Ja )fino 'Macamnga aleuritoides'
  SES: Kahua         hinua (goro) 'Macamnga involucrata' (Henderson & Hancock
                                  1988)
  NCV: Mota          vin-vin      'a tree '
  NCV: NEAmbae vinue              'Macamnga involucrata'
  NCV: Nduindui      venue        'Macamnga involucrata' (Wheatley 1992: 99)
                     venue (hoe) 'Macamnga tanarius' (Wheatley 1992: 101)
  NCV: Uripiv        ne-vnu       'Macaranga sp.'
  NCV: Naman         ni-vnu       'Macaranga sp.'
  NCV: Neve'ei       ni-vinu      'Macaranga sp.'
  NCV: Larevat          na-vanu        'Macaranga sp.'
  NCV: Nese             ne-yine        'Macaranga sp. '
  NCV: Paamese          hinu (ahen)    'Macaranga involucrata' (Wheatley 1992: 99)
                        hinu (wa)      'Macaranga tanarius' (Wheatley 1992: 101)
  NCV: Lewo             (puru)venua    'a tree'
>

244    Malcolm Ross


<
PWOc *bara 'Macaranga spp. '
  NNG:     Maenge       vala-vala      'Macaranga spp.'
  PT:      Misima       (e)bal         'Macaranga tanarius'
  MM:      Tolai        bara-bara      'M acaranga sp. ' (Record 1945)
  MM:      Patpatar     (pala)bara     'M acaranga aleuritoides'
  MM:      Petats       vana-van       'Macaranga aleuritoides' (Record 1945)
  MM:      Teop         bana-bana      'Macaranga aleuritoides' (Record 1945)
>

     There are formal questions associated with the reconstruction of PWOc *kobo 'taxon of
M acaranga spp. ' . First, Far-east Manggarai, Razong, Rembong (all CMP) kebak 'M acaranga
tanarius' (Verheijen 1990: 226) is probably cognate with the items below. If so, we would
expect a POe form t*koba(k) rather than *kobo, so final PWOc *-o may represent an idiosyn-
cratic innovation. Second, *kobo seems to have been confiated with *kope 'bamboo sp.' (see
ch. l3, §3 .1) in Motu.

<
PWOc *kobo 'taxon of Macaranga spp.'
 PT:   Muyuw        (a)kobwow        'Macaranga tanarius'
 PT:   Motu         kohe             'Macaranga tanarius' (for tkobo)
 MM: Bola           ko-kobo          'Macaranga aleuritoides'
 MM: Nakanai        ko-kobo          'Macaranga tanarius'
                    ko-kobo( -kiuka) 'Macaranga aleuritoides, with deeply serrated
                                     leaves '
 MM: Kara(E)        (va )kof         'Macaranga quadriglandulosa '
                    (va )kof(se)     'Macaranga urophylla '
>


8.2.6 Pipturus argenteus (syn. P. velutinus, P. incanus, Urtica argentea, U incana) (Urticaceae)

Pipturus argenteus is a small tree, 3-6 m tall, growing mainly in secondary forest. It has a
short bole and leaves which are dark green on the upper surface and greyish green to silver
underneath. The small white fruits are edible and sweet, but are not harvested systematically:
they are eaten by children or as a bush snack. The bast is a useful cordage material, but the
timber is used if at all for temporary shelters. It is unsuitable for house-building and is poor
firewood , because it refuses to bum and because the smoke is an irritant (Peekel1984: 153,
Whistler 1991b: 99, Wheatley 1992, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 157, Thieberger 2006b) . In
Papua New Guinea the leaves are sometimes eaten, but it is not clear whether this includes
locations in the Bismarcks (French 1986:90, May 1984: 63). Arentz et al. (1989: 91) report
that in part of New Britain an infusion ofthe leaves is used against a cough.

                                                             Secondary forests and grasslands         245


    The POe term for Pipturus argenteus was *qaramwaqi. Both instances of *q require com-
ment here.

    Blust (ACD) reconstructs PMP *adamay without initial *q-, but adds that if Sundanese
haramay 'Boehmeria nivea' (a member of the family Urticacea) is cognate, then the recon-
struction will be *qadamay. The Kara, Patpatar, Notsi, Pije, Nelemwa and Tongan reflexes
also reflect *q- , and it is thus reasonable to infer that the PMP form was *qadamay.

    There is disagreement among cognates with regard to the final *-aqi of POe *qaramwaqi.
Blust reconstructs the final *-ay ofPMP *adamay with no *-q- on the basis ofCebuano handa-
lamay 'Pipturus argenteus' , Maranao aramai 'Pipturus arborescens' and the Sun danese re-
flex above, and so putative POe *-q- must be a post-PMP innovation. PMP *-ay is normally
reflected as POe *-e, but Raga, Sye and                 -ai reflect POe *-aqi, not *-e. POe *-q- is
also reflected in Kara kaimek and Patpatar karanek, which sporadically retain it as k. POe
*-aqi is also arguably the source of -e in Marshallese arm we and of long -e in Wayan rome.
Against the reconstruction of *-aqi are the Seimat, Apma, S Efate and all Central Pacific
reflexes other than Wayan. Geraghty (1990: 55) accounts for long final -a in Central Pacific
reflexes by reconstructing PEOc/PCP *(q)aromwaRa. PEOc *-R- is usually lost in PCP but
occasionally retained as *-/-, which, Geraghty suggests, is reflected in NE Viti Levu !Jala
'Pipturus sp.' (1990: 91). However, shorn of not just one but two syllables, this is a ques-
tionable reflex, and so I reconstruct PCP *qaromw(e,a) . The ambiguity of the final long vowel
is due to the disagreement between Wayan -e and Lau Fijian and Polynesian -a. Geraghty
is right, however, to take the long final vowel seriously, and it is not clear to me how this
innovation arose.

<
PMP *qadamay 'Pipturus argenteus' (ACD)
POe *qaramwaqi 'Pipturus argenteus' (Geraghty 1990: PEOc *(q)aromwaRa)
  Adm: Seimat              ahoma           'a small tree, from the bark of which fishing lines
                                           and nets are made' (Sorensen 1950)
  MM:      Kara (E)        kaimek          'Pipturus argenteus'
  MM:      Notsi           karamet         'Pipturus argenteus' ( -t unexplained) (Holdsworth
                                           et al. 1978)
  MM:      Patpatar    karanek             'Pipturus argenteus' 3
  NCV:     Vera' a     demie               'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCV:     Raga        adomai              'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCV:     Apma        odomwa              'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCV:     S Efate     na-"rmwa            'Pipturus argenteus'
  SV:      Sye         na-nmai             'Pipturus argenteus'
  SV:      Anejom      ne-lmwai            'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCal:    Pije        hahmwe              'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCal:    Nelemwa     hdlamwi             'Pipturus argenteus'
  NCal:    Iaai        arma                'Pipturus argenteus'
  Mic:     Kiribati    aroma               'Pipturus argenteus'
  Mic:     Marshallese arm we              'Pipturus argenteus'
>

[3] Medial-n- ofPatpatar karanek may represent an unexplained irregularity or may be a transcription error in
Peekel (1984:153).

246       Malcolm Ross


<
PCP *qaromw(e,a) 'shrub or tree sp., Pipturus sp.; bark used for cordage'
  Fij:    Wayan           rome            'generic for three spp. ofUrticaceae: Boehmeria
                                          virgata, Leucosyke corymbulosa and Pipturus
                                          argenteus'
  Fij:    Lau             ro!Jti          'Pipturus sp.' (Geraghty 1990: 91)
PPn *q[ a,o ]lo!Jti 'shrub or tree sp., Pipturus sp.; bark used for cordage' 4
  Pn:     Tongan          ?olo!Jti        'Pipturus argenteus'
  Pn:     Nukuria         olo!Jti         'Pipturus sp.'
  Pn:     Takuu           arona           'plant sp'
  Pn:     Luangiua        lolo!Ja         'tree sp., fishing-line from bark.'
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele      ro!Jti          'Pipturus sp.'
  Pn:     Rarotongan ?oro!Jti             'Pipturus argenteus'
  Pn:     Tahitian        roo?a           'Pipturus sp.'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan ro!Jti                'Pipturus incanus var. tuamotensis'
  Pn:     Marquesan hoka                  'shrubs or small trees, Pipturus spp.)'
>


8.2.7 Rhus taitensis (syn. R. retusa, R. rufa), P a.kwasi (Anacardiaceae)

                                                      Rhus taitensis is a tree which grows to 10--15 min
                                                      secondary forest. At flowering time it is covered in
                                                      white flowers. This is a deciduous tree, and when
                                                      the leaves are ready to fall, they tum bright red
                                                      (Peekel1984: 325).

                                                          In New Ireland fishing net floats are made from
                                                      the white wood. When it is cut down and has
                                                      dried out, it splits exceptionally easily, but has few
                                                      uses. In Kwara'ae the tree is a source of protein
                                                      food in the form of the grubs of a caterpillar that
                                                      feeds on it (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 108). On New
                                                      Hanover (immediately to the north of New Ireland)
                                                      the young shoots are eaten by women to induce
                                                      abortion and used for a variety of medicinal pur-
                                                      poses (Holdsworth et al. 1982)

                                                          The premier uses of R. taitensis, however, all
                                                      have to do with producing black colouring materi-
                                                      als. In Marovo pandanus leaves are stained black
                                                      by boiling them in a mixture that includes pounded
                                                      R. taitensis leaves and a particular seaweed. Gard-
                                                      ner & Pawley (2006) report a similar process from
    Figure 8.3 Rhus taitensis: A, tree; B,            W aya Island, where the dye was also used to
    stem bearing leaves; C, branch bearing            blacken hair. The charcoal of R. taitensis was an
                    fruit.                            ingredient in the black putty used for the caulking
                                                      and glossy surface finish of war canoes in Marovo

[4] PPn *-l- for t*-r- is attested by Tongan -l- for tzero.

                                                              Secondary forests and grasslands           247


Lagoon (Hviding 2005: 131). In parts of the Solomons the pounded charcoal is mixed with
Macaranga urophylla to make paint. In Tonga it was used in hair dye (Whistler 1991b: 121).

    A number of groups in Indonesia and Melanesia practised ritual tooth-blackening as part
of initiation, and this was perhaps also a custom among Proto Oceanic speakers (Chowning
1991: 48-49).5 Across southern New Britain the blackening material was mineral (probably
manganese). In Malaita it was made from R . taitensis, and made the teeth shiny black and
allegedly strong. The veins and stems were removed from the leaves, and what remained
was roasted in bamboo, then pulverised. This powder was mixed with a crushed blue-black
powdery rock known as oko, and a chemical reaction produced a black mixture which was
cooked further to produce a viscous dye which was coated onto the subject' s teeth and left
there for a week (during which the subject ate no solid foods) . Occasionally the black would
wear off after a few weeks, but usually it remained for life (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 238,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 108 ; see also vol.l , ch.4, §5.3).

<
POe *tawasi 'Rhus taitensis'
  MM:      Lavongai        tuas             'Rhus taitensis'
  MM:      Kara (E)        (ma )rawas       'Rhus taitensis'
  SES:     Kwara' ae       akwasi           'Rhus taitensis'
  SES:     Kwaio           akwasi           'Rhus taitensis' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES:     Lau             ?akwasi          'Rhus taitensis'
  SES:     Santa Ana       awasi            'Rhus taitensis'
  Fij:     Wayan           tawa(rau)        'Rhus taitensis' (obsolete term; Gardner & Pawley
                                            2006)
PPn *tawahi 'Rhus taitensis' (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Tongan         tavahi       'Rhus taitensis'
  Pn:   Niuean         tavahi       'Rhus taitensis'
  Pn:   Rennellese tabai            'Rhus taitensis'
  Pn:   Samoan         tavai        'Rhus taitensis'
  Pn:   Tahitian       avai         'a large: timber tree'
  Pn:   Maori          tawai        'large trees, Nothofagus (southern beech) spp.).'
>


8.2.8 Trema orienta/is (syn. T. scaberrima. T. aspera) (Ulmaceae)

Trema orienta/is is a secondary forest tree growing as tall as 12 m, with shiny bright green
twigs and egg-shaped leaves, rough and dark green on the upper surface, pale green under-
neath (Peekel 1984: 131 ).

   On the north coast of New Britain the bast serves as material for canoe lashings and for
making nets to catch birds and pigs and the bark is used to wrap pork and vegetables for
cooking. The wood is used for beams and as firewood (Powell1976). Wheatley (1992: 237)
reports similar uses from Vanuatu.

[5] Chowning (pers . comm.) reports the custom in southern New Britain and up into the Gazelle Peninsula, in
the D'Entrecasteaux Archipelago and in parts of the Solomons. She gives a cognate set supporting PWOc
*tapal(a), denoting the blackening material or the process: Tolai taval, Molima tavana, Roviana davala (d- for
t t-) (Chowning 1991: 48--49).

248    Malcolm Ross


    Blust (AcD) reconstructs PWMP *deRu!J on the basis of western Malaya-Polynesian re-
flexes alone. The reflexes below show that POe *droRu(!J) 'Trema sp.' is reconstructable and
thus that Blust's reconstruction should be re-labelled as PMP.

<
PMP *deRu!J 'Trema orienta/is' (Verheijen 1984; ACD: PWMP)
POe *droRu(!J) 'Trema orienta/is'
  MM:       Roviana         do-doru          'tree, possibly Trema sp. (bark taken off in sheets)'
  NCV:      Vera'a          do-ndo           'Trema orienta/is' (Wheatley 1992: 237)
  NCV:      Raga            dou-dou          'Trema sp.' (Walsh 2004)
  SV:       Sye             ne-nro!J         'Trema cannabina' (J. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  Fij:      Wayan           drou             'Parasponia andersonii'
  Fij:      Bua             [drou- ]drou     'Trema amboinensis' [6]
>

[6] J. Parham (1972). Bua is on Vanua Levu.


8.2.9 Trichospermum spp. (syn. Althoffia, Grewia) (Tiliaceae)

                                       Peekel records two species of Trichospermum in
                                      New Ireland, T. peekelii (syn. T.fauroensis, T. psilo-
                                       cladum) in the north and T. pleiostigma (syn. T.
                                       quadrivale, Althoifia tetrapyxis) in the south, with an
                                       overlap in the Madak-speaking area.
                                           Both species grow to 10--20 m and have a single
                                       stem with radial branches which form a roundish to
                                       conical crown. When it is in bloom, the crown is cov-
                                       ered in fllowers and is a white mass with a sweet smell
                                      which reaches quite a distance. Because the saplings
                                       are shade-intolerant, they tend to occur in secondary
                                       regrowth, although individual specimens may attain
                                       canopy height and survive-but they are unable to re-
   Figure 8.4 Trichospermum richii.
                                      produce .

    The two species provide straight poles for rafters. They are also good firewood and are
among the species that were used as fireploughs. The bark can be pulled off in strips and
is used for carrying bundles of garden produce or wood, and to cover house entrances and
as roofing for temporary shelters. The Kwara'ae used it to make warriors' shields (Peekel
1984:357, Wheatley 1992:233, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 136--137).
    POe *maRako 'Trichospermum peekelii' is an unproblematic reconstruction.

<
POe *maRako 'Trichospermum peekelii' (Geraghty 1990: PEOc)
  MM:       Lavongai        ma!JaU           'Trichospermum pleiostigmum' 7
  MM:       Kara (E)        maiau            'Trichospermum peekelii'
  MM:       Madak           (vap)ma          'Trichospermum peekelii'
  SES:      Gela            malayo           'sp.        tree'
  SES: Kwara' ae    mala?o        'Trichospermum peekelii'
  SES: 'Are ' are   marako        'tree sp., a twig ofwhich is used to indicate a taboo '
  SV:   Anejom      n-may         'Trichospermum inmac' (Wheatley 1992: 233)
PCP *mako 'Trichospermum richii' (for expected t*mako)
  Fij:  Wayan       mako          'tree, probably Trichospermum richii'
  Fij:  Bauan       mako          'Trichospermum richii'
  Pn:   Samoan      ma?o          'Trichospermum richii, Melochia odorata etc. '
  Pn:   Tikopia     mako          'tree sp. ofthe woodland ; wood occasionally used
                                  for outriggers'
  Pn:   W Futunan mako            'tree with yellow blossom'
  Pn:   Tahitian    mao           'tree name, bark used as dye '
  Pn:   Hawaiian    ma?o          ' Gossypium tomentosum, Abutilon incanum'
  Pn:   Maori       mako-mako 'wineberry, Aristotelia serrata '
>

[7] Given Peekel's comment that T. pleiostigma is restricted to the south of New Ireland, T. peekelii to the north,
this identification may be incorrect.

                                                      Secondary forests and grasslands        249




8.3 Grasses

Although grasslands are rare in the Bismarck Archipelago, grasses of course grow there,
especially on the edges of forests, around garden clearings and in secondary forest. The most
common grass in the Bismarcks is Paspalum conjugatum (Figure 8.5, left), which can grow
to a metre high (Peekell984: 48), but it appears to have been introduced from theN ew World
(R. Gardner, pers. comm.). Evans (ch.3, §4.5) reconstructs POe *pali[s,j]i 'generic term for
grasses and other grass-like plants' . She notes that the generic term for a taxon quite often
represents an extension of the meaning of a term for a particular and salient subtaxon. There
is flimsy evidence that the Proto Remote Oceanic reflex of *pali[sj ]i was not only the generic
but by this time denoted the creeping beach grass, Thuarea involuta, known in Hawai' i as
kuroiwa grass. This is its specific denotation in both Mwotlap (NCV) and Woleaian (Mic).

     Two less widely reflected terms, the refllexes of which are generic terms for grass, are
POe *rabum and *(quta)quta.

<
POe *rabum 'grass'
  NNG:    Mapos         dbu           'grass in general; grass used for thatching a house '
  PT:     Magori        rabu(na)      'grass '
  MM:     Vitu          rabu-rabu     'grass '
  TM:     Nagu          lepmtt        'grass '
  TM:     Nebao         abama         'grass '
  TM:     Asuboa        l:Jbum:J      'grass '
  TM:     Tanibili      ubom:J        'grass '
  TM:     Burna         ab:J          'grass '
  TM:     Vano          abume         'grass '
  TM:     Tanema        abo me        'grass '
>

<
POe *(quta)quta 'grass and weeds (generic)'
  NNG: Takia            ud            'grass and weeds (generic)'
  MM:     Nakanai      huta-huta     'small plants and leaves' (A. Chowning, pers.
                                     comm.)
  MM:     Tabar        ot-ot         'grass and weeds (generic)'
  Mic:    Kiribati     ute-ute       'grass (generic)'
>

250   Malcolm Ross




                                                                                 Scm



Figure 8.5 Left Paspalum conjugatum. Middle Imperata cylindrica, sword grass. Right Coix
lachryma-jobi, Job's tears.





   In Proto Remote Oceanic, *mwanaya, anothe:r apparently generic term for grass occurred.
This quite possibly also denoted a specific but now uncertain subtaxon.

<
PROc *mwanaya 'grass' (Clark 1996a: PNCV *mwanai)
  NCV:   Raga          mwanea        'grass'
  NCV:   Avava         mwana         'grass'
  NCV:   Nati          no-mwonei     'grass'
  NCV:   Paamese       munai         'grass'
                               .
  NCV:   Lewo          ma-m 1m       'grass'
  NCV:   Nguna         na-mwenau     'grass'
  SV:    Lenakel       n-mwania      'kangaroo grass, Themeda triandra (?)'
  Mic:   Kiribati      maunei        'Cyperus laevigatus and Eleocharis geniculata'
>


8.3.1 !mperata cylindrica (syn. I. arundinacea), sword grass, blady grass, cogon grass, TP kunai (Poaceae)

Alongside P. con} ugatum, grasslands in NW Melanesia are dominated by sword grass (I mperata
cylindrica), kangaroo grass (Themeda australis) and Pennisetum polystachion. The most
common of these in the Bismarcks, and the only one of the three for which a POe term
is reconstructed, is sword grass (Figure 8.5, middle).


                                                       Secondary forests and grasslands     251


    I. cylindrica (known as alang-alang in Malay), a vigorous grass 1-2m high, is widespread
in the Bismarcks. It is the tallest of the grasses, grows densely and spreads easily (Peekel
1984:46, Hviding 2005: 141-142). Its use in roofing is reported from New Britain to Waya
Island, Fiji (Lentfer 2003, Gardner & Pawley 2006).

    Three POe etyma can be reconstructed with the denotatum I. cylindrica, namely *Reqi(t),
*guRu(n) and *pitu . Both have non-Oceanic cognates denoting the same species, and any
difference in their usages is unknown.

    By far the most frequently reflected etymon is *Reqi(t). POe *guRun has scattered re-
flexes .

    Blust (Acn) reconstructs PAn *Riaq 'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica' on the basis of
Formosan reflexes. Whether PCEMP *Reqi is an irregular development from this, I do not
know. This reconstruction is attributed to PCEMP on the basis of Far East Manggarai ri?i
(Verheijen 1990:221 ), Sasak re, Rotinese li (all CMP), all 'sword grass, I mperata cylindrica' .
Roviana and Marovo have the form rekiti, reflecting earlier *rekit, but this appears to be an
unsourced borrowing, as (i) the regular           of POe *-q- is zero and (ii) other languages
which regularly retain a final POe consonant (Diodio, Wedau and Tawala) do not retain it
here. The expected reflex in Roviana and Marovo is trei, found in their close relative Nduke.
All other languages in this cognate set with a non-zero reflex of POe *-q- reflect it regularly:
no reflexes other than Roviana and Marovo r,equire the reconstruction of *-k- in this etymon.

<
PCEMP *Reqi 'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica'
POe *Reqi 'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Tuam           reg                'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Gitua          rek                'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Lukep          rei                'I mperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Takia          rei                'I mperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Wogeo          lei                'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Kaiep          rei                'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Kairiru        ryek               'I mperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Ulau-Suain     ri                 'I mperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Kela           (ri)ri             'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Numbami        lei                'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Mumeng (Patep) hey                'I mperata cylindrica'
  NNG:    Maenge         lai                'Imperata cylindrica'
  PT:     Diodio         leyi               'grass '
  PT:     Taw ala        lei                'I mperata cylindrica'
  PT:     Kilivila       lei                'I mperata cylindrica'
  PT:     Muyuw          li-lei             'Imperata cylindrica'
  PT:     Motu           rei                'Imperata cylindrica'
  PT:     Balawaia       leyi               'grass '
  PT:     Hula           leyi               'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Bali           re-reke            'Imperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Bola           reyi               'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Tigak          gi                 'Imperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Kara (E)                          'Imperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Tabar          ri-ri              'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Lihir          le                 'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:     Bilur          re                 'Imperata cylindrica'
  MM:      Tinputz              nee             'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:      Nduke                rei             'I mperata cylindrica'
  MM:      Roviana              rekiti          'Imperata cylindrica' (for trei: borrowing?)
  MM:      Marovo               rekiti          'Imperata cylindrica' (for trei: borrowing?)
  SES:     Gel a                lei-lei         'I mperata cylindrica'
  SES:     Kwara'ae             lai             'I mperata cylindrica'
  SES:     Arosi                rei             'I mperata cylindrica'
  Mic:     Mokilese             re              'k.o. grass'
>

252    Malcolm Ross


   It is probable that the Central Papuan (Taboro, Hula, Motu and Doura) forms in the set
below reflect borrowing from an intrusive Papuan Tip language, as they reflect *k- rather
than *g- (Ross 1994b: 408).

<
PMP *guRun 'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica' 8
POe *guRu(n) 'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:     Kilenge        na-yu           'Imperata cylindrica'
  NNG:     Maenge         gur-gur         'grass'
  PT:      Taboro         kuru-ru         'Imperata cylindrica'
  PT:      Hula           uru             'species of grass'
  PT:      Motu           kuru-kuru       'Imperata cylindrica'
  PT:      Doura          ?uru-?uru       'Imperata cylindrica'
  MM:      Meramera       gulu-gulu       'grass'
  SES:     Bugotu         gu-guru         'grass'
>

    Blust (ACD) also reconstructs PCEMP *bitu, POe *pitu 'I. cylindrica' on the basis of Savu
widu, Kambera witu (both CMP) and Tangga (MM).fit, all 'I. cylindrica'. To these one might
add NyeHlyu (NCal) uc 'I. cylindrica'. Blust (ACD) considers Gedaged pit 'roofing material
of sago leaves' a possible member of this set, since sago leaves and sword grass are both
widely used as roofing thatch. However, POe *pitu is a rather unconvincing reconstruction,
the more so as other apparent Meso-Melanesian reflexes point to a hard-stemmed cane or
reed as a denotatum: Patpatar, Tolai pit, 'Saccharum edule', Teop vito 'a wild variety of S.
edule'). It may be that these reflect a confusion between reflexes of POe *pitu 'I. cylindrica'
and POe *pijo 'cane or reed taxon, including Saccharum spontaneum' (§3.4).


8.3.2 Coix lachrymajobi, Job's tears (Poaceae)

Coix lachryma-jobi is a robust tropical grass, 1--1.5 m high, with shiny grains like tears (Fig-
ure 8.5, right). The grains are the hardened flower-cases offemale spikelets. They tum various
colours-yellow, purple, white or brown-and are used in rattles and necklaces in places as
far apart as New Britain and Malaita (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001:204, Powell 1976). Powell
reports that the leaves are eaten in New Britain.




[8] PMP *guRun is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data here and of Ifugao gulun, Bontok, Inibaloi
golon, Tagalog kogon, Bikol gogon, Hanunuo kugun, all 'I. cylindrica' (Madulid 200lb: 165).

                                                          Secondary forests and grasslands      253

<
POe *sila 'Job ' s tears, Coix lachryma-jobi'
  Adm: Leipon            sili-sin          'Coix lachryma-jobi '
                                           (Nevennann 1934)
  SES:    Kwara' ae      sila              'Coix lachryma-jobi '
  SV:     Anejom         na-8ec            'Coix lachryma-jobi '
  Fij:    Bauan          sila              'Coix lachryma-jobi '
  Fij:    Wayan          slla              'Coix lachryma-jobi '
>


8.3.3 Miscanthus jloridulus (syn. M. japonicus, Saccharum jloridulum), Bwaelken (Poaceae)

A reed-like grass dominant on dry hillsides, Miscanthusfloridulus grows to about 2m tall.
In some areas it is the predominant material for constructing house walls. In Kwara' ae the
solid stems are used as roof battens to which sago thatch is attached, and also as arrow-shafts
(Peekel1984: 47, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 203).

<
POe *pi(y )u!J 'M iscanthus floridulus '
  MM:     Nduke          piu         'Miscanthusfloridulus' (unexpected final consonant
                                     deletion)
  MM: Roviana          piu           'Miscanthusfloridulus' (unexpected final consonant
                                     deletion)
  MM: Marovo           piu           'small bamboo, used for fishing arrows'
                                     (unexpected final consonant deletion)
  NCV: Uripiv          na-vis        'Miscanthusfloridulus'
  NCV: Tape            vieb          'Miscanthusfloridulus'
  NCV: Avava           vias          'Miscanthusfloridulus'
PSV *na-(v)iu!J 'wild cane ' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye           (nre)n-yu!J 'wild cane '
                       (pol)yu!J     'wild cane '
  SV:    Ura           (la)n-ye!J    'wild cane '
  SV:    Lenakel       nu-vi!J       'wild cane '
  SV:    Kwamera       n-i!J         'wild cane'
  SV:    Anejom        ni-ye!J       'wild cane'
>

8.3.4 Saccharum spontaeum, wild sugarcane (Poaceae)

Saccharum spontaeum is a tall grass up to 3m in height, with jointed, fibrous stalks similar to
those of sugarcane, S. oificinarum (ch.13, §2.1 ), to which it is quite closely related. Its English
name 'wild sugarcane' reflects an earlier belief that it was the wild source of sugarcane.

    The reconstruction below originates with French-Wright (1983), who glosses the form as
'a kind of wild sugarcane '. An expanded cognate set was given with the reconstruction *pijo
'Saccharum sp. ' in Ross ( 1996c), but some of the items listed there are now attributed to POe
*bitu(!J) 'bamboo sp. ' (ch.13, §3.1). Chowning (2001: 81) criticises the sugarcane/Saccharum
gloss as too precise, and I have modified the gloss below to take account of the reflexes in
the New Guinea region that have other denotations.

254   Malcolm Ross


<
POe *pijo 'cane or reed taxon, including Saccharum spontaneum' (Milke 1968: *piso 'k.o.
  reed'; French-Wright 1983: *piso)
  NNG: Mangap              mbiizi       'reed, pitpit type plant'
  NNG: Kairiru             vis          'pitpit, Saccharum spontaneum, a wild sugarcane
                                        type with edible fruit'
  PT:     Motu             hido         'a wild cane growing by the riverside'
  MM: Bola                 viro         'sugar cane, Saccharum edule'
  MM: Nakanai              viro         'a hollow-stemmed reed, Phragmites sp.'
  MM: Tabar                vi so        'bamboo'
PEOc *piso 'Saccharum sp.'
  SES: Gel a               viho         'a sp. of shore lily, Crinum'
  NCV: Mwotlap             viho         'Saccharum spontaneum'
  NCV: Mota                vi so        'a reed, Arundo, with edible flower heads'
  NCV: Araki               vi so        'Saccharum edule'
  NCV: Raga                viho         'Saccharum edule'
  NCV: Kiai                vi so        'Saccharum edule'
  NCV: BigNambas           n-is(iJS)    'wild cane'
  NCV: Uripiv              na-vis       'Saccharum edule'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-vis             'edible reed'
  NCV: Tape                niJ-ViJS     'Saccharum spontaneum'
  NCV: Avava               a-vis        'Saccharum spontaneum'
  NCV: Nese                na-vse       'Saccharum spontaneum'
  NCV: Lonwolwol           eh           'a vegetable growing on stalks, in clumps, with soft
                                        green sheathing; its flesh, remotely like cauliflower
                                        flesh, it is roasted in fire in the sheath'
  NCV: Labo                ni-vie       'edible reed'
  NCV: Lewo                vio          'cane flower (edible)'
  NCV: Namakir             vis          'Saccharum edule'
  NCV: Nguna               na-viiso     'edible reed'
  Fij:    Bauan            vioo         'a wild sugarcane, Saccharumfloridulum'
  Pn:     Samoan          fiso          'a large reed, Erianthus maximus; stems contain
                                        sugar' (Whistler 2000: 165)
  Pn:     Emae            fiso          'edible wild cane, probably Saccharum edule'
>



9 Staple foods: root crops, bananas, breadfruit and scigo

9.1 Introduction

A Proto Oceanic (POe) meal was typically made up of two categories of ingredient, *kana!J
'staple food, starchy food' (ch.2, §6.1) and *tamaji 'additional ingredients to accompany
starchy food' (ch.2, §6.2). The main ingredients of *tamaji were-or rather are in today's
Oceanic societies-green vegetables, treated in chapter 10, and coconut cream, treated in
§4.2 of chapter 12.

    The present chapter treats staple foods. The chapter is divided according to the four cat-
egories of staple foods: root crops (§2), bananas (§3), breadfruit (§4) and stem starch, prin-
cipally sago (§5).


9.2 Root crops

There is no term for root crops in general in most Oceanic languages, and there was apparently
no general term in POe. The only major staple root crops known to POe speakers were yams
(Dioscorea spp., §2.1) and taro (Colocasia and Aloeasia spp., §2.2).

    Of the root crops found in the Pacific today, the widely consumed sweet potato (Ipomoea
batatas), as well as cassava (Manihot esculenta) and American or Chinese/Hong Kong taro
(Xanthosoma sagittifolium ), are relatively recent introductions from South America, brought
by Europeans to Indonesia, whence they spread to New Guinea. 1 They were certainly not
present in NW Island Melanesia in POe times. Indeed, the sweet potato arrived in the Bis-
marck Archipelago and the Solomons only with European traders and settlers in the 19th
century (Bourke forthcoming) . Barrau (1965) suggests that these introduced crops relegated
some less significant earlier staples to the status of famine foods: basing himself on Guppy
( 1906), he names Pueraria lobata, Dioscorea nummularia and Cycas rumphii as possible
earlier staples.

[1] Ipomoea batatas and Manihot esculenta reached Papua New Guinea sometime between European exploration
in the New World and European colonisation ofNew Guinea, i.e. in the period 1500--1870 (Yen 1974b, Ballard
et al. 2005). I. batatas probably arrived about 300 years ago and M. esculenta about 200 years ago (Bourke
forthcoming). X. sagittifolium arrived in Papua New Guinea as recently as the 19th century (Bourke 1982,
Kirch 1994: 80).

256      Malcolm Ross


     Yams and taro differ in their distributions since yams, and especially Dioscorea alata,
have more demanding environmental requirements. Unlike Colocasia taro, which thrives in
generally rainy areas, in damp soil, and up to altitudes of2200 m or so, yams require seasonal
rainfall and flourish in deep, well-drained soils. They are grown in open gardens as they need
sunlight. Although D. alata and D. esculenta require a similar environment, D. alata can be
grown at altitudes up to 1900 m, D. esculenta only to less than 1000 m (M. Bourke, pers.
comm.). Thus Ivens (1927) describes a difference in root crops among speakers of dialects
of South Malaitan. On the island of Ulawa, only D. alata was cultivated. On Small Malaita
D. esculenta was also grown on the low hills. On Malaita proper, people lived on the central
ridge at 1000 m and had no yams, only taro.

     Because of its environmental tolerance the taro tuber Colocasia esculenta is the most im-
portant subsistence plant in Melanesia (Barrau 1955: 50). When the ancestors of POe speak-
ers arrived in the region C. esculenta was already the dominant staple over much of New
Guinea. In drier lowland and mid-altitude areas Dioscorea species predominated (Bourke
1982, Swadling & Hide 2005). However, it seems likely on circumstantial grounds that the
yam D. alata was an important staple of POe speakers, at least immediately after their arrival
in the Bismarcks.

     POe speakers lived on small islands and in coastal enclaves (vo1.2, ch.2), and most of their
environments were probably suitable for growing D. alata. Taro would have assumed greater
importance as they moved inland on the larger islands. Significantly, one of the POe terms
for Colocasia taro was *mwapo(q), a borrowing from a mainland Papuan language (§2 .2.1 ).
Taro was certainly known to POe speakers-they also had their own Austronesian word for
it, *talo(s)-but the presence of a Papuan borrowing for such a seemingly central item of
diet implies that taro cultivation came to assume greater importance through contact with
taro growers on the New Guinea mainland.

     Both yams and taro allow some variety in !their preparation for eating: they are boiled,
braised or baked whole or in large chunks, and sometimes they are eaten grated or mashed.

     A huge number of varieties of both yams and Colocasia taro (in the tens, if not the
hundreds) are individually named in Oceanic-speaking communities (Malinowski 1935a:
100--104, Fox 1978, Barrau 1962: 99-100). Where more than one name for a species is re-
constructed, it may be that one or other name denoted a variety. However, no deliberate
attempt has been made here to reconstruct names for varieties, partly because sources do not
provide Linnaean names for individual                and partly because their names are often
transparently descriptive and have probably been innovated over and over again.


9.2.1 Yams, Dioscorea spp.

Unlike the Araceae (taros and taro-like plants ; §2.2) with their large leaves, yam plants form
long vines which in the wild twine around tree trunks. When they are cultivated, the farmer
usually provides a stake or frame for support. On Ulawa yams were planted communally only
in newly cleared gardens.2 The men felled the trees, cleared the ground and dug the holes,
and the women planted the small tubers or tUtber tops or slices (Ivens 1927: 10, 355-357). In
other places yams are sometimes planted in old gardens, but only after they have lain fallow
for a while, as yams need fertile soil. Generally there is only one yam crop per year, and
tubers are harvested 9-12 months after planting. However, on Small Malaita and Ulawa yam
tops were also planted as yams were consumed, providing an earlier occasional crop (Ivens
1927: 361).

[2] Terms associated with gardening practices are treated in vol.l, ch.6.

                                                                             Staple foods    257


    BarraUt (1955: 39--40) points out that yam-growing communities require a good under-
standing of the seasons. 'Flowering and fructification of local plants often indicate to the
natives the season best suited for the various agricultural activities. ' Thus on Espiritu Santo
(Vanuatu) and in Fiji, yams are planted when the coral trees, Erythrina variegata (ch.5, §5.5),
are in flower (Baker & Harrison 1936).

    Preparing and planting a yam garden requires a major effort, and in many yam-growing
communities the planting was associated with rituals and incantations calling on the spirits
to stand guard over the crop, protecting it from thieves, yam beetles and other malign beings
(Fox 1924: 104-106, Malinowski 1935a). On Ulawa the rituals began the night before plant-
ing by blessing the pieces of yam to be planted, followed in the morning by incantations in
the garden and culminating with a small feast (Ivens 1927: 358-361). Weeding also had as-
sociated ritual. The women bathed, and then ceremonially cleansed themselves with Euodia
sprigs (ch.7, §5.6) before they went to weed the yam garden. When the yams were ready for
harvesting, the priest took to the beach two yams tied with Dracaena (ch.13, §6.1), where he
sacrificed them to the sea spirits on behalf of the village. Only after this might the villagers
harvest their yams as they needed them (Ivens 1927: 362-363). On both Small Malaita and
Ulawa the yams were first placed in a temporary shelter near the garden, then transferred to
a storehouse (Ivens 1927: 363-366). Malinowski' s (1935) account of yam cultivation among
the Kilivila is similar to Ivens' account of the Ulawa; the processes are the same, the rituals
pervasive, but yam cultivation is strictly a male domain.

    Because they are seasonal, communities dependent on fresh yams alone would undergo
regular food shortages while the young yams were growing (Barrau 1955: 58). Before the
advent of the sweet potato a few hundred years ago, the perils of shortage were avoided in
two ways. First, yams were often co-staples with other starchy foods: inN ew Guinea societies
with either Colocasia taro or bananas (Bourke 1982), in Vanuatu coastal communities with
breadfruit (Walter & Sam 2002: 41). Secondly, by storage: of the root crops grown in NW
Island Melanesia, yams can be stored longest, kept on shaded or dark shelves in a dry, well
aired location for up to six months, providing food between harvest periods (Henderson &
Hancock 1988: 19). Yam storage houses are a salient feature in Melanesian villages from the
Trobriand Islands of Papua New Guinea to New Caledonia (Barrau 1955: 58).

9.2.1.1 Why so few yam terms?

Today six yam species are found in Melanesia: D. alata, D. bulbifera, D. esculenta, D. pen-
taphylla, D. hispida, and D. nummularia (BarraUt 1955: 56, Bourke 1982). The first four are
present throughout the region, but POe names can be reconstructed for only the first two.
This is curious, because the two main garden yam species in NW Island Melanesia today are
the greater yam, D. alata, and the lesser yam, D. esculenta. We might expect to reconstruct a
POe term for at least the first four species, and certainly for D. esculenta, but no term for the
latter can be reconstructed with certainty. Barrau ( 1965) suggests that D. nummularia, which
he found cultivated in scattered locations throughout the Pacific, 3 was also once much more
widely cultivated than it is today. No term can be reconstructed for it, but this is likely to be
an artifact of the data: no source offers a term for it.

258    Malcolm Ross


     The lesser yam is agronomically superior to the greater yam and is in many areas a major
source of nutrition, but it is the greater yam which is ceremonially significant and a source of
prestige for the grower (Bourke 1982:55, in preparation and pers. comm.). 4 From this one
may infer that the greater yam is an ancient crop, whilst the lesser yam was cultivated at least
a little more recently-but long pre-dates the sweet potato.

     The linguistic evidence is consistent with Bourke's inference. The POe etymon *qupi
'greater yam, D. alata' indicates that POe speakers had this crop, and the fact that it was
also the generic term for yams suggests that it was the 'default' yam species in the POe
economy. Because there is no widely distributed cognate set, no POe term for the lesser
yam, D. esculenta, can be reconstructed. What does this imply? In its wild state the lesser yam
seems to have long been a feature of the forests ofNW Island Melanesia and was presumably
present in the POe period. 5 The most appropriate conclusion seems to be that when POe was
breaking up it had not yet been extensively cultivated, and that it became a significant part of
the diet only as early Oceanic speakers moved inland on the larger islands from their coastal
and small-island habitats.

     By the same token, the apparent existence of a POe term for D. bulbifera, the potato yam,
implies that it was consumed by POe speakers, even though it is today cultivated only as a
marginal crop and only in certain parts of New Guinea.

     The visible differences between D. alata, D. esculenta and D. bulbifera are shown in
Figure 9.1.

9.2.1.2 Dioscorea alata, greater yam, water yam, winged yam, TP yam, P iam (Dioscoreaceae)

Left to themselves, D. alata tubers come in an amazing variety of forms, as shown in Fig-
ure 9.2. In various parts of Oceanic-speaking Melanesia-the Papuan Tip islands, Fiji, New
Caledonia-farmers strove to produce yams with a regular form and giant length. Barrau
(1955: 57) mentions a 2.6 m yam seen in New Caledonia in 1953. These long yams were
produced by hollowing out a cylindrical growing hole and lining it with wooden sticks to
provide growth space for the tuber. More generally, the yield is maximised by staking the
growing vine with a support 2-3m high.

    It is not nutrition that drives the desire to produce the largest and the most yams in Melane-
sian societies, but rather competition for prestig1;:, carried out by exhibiting one's success as a
yam grower. Thus among Kilivila speakers of the Trobriands yams are displayed first in con-
ical heaps in the garden, then again in front of the in-law's storehouse, before being placed in
one's own storehouse. A good feast, from the host's perspective, is one at which the guests eat
their fill of yam, then see how full their host's storehouse remains after the feast. A large yam
with a fantastic form is good for display. The very fact that yams can be stored places them
above taro in the food hierarchy because it allows a man to accumulate them until he can dis-
tribute them at a feast in the large quantities which bolster his prestige (Howes 2003: 67-68,
96-97).

[3] Borrell (1989: 21) notes its cultivation on Kairiru Island (Schoutens).

[4] The agronomic and cultural relationship between the lesser and greater yam is to a degree parallel to that
between taro and sweet potato. The introduced sweet potato yields better and is the more widely cultivated
crop, but the taro is in many places more prestigious.

[5] Chowning (2001 : 79, pers. comm.) reports that Sengseng and Maenge speakers on New Britain still ate wild
yams in the 1950s, and Nakanai speakers remembered having done so until recently.

                                                                          Staple foods   259




   r
  if                     Greater yam, Dioscorea a lata
/

fleshy   tuber




                                        Lesser yam, Dioscorea escu/enta




                                     smooth vine,




            Figure 9.1     Growth habit of three yam (Dioscorea) species
260   Malcolm Ross




                     Figure 9.2    Yam (Dioscorea alata) tuber shapes



    The most widely reflected term for D. alata is POe *qupi, which is also widely reflected
in a second sense as the generic term for yams.

<
PMP *qubi 'yam' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *qupi 'greater yam, Dioscorea alata ; yam (generic)'
  Adm: Drehet         u            'greater yam; yam (generic) '
  NNG: Malasanga kui-kui           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  PT:   Iduna         kuvi         'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  MM: Vitu            yuvi         'greater yam; yam (generic) '
  MM: Tolai           a-up         'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  MM: Marovo          uvi          'greater yam; yam (generic) '
  MM: Maringe         n-ufi        'greater yam, Dioscorea alata; yam (generic)'
                                   (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  TM: Burna           uwa          'yam'
  TM: Tanema          uva          'yam'
  TM: Tanabili        no-upio      'yam'
  TM: Vano            upie         'yam'
  SES:    Lengo         uvi           'greater yam, Dioscorea alata; yam (generic)'
                                      (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES:    Arosi         uhi           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCV:    Uripiv        n-ov          'k.o. yam'
  NCV:    Paamese       o-uhu         'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCV:    Lewo          yuwi          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCV:    Namakir       ?uw           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCV:    Nguna         na-wii        'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCV:    Lewo          yui           'yam (generic)'
  SV:     Sye           n-up          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     N Tanna       n-up          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     Kwamera       n-uk          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     SWTanna       n-ekw         'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     Lenakel       n-uw          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     White sands   n-u           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  SV:     Anejom        n-u           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Pije          kuuk          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Fwai          kuuk          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Nemi          kuuk          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Jawe          kuic          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Nyelayu       uvi           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Nelemwa       kuvic         'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Xaracuu       ku            'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  NCal:   Iaai          u             'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  Fij:    Wayan         uvi           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  Pn:     Tongan        ?ufi          'greater yam; yam (generic)'
  Pn:     Samoan        uji           'greater yam; yam (generic)'
>

                                                                           Staple foods   261


    Three other terms can be reconstructed from cognate sets some of whose members are
glossed 'large yam', 'greater yam' or 'D. alata'. This is weak evidence for inferring that the
reconstructed terms denoted a D. alata cultivar. The terms are POe *mwaruqe, POe *udu(r,R)
and POe *pwasepe.

<
POe *mwaruqe 'Dioscorea sp. or perhaps a cultivar of D. alata'
  Adm: Titan         mware(n)      'a big yam'
  Adm: Loniu         mwat          'k.o. large yam'
  MM: Roviana        marihi        'yam' (Henderson & Hancock 1988) (borrowed?)
  NCV: Paamese       a-marue       'k.o. wild yam'
  NCV: Lewo          mol-malu      'k.o. wild yam, ready before cultivated yams'
  NCV: Nguna         mwazu         'k.o. yam like English potato'
  NCV: Namakir       maro?         'k.o. taro'
  NCV: S Efate       n-mwaz        'Dioscorea sp.'
PSV *-mwariq 'Dioscorea sp.' (Lynch 2001c: 234)
  SV:   Sye          (n-uv)mori 'Dioscorea sp.' (n-uv 'yam (generic)')
  SV:   Ura          (n-up)mori 'Dioscorea sp.' (n-up 'yam (generic)')
>

262     Malcolm Ross

<
POe *udu(r,R) 'Dioscorea alata cultivar (?)'
  NNG:      Amara           (o)udo           'greater yam'
  MM:       Kara (W)        udi              'greater yam'
  MM:       Nalik           udur             'greater yam'
  SES:      Arosi           ugu-ugu          'yam sp. with nice smell'
>

    POe *pwasepe 'Dioscorea alata variety(?)' is of interest, because it also seems to be the
source of the PT forms listed below the cognate set. However, the sound correspondences
attested by the PT forms are not those of PT languages but the distinctive reflexes (*pw >
kw; *s > t) of North Malaitan languages of theSES group. Dictionaries are available for two
North Malaitan languages, Lau (Fox 1974) and Kwaio (Keesing 1975), but neither includes
this item. I assume it is nonetheless a borrowing from a North Malaitan language, but I do
not know the source of the borrowing.

<
POe *pwasepe 'Dioscorea alata variety(?)'
  MM:       Petats            waseh            'Dioscorea alata'
  MM:       Selau             wesewe           'Dioscorea alata'
cf. also:
  PT:       Molima        atea                 'greater yam'
  PT:       Dobu          kwatea               'yam'
  PT:       Duau          kwatea               'yam'
  PT:       'Auhelawa     ateya                'yam'
  PT:       Suau (Saliba) kwatea               'greater yam, Dioscorea alata ; yam (generic)'
  PT:       Tubetube      kwatea               'greater yam'
  PT:       Duau          kwatea               'lesser yam'
>

9.2.1.3 Dioscorea bulbifera, potato yam, aerial yam, air potato (Dioscoreaceae)

The terms 'potato yam' and 'aerial yam' reflect the fact that D. bulbifera has multiple aerial
bulbils rather than a single basal tuber. Except in parts of Papua New Guinea it is not culti-
vated but quite commonly grows wild (Barrau 1962: 113). Its bulbils contain a toxin, dioscor-
ine, and need to be cooked and grated, then washed continuously in fresh water for several
hours (Barrau 1955: 59). In Papua New Guinea it is sometimes cultivated as a minor staple
alongside the two major staple species, D. alata and D. esculenta (Bourke 1982).

    POe *pwatika evidently referred to the potato yam, D. bulbifera, because its reflexes de-
note this species in widely separated languages: Patpatar (MM), Kwara' ae (SES) and Sye and
Ura (SV) (the Chuukese form appears to be borrowed). The languages in which it is glossed
'lesser yam' (D. esculenta) are contiguous and appear to represent a semantic innovation
local to central New Ireland.

<
POe *pwatika 'potato yam, aerial yam, Dioscorea bulbifera'
  Adm:      Lou              puet                'Dioscorea bulbifera'
  PT:       Boanaki          posika              'yam'
  MM:       Notsi            pias                'lesser yam'
  MM:       Tabar            poti-poti           'lesser yam'
    MM:     Lamasong     patik            'lesser yam'
    MM:     Patpatar     patuk            'Dioscorea bulbifera'
    MM:     Halia (Haku) pat              'greater yam'
    SES:    Kwara' ae    (dau)fasia       'Dioscorea bulbifera cultivars ' (Henderson &
                                          Hancock 1988)
PSV *(niJ-tai- )bwatyV 'yam sp.' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye              (tai)potyo(nei) 'k.o . wild yam'
  SV:    Ura              (dai)borye(ni) 'Dioscorea bulbifera'
cf. also:
    Mic:    Chuukese         pwereka            'Dioscorea bulbifera' (-r- fort@)
>

                                                                                        Staple foods      263



9.2.1.4 Dioscorea esculenta, lesser yam, prickly yam, TP mami, Ppana (Dioscoreaceae)

Dioscorea esculenta has a prickly vine stem and winds clockwise around its stake, whereas
D. alata winds anti-clockwise (Figure 9.1).

    The reasons why a POe etymon for this widespread species is apparently not recon-
structable are discussed in §2.1.1. There are,, however, a number of terms in NNG and MM
languages which imply that there may have been a PWOc term for the species.6 Two forms
are quite widely reflected, *ka-misa and *ma-misa. The *ka-l*ma- alternation is typical of sta-
tive (adjective-like) verbs in POe,? implying that this was originally an epithet applied to D.
esculenta rather than a noun. However, no other meaning for this word can be reconstructed
at present.

    The possibility of reconstructing PWOc *ka-misal*ma-misa 'lesser yam, D. esculenta'
perhaps means that the lesser yam was domesticated in NW Island Melanesia after the break-
up of POe but before PWOc had dispersed far. Against this inference, however, is the fact that
we would also expect to find reflexes of such a significant item in languages of the Papuan
Tip linkage, the third member linkage of Western Oceanic, yet none have been found. 8 The
S Efate and Wayan Fijian forms are both very doubtful cognates.

<
PWOc *kamisa 'lesser yam, Dioscorea escul'enta'
 NNG: Tuam           amez         'yam'
 NNG: Tami           kamit        'yam'
 NNG: Yabem          ame          'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
 NNG: Yalu           am is        'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
 NNG: Sissano        emiei        'greater yam'
 MM: Tangga          kam          'sweet potato; lesser yam'
 MM: Tomoip          misa         'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
cf. also:
  NCV: S Efate              n-am     'wild          of Dioscorea bulbifera'
>

[6] The account given here differs somewhat from that in Ross (1996c).

[7] Cf. *ma-sauql*ka-sauq ' be far away'(vol.2, ch.7, §2.2.3). The history ofstative verb forms in *rna- and *ka-
is analysed by Evans & Ross (2001).

[8] The form mami 'lesser yam' also occurs in various languages of the region, but we know that this is a recent
borrowing from Tok Pis in mami, because it shares in the s-loss characteristic of words which have entered Tok
Pisin from the MM languages Ramoaaina and Tolai (Ross 1993).

264      Malcolm Ross


<
PWOc *mamisa 'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
  NNG: Maenge               mamisa   'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
  NNG: Mamusi               mamisa   'yam'
  MM: Minigir               mamisa   'lesser yam'
cf. also:
  Fij:      Wayan           mami     'cooking banana with short thick fruit;
                                     sweet-tasting, but skin remains green and flesh hard
                                     even when ripe'
>

9.2.1.5 Other terms for yam

Further terms for yam can be reconstructed, but it is unclear which species they denoted.

<
PWOc *gobu 'Dioscorea sp.'
  NNG:      Numbami        go-gobu        'greater yam'
  NNG:      Mumeng (Patep) ycb            'yam'
  MM:       Bali           gobu           'yam, Dioscorea alata, cultivar' (Hide 1985)
  MM:       Kara (E)       go-gof         'Dioscorea bulbifera'
>

<
PROc *damu 'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Mota          nam           'yam'
  NCV:      Araki         tsam          'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Tamambo       dam           'yam'
  NCV:      NEAmbae       damu          'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Raga          damu          'yam'
  NCV:      Uripiv        drum          'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Naman         ne-dum        'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Neve'ei       ne-dam        'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Avava         a-dam         'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Larevat       dram          'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Nese          na-ram        'Dioscorea sp.'
  NCV:      Port Sandwich na-"ram       'yam'
  NCV:      Lonwolwol     dcm           'yam'
  SV:       Kwamera       nau-ram       'kind ofwild yam'
  SV:       Anejom        rame          'k.o. yam, stringy'
  NCal:     Pije          dimwa         'D. bulbifera'
  NCal:     Jawe          dimwa         'D. bulbifera'
  NCal:     Fwai          niwa          'D. bulbifera'
  NCal:     Nemi          niwa          'D. bulbifera'
  NCal:     Nyelayu       demwa         'D. bulbifera'
  NCal: Nelemwa                 dem wa           'D. bulbifera'
cf. also:
  Fij:      Wayan               damu(ni)         'k.o. yam with curved tuber and chocolate coloured
                                                 skin' (final -ni is unexplained)
>

                                                                                           Staple foods   265


<
PWOc *ka(p)ul 'seed yam'
  PT:       Dobu             awona            'seed yam'
  PT:       Kakabai          ko-koya          'yam'
  PT:       Misima           ka-kaun          'seed yam'
  PT:       Kilivila         kaula            'yam'
  MM:       Tiang            ko               'lesser yam'
  MM:       Kara (E)         ko-kau           'lesser yam, D. esculenta'
  MM:       Patpatar         kau-kau          'lesser yam, D. esculenta' 9
  MM:       Nehan            ko-ko            'yam'
  MM:       Marovo           co-core          'wild yam sp.'
>


9.2.2 Taro (Araceae)

Most major food plant terms both in English and in Oceanic languages refer to a single genus.
The English term 'taro ' is an exception. In much ofthe Pacific 'taro' is used to refer collec-
tively to five genera of the Araceae family, namely Colocasia, Cyrtosperma, Alocasia, Amor-
phophallus, and Xanthosoma , each represented by a single cultivated species in the Pacific
and shown in Figure 9.3. The most important species are-and in POe times probably were-
Colocasia esculenta and Cyrtosperma merkusii.

9.2.2.1 Colocasia esculenta (syn. C. antiquorum), taro, Asian taro, TP taro tru (Araceae)

Like the other Araceae, in its natural state Colocasia taro prefers a shady, damp (and even
swampy) environment, which explains its cultivation in rain forest environments and the need
for irrigation elsewhere. It is often grown on crudely terraced slopes, the terraces supported
by tree trunks or stick fences. It is usually propagated by planting a section from the top of
the tuber together with the plant' s stem (the leaves are removed). Less often a cutting or a
sucker from the side ofthe corm is used. Ivens (1927: 355) reports from Ulawa that, because
taro is not a seasonal crop, the farmer may simply cut the top off a newly pulled tuber and
re-plant it immediately. Tubers are ready for harvesting 7-12 months after planting. It grows
throughout the year, obviating the need for storage (Barrau 1955: 50-52).

    Two POe terms for C. esculenta can be reconstructed: *talo(s) and *mwapo(q). This syn-
onymy perhaps reflects the complex history of taro cultivation by early Oceanic speakers.
On the one hand they brought with them varieties oftaro that they named *talo(s). Evidence
for this is that the term was inherited from PMP. On the other hand they interacted with
Papuan speakers in NW Melanesia and may have acquired new taro varieties from them,
along with the label *mwapo(q), which apparently entered POe from a mainland Papuan lan-
guage. Reflexes of a possible source occur in languages of the northern Adelbert Range in the
present-day Madang Province (see Z'Graggen 1980), and the widespread currency in Papuan
languages of words with a form resembling mao is noted by Dutton (1973: 443) and Hays
(2005: 642).

[9] This is the source of the Tok Pisin term kaukau 'sweet potato', whose source was noted as unknown by Ross
(1993).

266    Malcolm Ross


    The cognate set from which POe *mwapo(q) is reconstructed contains several formal dif-
ficulties. The alternation of reflexes of POe *m and *mw in certain items including this one
has been discussed by Blust (1981a). French-Wright (1983: 130--132) also considers the al-
ternation between zero and reflexes of POe *-p·· in this set, choosing to reconstruct two POe
forms, one with and one without *-p-, but suspecting that they are reflexes of a single form.
With more data at our disposal, it is clear on both formal and semantic grounds that this is a
single cognate set, but one in which two common sporadic changes often occur, namely that
*mw becomes *m and that *pis lost between vowels when one is rounded. Some ofthe NNG
reflexes (Kove, Gitua and Mangap) complicate the picture by reflecting POe *-q. These vari-
ations may mean that the earliest forms in Oceanic do not date back to POe itself but represent
slightly later borrowings from dialect to dialect among early Oceanic dialects.

    The distribution ofthe two cognate sets is also interesting. Whilst POe *mwapo(q) is dis-
tributed throughout Oceania, POe *talo(s) hardly occurs in Western Oceanic. Its only known
Western Oceanic reflexes are in Manam (NNG), Motu (PT) and Roviana and Marovo (MM).
In the cases of Manam and Motu, no reflex has been found in nearby closely related lan-
guages, and it is quite possible that these are borrowings from an Eastern Oceanic language
or from an English-based pidgin. 10 In any case, POe *talo(s) has been widely replaced by POe
*mwapo(q) in Western Oceanic languages. John Lynch (pers. comm.) points out that reflexes
of *talo(s) have been replaced by reflexes of PSOc *bweta in all of North/Central Vanuatu
except South Efate (which arguably subgroups with South Vanuatu).

    A search for languages in which reflexes of *talo(s) and *mwapo(q) are in contrast has
turned up very little, but this may be an artefact of inadequate data. Only Arosi reflects both
terms, each as the first element of names of taro varieties (see below). 11 The Arosi generic
term for taro is bwa, reflecting neither POe term.

<
PMP *tales 'taro, Colocasia esculenta' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *talo(s) 'taro, Colocasia esculenta' (Capelll1943: *dalo(s))
     NNG:   Manam            taro              'taro, C. esculenta'
     PT:    Motu             talo              'taro, C. esculenta'
     MM:    Roviana          talo              'taro, C. esculenta'
     MM:    Marovo           talo              'taro, C. esculenta'
     SES:   Kwaio            alo               'taro (generic); unit of a hundred taro for a feast'
  SES:   Lau          alo           'taro (generic)'
  SES:   Arosi        aro(-kamae)   'taro sp.'
                      aro(-kauhi)   'taro sp.'
                      aro(-maiki)   'taro sp.'
  SES:   Bauro        aro           'taro'
  NCV:   S Efate      (n)tal        'taro, C. esculenta'
  SV:    Sye          n-tal         'taro, C. esculenta'
  SV:    Lenakel      niJ-te        'taro, C. esculenta'
  SV:    SWTanna      niJ-tel       'taro, C. esculenta'
  SV:    Anejom       n-tal         'taro, C. esculenta'
  Fij:   Bauan        dalo          'taro, C. esculenta'
  Pn:    Tongan       talo          'taro, C. esculenta'
  Pn:    Samoan       talo          'taro, C. esculenta'
>

[10] Hiri Motu, the Motu-based pidgin of Papua, received input from policemen from the Solomons, some of
whom presumably spoke a SES language (Dutton 1985). John Lynch (pers . comm.) points out that Hiri Motu
speakers may also have copied items from Papuan Pidgin English. Roviana is widely used as a lingua franca in
the western Solomons and, like other languages of the area, has borrowings from SES languages. Roviana and
Manam would also be candidates for borrowing the word 'taro' from, respectively, Solomons Pijin and Tok
Pisin.

[11] Fox (1978) glosses these names as 'sp. of taro' , and I have retained this in the glosses, but I assume that these
are in fact different cultivars.

                                                                      Staple foods   267


<
POe *mwapo(q) 'taro, Colocasia esculenta' (Milke 1968: *mwao)
  Adm: Lou            mwa              'wild plant like taro'
  Adm: Nali           mah              'k.o . taro'
  Adm: Drehet         muh              'taro, C. esculenta'
  Adm: Loniu          mah              'taro, C. esculenta'
  Adm: Titan          ma               'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Kove           moi              'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Tuam           mo               'taro, C. esculenta'
                        w.
  NNG: Gitua          mm               'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Mangap         mok              'taro; good food'
  NNG: Kilenge        mo               'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Mangseng       mwa              'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Maenge         mao              'taro, C. esculenta
  NNG: Bing           muaw             'k.o . yam'
  NNG: Takia          mao              'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Yabem          mo               'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Sirasira       moa              'taro, C. esculenta'
  NNG: Wogeo          mwau             'taro, C. esculenta'
  PT:   Dawawa        mavu             'taro, C. esculenta'
  PT:   Sinaugoro mayo                 'yam (generic)'
  PT:   Motu          maho             'greater yam'
  MM: Nakanai         mavo             'taro (generic); C. esculenta'
  MM: Teop            mil              'taro, C. esculenta'
  MM: Kia             mahu             'taro, C. esculenta'
  MM: Maringe         mhau             'taro, C. esculenta' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Arosi          mwa(-rata?ai)    'taro sp.'
  SES: Arosi          mwa(-rugu?ino) 'taro sp'.
  NCal: Xaracuu       mwc              'taro, C. esculenta'
  Pn:   Hawaiian      nao              'k.o . taro'
>

268   Malcolm Ross




 Amorphophallus                     Cyrtosperma                   Xanthosoma
           Co/ocasia                                   Alocasia

          Figure 9.3   Taro (Araceae) genera and Amorphophallus: growth habit


<
PSOc *bweta 'taro, Colocasia esculenta' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mwotlap         pwet          'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: NE Ambae pweta                'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Araki           pera          'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Raga            bweta         'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Nokuku          pweta         'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Kiai            peta          'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Tamambo         bueta         'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Sakao           (oe)vad       'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: Uripiv          na-bwet       'taro, C. esculenta'
  NCV: BigNambas na-pwet             'an edible root (not taro)'
  NCV: Lonwolwol (u)bwer             'taro, C. esculenta'
  SV: Anejom           na-pwat       'k.o. taro'
  NCal: Nemi           pweek         'wild arrowroot, Amorphophallus paeoniifolius'?
  NCal: Jawe           pweek         'wild arrowroot, Amorphophallus paeoniifolius'?
>

    The leaves of Colocasia esculenta are eaten as a green vegetable in many parts of Ocea-
nia, and many languages have a separate word for them (ch.4, §2.5). A possible POe term
for taro leaves, POe *gal(a,o) is weakly supported, along with a possible PWOc candidate,
*[qa]pwasu-'possible' because only its NNG and PT reflexes denote leaves; its MM reflexes
denote Colocasia esculenta itself.

<
POe *gal(a,o) 'taro leaves'? (Ross 1996c: 190)
  Adm: Baluan          gal          'taro'
  NNG: Labu            ka           'taro'
     MM:      Vitu            galo             'taro leaves '
     SES:     Kwaio           gala-            'taro shoot'
>

                                                                                          Staple foods   269

<
PWOc *[qa]pwasu 'taro leaves'?
     NNG:     Kaulong         pasu                 '(mature) taro leaf'
     NNG:     Sengseng        paso                 'taro leaf' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
     NNG:     Manam           (minam) ?apwas       'k.o. yam'
     PT:      Misima          p wasuwa             'k.o. tree with edible leaves; Gnetum gnemon'
     MM:      Kara (E)        iavas                'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
     MM:      Madak           pas                  'taro '
     MM:      Patpatar        pas                  'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
     MM:      Tolai           pa                   'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
>

      Other terms for parts of the taro plant are reconstructed in chapter 4. They are
       • POe *[s,j ]uti(q) 'banana or taro sucker, slip, cutting, shoot (i.e. propagation material)'
         (ch.4, §2.6Y 2
       • POe *baRa-baRa 'stem or stalk of non-woody plants, such as taro and banana, probably
         also the soft stems of leaves ' (ch.4, §2.2)
       • POe *up( e,a) 'taro seedling' (ch.4, §2.6)


9.2.2.2 Cyrtosperma merkusii (syn. C. chamissonis, C. edule) , swamp taro, giant taro, Pkakake, kakama, B wota taro (Araceae)

At 4 metres tall swamp taro, Cyrtosperma merkusii, is a giant among the Araceae. It grows
wild or is cultivated in swampy areas on many of the islands of Melanesia, Polynesia and
Micronesia. Cyrtosperma taro is commonly grown in the mud directly behind the mangrove
swamp (Barrau 1955: 25-26). In pre-European times it was cultivated in the Bismarcks (on
Manus and New Ireland), the Solomons, Vanuatu, Micronesia, western Polynesia and parts
of Fiji but not on mainland New Guinea, in New Caledonia, or in eastern Polynesia (Bar-
rau 1962: 103 , Andrew Pawley, pers. comm.). It tolerates saline swamps and requires little
labour to cultivate (Bourke 1982). Because of its suitability for marginal conditions, it is an
important staple on atolls in Micronesia. Elsewhere it has only marginal importance as a food
crop. It is propagated by planting cuttings in marshy ground, and the tuber, which may weigh
up to 15 kg, is harvested only after three years or longer. It is usually cooked by baking (Bar-
rau 1955: 53). Its huge waxy leaves are used in the Solomons for sealing stone ovens and for
laying out food (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 29-30).

    The reconstruction of a term for 'swamp taro ' has a chequered history. In Ross (1996c) I
proposed that the POe name for swamp taro was *bulaka, but indicated that there was a formal
problem with this reconstruction. Its NCV reflexes lack a consonant corresponding to *-!- ,
and Clark (1996b) accordingly reconstructed PNCV *buaga 'taro'. Geraghty (1990: 57-58)
observed that POe *R, but not *I, is often lost in NCV languages, and took this as evidence for
PEOc *buRaka, rather than *bulaka, citing Nakanai bureka in support of this. This is just one
ofthree N akanai reflexes, however, 13 and at least two out of the three must be borrowings.

[12] The Tawala and Kilivila (PT) reflexes of which (huli and uti) now mean simply 'taro' .

270    Malcolm Ross


    Geraghty suggested that Polynesian reflexes were probably borrowings from Microne-
sian, and Barrau (1959) and Whistler(1991a: 47, 58-59) suggested that Cyrtosperma merkusii
was indeed introduced into Polynesia from Micronesia. Kikusawa (2003) has expanded on
this and argues that the Micronesian terms below, other than Marshallese, reflect Proto Chuuk-
ic-Ponapeic *pwulaka 'swamp taro, Cyrtosperma merkusii' (Chuukic-Ponapeic is a subgroup
of Micronesian), and that all the other terms listed below were borrowed directly or indirectly
from a Chuukic-Ponapeic language.

    Kikusawa may well be right, 14 as Bourke (1990) suggests that Cyrtosperma taro was
introduced into the Bismarcks by Polynesians living on the atolls to the east. Swamp taro is the
dominant root crop only in Micronesia, and the irregularities of reflexes outside Micronesia
and Polynesia cause difficulties both for my *bulaka and Geraghty's buRaka. 15 In order to
demonstrate this, I list against each reflex below the POe form that it would reflect if it were
directly inherited. The Micronesian terms, other than Marshallese, reflect Proto Chuukic-
Ponapeic *pwulaka, which reflects a hypothetical POe *bulaka. The Polynesian terms appear
to reflect PPn *pulaka, also reflecting a hypothetical POe *bulaka. However, the claim in
Ross (1996c) that they actually reflect POe *bulaka collapses as we move westward, as does
Geraghty's reconstruction of *buRaka. NCV terms consistently reflect PNCV *bu(R)aga,
whilst MM and Adm reflexes are chaotic and               of sets most or all of whose members
are borrowed.

    The items listed below denote 'swamp taro, Cyrtosperma merkusii' unless glossed other-
wise.

Adm: Mussau                 ulaa  *pu(l,r,R)a(q,k)a
Adm: Seimat                 hula  *pula(q,k)a       'swamp taro, Alocasia sp. , introduced
                                                    from Aua' (Sorensen 1950)
Adm: Au a                  fuula  *pula(q,k )a      'taro'
Adm: Lou                   pulak *(p,b )ulaka
MM: Nakanai                uta    *u(l,r,R)a(q,k )a 'an inedible wild taro, Colocasia sp.'
                           buleha *bu(l,r,R)eqa     'an inedible wild taro, Colocasia sp. '
                           bureka *buseqa           'variety of elephant ear taro, Alocasia
                                                    macrorrhizos'
MM: Kara (E)               vulai  *hulaqa                   'k.o. taro'
MM: Patpatar               pulaka *pulaka                   'Polynesian arrowroot, probably Tacca
                                                            leontopetaloides' 16
MM: Tolai                  pulaka *pulaka                   'Polynesian arrowroot, probably Tacca
                                                            leontopetaloides'
NCV: Mota          puaka *hu(R)aga                          'boggy ground, mud'
NCV: Uripiv         suak    *hu(R)aga                       '(rare) taro '
NCV: Big Nambas boak        *hu(R)aga                       'taro, Colocasia sp. '
NCV: Port Sandwich          *hu(R)aga                       'hill taro'
NCV: Naman         huag     *hu(R)aga
NCV: Neve ' ei     ni-hia!J *hu(R)aga
NCV: Avava          BUalJ   *hu(R)aga
NCV: Nese          hoak     *hu(R)aga
NCV: Namakir       huag     *hu(R)aga
NCal: Xaracuu      huraa ?                                  'variety of taro '
Mic: Marshallese   pwaz     *hulaqa                         'swamp taro patch'
Mic: Mortlockese p wu!a? *hula(q,k)a
Mic: Chuukese      p wura   *hula(q,k)a
Mic: Puluwatese    p wuza   *hula(q,k)a
Mic: Satawalese    p wuza   *hula(q,k)a
Mic: Carolinian    hwuza    *hula(q,k)a
Mic: Woleaian      f"uraxe *hulaka
Mic: Pulo-Annan    vwuraxa *hulaka
Pn:   Anutan       pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   Pukapukan    pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   E Futunan    pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   E Uvean      pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   Samoan       pula?a *hulaka
Pn:   Tuvalu       pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   Tokelauan    pulaka *hulaka
Pn:   Raratangan   puraka *hulaka                           'coarse kind oftaro'

[13] In Ross (1996c) I listed buleha and bureka. Nakanai ula is cited by Bender et al. (2003) from Chowning &
Goodenough (n.d.).

[14] However, Kikusawa's paper contains some problems . Firstly, she reconstructs POe *biRaq, denoting both
Alocasia and Cyrtosperma, i.e. giant taros in general (only Wayan via supports the double gloss), but it is clear
that the POe form was *piRaq (ch.9, §2.2.3). She offers no evidence for POe initial *b- . In a footnote she cites
Bauan via as a regular reflex, but this reflects *piRaq, not* biRaq. Second, Kikusawa argues that Proto Chuukic-
Ponapeic *p"ulaka is perhaps a borrowed reflex of *biRaq, but this is unlikely, as the form was in fact *piRaq.
Third, she lumps together as reflexes of POe *biRaq the NCV terms reflecting PNCV *bu(R)aga and POe
*piRaq. This is unmotivated, as the forms reflecting POe *piRaq (listed under *piRaq in §2.2.3) are regular
reflexes. I assume that PNCV *buaga was also a borrowed form, ultimately from Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic
*p"ulaka.

[15] Cyrtosperma is reported to have been present in New Ireland 16,500 years ago (Barton & White 1993 , cited
by Swadling & Hide 2005 : 307). I do not know how this meshes with the much later history that concerns us
here.

                                                                                         Staple foods     271



9.2.2.3 Alocasia macrorrhizos (syn.A. macrorrhiza, A. indica) , giant taro, elephant ear taro, P waeltaro (Araceae)

The giant taro, Alocasia macrorrhizos, growing to 3-4 m, is not strictly a root crop ; it is
the corm (i.e. the thick lower stem) that is eaten. It is present as a minor staple in much of
New Guinea and the Bismarcks, but appears to have been grown as much for ceremonial
significance as for eating (Bourke 1982). Arm Chowning (pers. comm.) reports that among
the Nakanai and the Sengseng of New Britain, giant taro is often eaten by people who are
abstaining from Colocasia taro as an act of mourning for a dead relative. A. macrorrhizos is
not mentioned at all in Henderson and Hancock's ( 1988) Solomons survey. Barrau ( 1955: 54)
says that it is found throughout Melanesia but only sometimes cultivated in gardens, Hay
(1990: 41-42) that it is uncommon in rural Papua New Guinea. Its calcium oxalate content
is such that it requires lengthy baking or scalding with water several times.

[16] The dictionary source defines this term as ' wild arrowroot, Amorphophallus campanulatus' ( = A . paeoni-
ifolius). Peekel (1984: 91) gives bulaka as 'Polynesian arrowroot, probably Tacca leontopetaloides' in both
Patpatar and Tolai, and I take him to be the more reliable source with regard to botanical identifications. Hay
(1990: 42) notes that the leaves of the two plants are easily confused.

272   Malcolm Ross


    The POe name for giant taro was *piRaq, continuing a PMP etymon. The final *-q is
attested in Gumawana, Bwaidoga, Big Nambas and Tape and indirectly in the retention of
the final vowel in SV languages (Lynch 200lc: 121).

<
PMP *biRaq 'taro sp.' (Blust 1972b)
POe *piRaq 'giant taro, elephant ear taro, Alocasia macrorrhizos' (Blust 1972b)
  Adm:    Muss au    ia               'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  PT:     Gumawana vilava             'taro'
  PT:     Bwaidoga   vilaya           'edible root resembling taro'
  PT:     Motu       hira             'large sp. of edible arum'
  MM:     Kara (E)  fia               'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  SES:    Gel a      vita             'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  SES:    Arosi      hira             'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    Mwotlap    VI               'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    Mota       via              'the giant caladium'
  NCV:    NEAmbae via                 'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    Kiai       via              'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    Araki      via              'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    Raga       via              'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    BigNambas (Jix              'Alocasia macrorrhizos' (J. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV:    Uripiv     na-vi            'wild arrowroot, Amorphophallus paeoniifolius'
  NCV:    Tape       viay             'Cyrtosperma merkusii'
  NCV:    Nese       na-(Ji           'k.o. taro'
  NCV:    BigNambas viah              'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCV:    SEAmbrym o-hia              'unidentified edible tuber'
  NCV:    Paamese    u-hiaa           'wild yam'
  NCV:    Lewo       ko-yuia          '(wild) yam'
  NCV:    Namakir    vi               'Cyrtosperma?'
  NCV:    Nguna      na-via           'taro sp., inedible; very bitter or acidic; said to bum
                                      the mouth if eaten'
  NCV:    S Efate      na-fi          'taro sp.'
  SV:     Sye          ne-vye         'water taro'
  SV:     Lenakel      nu-via         'k.o. taro'
  SV:     Kwamera      nu-via         'Crytosperma (wild taro)'
  SV:     Anejom       nehei          'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCal:   Pije         pia            'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCal:   Fwai         pia            'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCal:   Nemi         pia            'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCal:   Jawe         pia            'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  NCal:   Nelemwa      pia            'Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  Fij:    Wayan        via            'giant taro, Alocasia and Cyrtosperma spp.; cultivated but eaten only in time of famine'
>

                                                                                     Staple foods   273


9.2.2.4 Another term for taro?

The glosses suggest that the denotatum of POe *(p,b )oso below belonged to the Araceae
family, but it is impossible to infer its identity from the available data.

<
POe *(p,b)oso 'k.o. taro'
  NNG:      Barim         bus                 'taro'
  NNG:      Lukep (Po no) bus                 'taro'
  MM:       Madak         pos                 'grealter yam'
  Mic:      Kosraean      :Jt                 'taro sp.'
  Mic:      Marshallese wetul                 'elephant ear taro, Alocasia macrorrhizos'
  Mic:      Chuukese      wot                 'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
>


9.2.3 Other tubers

Three other tubers are quite widely distributed in the Pacific. Two are the wild arrowroot,
Amorphophallus paeoniifolius (syn. A. campanulatus), and the Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca
leontopetaloides, but I am unable to reconstruct a POe term for either. This suggests either
that they, too, are more recent introductions or, more probably, that they are rarely eaten
and have undergone frequent renaming. The third tuber is Pueraria lobata, apparently more
widely cultivated in earlier times than it is today.

9.2.3.1 Amorphophallus paeoniifolius (syn.A. campanulatus), wild arrowroot, elephant yam (Araceae)

Amorphophallus paeoniifolius is a wild plant. In the Austronesian speaking areas of Papua
New Guinea it is a minor staple only in parts of western New Britain and in coastal SE
Papua New Guinea (Bourke et al. 1998). Margetts (2005b) notes of the latter region that A.
paeoniifolius is traditionally grown but not very common as people do not go out of their
way to cultivate it. It is not as valued as other taro types and does not play a role in feasts and
wealth exchanges. In the Solomon Islands it is reported to have been a garden crop in parts
ofChoiseul and Malaita (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 32). Barrau (1955: 55) reports that it
is no longer cultivated anywhere in Melanesia.

9.2.3.2 Tacca leontopetaloides, Polynesian arrowroot (Taccaceae)

The tuber of T acea leontopetaloides is bitter and requires considerable processing to produce
a starch pudding somewhat like sago pudding. It was used in this way on the small islands of
theSE Solomons and the Temotu Province, and in much of Polynesia (Henderson & Hancock
1988: 34) but apparently had only limited us,e in the Bismarcks.

    Interestingly, almost all the names I have collected for it reflect a reassignment of the
name of some other starchy food:

__pre__
    MM:      Patpatar          pulaka         < *bulaka 'Cyrtosperma merkusii' (§2.2.2)
    MM:      Tolai             pulaka         < *bulaka 'Cyrtosperma merkusii' (§2.2.2)
    TM:      Aiwoo             (to)piya       < POe *piRaq 'Alocasia macrorrhizos' (§2.2.3)
    Fij:     Bauan             yabia          < POe *Rabia 'Metroxylon sagu' (§5.1)
    Pn:      Pileni            pia            < POe *Rabia 'Metroxylon sagu' (§5.1)
    Pn:      Rarotongan        pia            < POe *Rabia 'Metroxylon sagu' (§5.1)

274     Malcolm Ross


   The elements in the PPn binomial below are PPn *ma 'fermented breadfruit' (POLLEX)
and *soa?a 'banana' (§3).

<
PPn *ma-soa?a 'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca sp.' (POLLEX)
  Pn:      Tongan          mahoa?a          'arrowroot, Tacca sp. '
  Pn:      Tokelauan       mahoa            'Tacca leontopetaloides'
  Pn:      Anutan          mao a            'arrowroot, T acea sp.'
  Pn:      E Futunan       maso?a           'arrowroot, T acea sp.'
  Pn:      Samoan          masoa            'T acea leontopetaloides'
  Pn:      Tuvalu          masoa            'arrowroot, T acea sp.'
>

    For the Micronesian names ofT. leontopetaloides, however, no origin has been found:
Nauru (da)mag-mag, Proto Western Micronesian *mwaku-mwaku 'arrowroot, T. leontopeta-
loides (Bender et al. 2003).

9.2.3.3 Pueraria lobata (syn. P. novo-guineensis, P. thunbergiana, P. triloba, P. hirsuta, P. neo-caledonica, Pachyrrhizus trilobus, P. montanus, P.             Dolichos hirsutus, D. tuberosus, D. lobatus) (Fabaceae)

                                                Pueraria species are half-woody lianas, 3-5m
                                                high, with stems covered in hairs, brown on
                                                 older parts, rust-yellow to white on younger.
                             -.rr               The bast is used to make yam for rope, fishing
                                                 lines and fish nets. One species, P.lobata (with
                                                 an enormous number of synonyms), is found as
                                                 far east as Samoa.
                                                     P. lobata has a fleshy, tapioca-like tuber
                                                that is widely eaten in times of famine (Barrau
                                                 1965 ; Peekel 1984: 253-255). Barrau (1965)
                                                 supports Guppy' s (1906: 412) suggestion that
                                                P. lobata may also have been more widely cul-
                                                tivated by Oceanic speakers before the arrival
                                                 of the sweet potato. It is still cultivated in the
Figure 9.4 Tuber and plant parts of Pueraria Kangean Islands ( 120 km east of Madura, In-
                     lobata                      donesia) and in New Caledonia, where Haudri-
court (1964: 97), cited by Barrau, labels it 'a food for chiefs' rather than a famine food . One
of Guppy' s mid-nineteenth-century sources noted that it also had ceremonial significance in
Fiji.

     No POe term for P. lobata is reconstructable, and the cognate set below is restricted to
North-Central Vanuatu and Central Pacific, and thus allow only a PROc reconstruction. None
ofBarrau ' s sources make specific mention ofthe Bismarcks or the Solomons, and it may be
that its significance has faded more definitely from folk memory there than on smaller islands
where it still serves as a famine food.

     The gloss of the Raga reflex refers to famine food, and probably denotes P. lobata.

<
PROc *Raka 'k.vine, Pueraria lobata' (Geraghty 1990)
  NCV: Raga                    aga             'yam with blue flowers, eaten in time of famine '
     NCV: Port Sandwich ni-ax                    'vine sp. '
     NCV: Paamese       e-a                      'kind of tree with very tough roots that are very
                                                 tough to dig out while hoeing in garden'
     NCV:     Namakir            ni-ak           'vine sp. with blue flowers like a yam; Pueraria (?)'
     Fij:     Wayan              aka             'creeper, Pueraria lobata'
     Fij:     Bauan              yak a           'creeper, Pueraria lobata' (Geraghty 2004: 79)
     Pn:      Tongan             aka             'creeper, Pueraria lobata, whose root is eaten when
                                                 better food is scarce '
     Pn:      Niuean             aka             'Pueraria lobata'
     Pn:      Ifira-Mele         aka             'creeper sp. , probably Pueraria lobata'
     Pn:      Pukapukan          aka             'a root'
     Pn:      Rennellese         aka             'bush vine, Pueraria lobata with long roots, eaten in
                                                 times of shortage'
     Pn:      Tikopia            aka             'root of Pueraria lobata'
     Pn:      Samoan             a?a             'creeper, Pueraria lobata'
     Pn:      Tokelauan          aka             'root'
     Pn:      Maori              aka             'Metrosideros spp. that begin life as climbing vines.'
>

                                                                                         Staple foods   275



9.3 Bananas, cultivars of the genus Musa

Banana plants have a non-woody stem and huge leaves which, along with the stem holding
the bunches of bananas, grow directly out of the top of the main stem. The plant as a whole
is usually around 3 m in height.

    In Papua New Guinea today bananas ane the second most widely consumed food crop
after the sweet potato. For some PNG communities starchy varieties of bananas are the sole
staple, picked and cooked before they are fully ripe. Some varieties lend themselves better to
boiling, others to baking. Traditional banana varieties are relatively hard to grow; each year
they must be moved to new garden sites with fertile soil. Many of these varieties produce
fruit within six months of planting (French & Bridle 1978: 12). Figure 9.5 shows a traditional
banana plant.

    Banana leaves have a variety of uses. The most common are wrapping food for baking in
a stone oven (vol.l , ch.6, §3.1) and laying out food on them at feasts.

    Edible bananas are all sterile hybrids with complex genetic histories, cultivars of the
genus M usa. 17 In my 1996 attempt to gloss the various reconstructed terms for bananas, I
employed the old division, based on morphological characteristics, of the genus M usa into
five sections, varieties of which found in NW Melanesia belong to the sections Eumusa and
Australimusa. In the past fifty years a new understanding of Musa sections has emerged,
resulting in a reduction in their number from five to three, but two are still relevant to NW
Melanesia, namely Musa [18] (including the former Eumusa) and Callimusa (including the for-
mer Australimusa) (Simmonds & Shepherd 195:5, Wong et al. 2002). In Simmonds and Shep-
herd' s cultivated banana nomenclature, each section contains species (plus subspecies) and
hybrids, the latter labelled with letters denoting the subspecies from which they are derived:

[17] The taxonomic and archaeobotanical informatiom in this section is drawn from two papers which Jean
Kennedy kindly made available to me: J. Kennedy 2008 and forthcoming.

[18] Thus genus and section share the same name, unfortunately for the non-specialist.

276      Malcolm Ross


A for the various subspecies of Musa acuminata, B for those of M. balbisiana, S for the
minor New Guinea species M. schizocarpa (all three in the section Musa) and T for Cal-
limusa-derived genomes. Thus 'M . sapientum' and 'M. paradisiaca', the two alleged species
recognised by Linnaeus, are both AAB triploid hybrids. Arnaud and Horry's (1997) survey
of 108 banana varieties in Papua New Guinea includes AA and AB diploid and AAA, AAB
and ABB triploid hybrids, as well as hybrids of Musa and Callimusa species. [19]

                                                   Biomolecular study confirms these sections
                                               and is currently bringing about a revision of ideas
                                               about the archaeobotany of bananas, which is
                                               considerably more complicated than previously
                                               thought (J. Kennedy forthcoming). The transfor-
                                               mation from wild to cultivated edible bananas
                                               occurred independently in the two sections. The
                                               wild species of the section M usa that have con-
                                               tributed to edible bananas are found over a re-
                                               gion stretching from eastern India and Sri Lanka
                                               through island SE Asia into the NW Melanesia
                                               as far as the Solomons, but the fact that New
                                               Guinea is home to many highly diverse diploid
                                               AA cultivars makes it the probable area of their
                                               domestication. Wild Callimusa species are con-
                                               fined to a region stretching from Halmahera to the
                                               Solomons, indicating that NW Melanesia was the
  Figure 9.5 Traditional (diploid) banana      region where Callimusa bananas were also first
                    plant                      domesticated.

                                                   J. Kennedy (2008) points out that all bananas
east of the Solomons were carried there by settlers. These belong to three distinct lineages.
The first consists of so-called Fe 'i bananas, hybrids among several Callimusa species (and the
world' s only edible Callimusa bananas). The other two, both known as 'Pacific plantains', are
derived from Musa species. One involves M . acuminata, subspecies banksii, endemic to New
Guinea, and the other is a cross between theM. acuminata subspecies banksii and errans,
the latter endemic to the Philippines. Fe 'i bananas and banksii derivatives both originated in
New Guinea, but the site of banksii/ errans hybridisation is unknown. Archaeological evi-
dence from Kuk in the New Guinea Highlands indicates that edible diploids derived from M.
acuminata banksii were under cultivation by 7000 years ago, but the origins of Fe'i bananas
and banksiil errans hybrids cannot be dated. The geographic and chronological unknowns
do not exclude the possibility that all three lineages were carried into the Pacific by early
Oceanic speakers, but they do not confirm it either.


[19] Arnaud & Horry use the old section terms Eumusa and Australimusa.

                                                                           Staple foods   277


    The likelihood that banana domestication first occurred in New Guinea, and that edible
bananas spread from there into Asia and Africa, means that any bananas brought to New
Guinea and the Bismarcks by Austronesian speakers probably came from this region in the
first place. That bananas have long been a part of their diet is confirmed by the very well
attested PMP term *punti and its POe continuation *pudi. The fact that its reflexes are so
widespread makes it certain that this was the generic term for bananas. Today's Oceanic
speakers usually have numerous terms for the different banana cultivars in their gardens, but
fact that few people use Simmonds and Shepherd's nomenclature in glosses (and that old
terms persist) makes it difficult or            to provide scientific names for these. Because
ofthis difficulty, old species terms are retained in glosses.

<
PMP *punti 'banana' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *pudi 'banana, Musa cultivars' (Capell1943: *puti)
  Adm:    Muss au       uri             'banana'
  Adm:    Seimat        pudi            'Musa sp.' (Sorensen 1950)
  Adm:    Drehet        pUf]            'banana'
  NNG:    Maenge        puri            'banana'
  NNG:    Kove          puri            'banana'
  NNG:    Lukep (Po no) pur             'banana'
  NNG:    Gitua         pudi            'banana'
  NNG:    Mapos Buang vud               'banana'
  PT:     Tubetube      udi             'banana'
  MM:     Nakanai       vugi            'banana'
  MM:     Bulu          vudi            'banana'
  MM:     Tigak         ur              'banana' (Beney 1980)
  MM:     Tolai         vudu            'banana'
  TM:     Aiwoo         no-u            'banana'
  SES:    Gel a         vudi            'banana'
  SES:    To'aba'ita    judi            'banana' (archaic)
  SES:    Lau           judi            'banana'
  SES:    Sa'a          huti            'banana'
  NCV:    Naman         na-vaj          'banana'
  NCV:    Nese          no-gic          'banana'
  NCV:    Uripiv        na-vij          'banana'
  NCV:    Lonwolwol     vih             'banana'
  NCV:    Port Sandwich na-viic         'banana'
  NCV:    Nguna         na-adi          'banana'
  SV:     Sye           no-voh          'banana'
  SV:     Anejom        no-hos          'banana'
  NCal:   Pije          piji(f))        'Musa paradisiaca'
  NCal:   Xaracuu       pwi             'banana'
  NCal:   Iaai          o-vic           'banana'
  Mic:    Kosraean      u.s             'banana'
  Mic:    Mokilese      wus             'banana'
  Mic:    Po nape an    ut              'banana'
  Mic:    Chuukese                      'banana'
  Mic:    Puluwat       wur             'banana'
  Mic:    Satawalese    wur             'banana'
  Mic:    Woleaian      wi.si           'banana'
  Fij:      Wayan            vudi       'cooking banana; sometimes used as generic term
                                        for banana'
  Pn:       Tongan          fusi        'cooking banana or banana of any kind '
>

278      Malcolm Ross


    The term Musa troglodytarum is used (inaccurately) both of wild varieties of M . bal-
bisiana and of Fe'i bananas. In the Uripiv and Samoan glosses below it is likely that it de-
notes the latter, in agreement with the Bauan gloss. POe *joRaga is glossed accordingly, but
with a question mark, because this was the meaning of the PROc reflex but not necessarily of
the POe term. Fe'i bananas are uncommon in New Guinea today, and it is not clear whether
they were present in the Bismarcks in Proto Oceanic times.

<
POe *joRaga 'banana, Fe'i (?) cultivars'
  NNG:      Middle W atut  cok             'banana'
  NNG:      Mumeng (Patep) }of}            'banana (generic) ; banana, Musa sapientium'
  MM:       Vaghua         soga            'banana'
  SES:      Arosi          to raga         'banana sp.'
  NCV:      Raga           hoaga           'k.o. banana'
  NCV:      Uripiv         jok             'Musa troglodytarum, a kind of banana'
  NCV:      Paamese        soko            'kind of banana with large orange coloured fruit '
  NCV:      Nguna          soaga           'cooking banana'
  Fij:      Bauan          soaga           'banana sp., Musafehi '
  Pn:       Samoan         soa?a           'mountain plantain, Musa troglodytarum'
                                           (Whistler 2000: 7)
>

    The glosses of the four terms below are vague, both because the glosses of present-day
forms are often vague and for the reasons given above, but they appear to have denoted ba-
nana cultivars. POe *sakup perhaps denoted a cultivar with long fruit, as the glosses of its
Gumawana, Motu and Kwara' ae reflexes suggest. In view of its upright bunches Kwara' ae
sa-sao appears to denote a Fe'i cultivar (J. Kennedy, pers. comm.), but this is neither con-
firmed nor disconfirmed by the glosses of its cognates. It is probable that POe *bwera was a
descriptive term meaning 'white', since Puluwat p wer retains this meaning. The POe form is
probably a reflex of PMP *burak 'white'. If so, one may infer that it referred to bananas of
the Musa group, since Fe'i bananas are typically copper-coloured.

<
POe *sakup 'banana cultivar with long fruit ' (?)
  PT:       Gumawana      yagowa      'a long non-sweet banana'
  PT:       Taupota       hakova      'banana'
  PT:       Tab oro       daua        'k.o. banana: white flesh '
  PT:       Motu          dau         'k.o. banana: very long'
  MM:       Roviana       hakua       'banana'
  MM:       Maringe       cau         'banana'
  SES:      Kwara' ae     sa-sao      'k.o. banana with upright bunches and large fruit '
  SES:      ' Are ' are   sao-sao     'k.o. wild banana'
  NCV:      NEAmbae       haka        'banana'
  NCV:      Larevat       (nav )say   'banana'
  NCV:      Tape          (ni)say     'banana'
  NCV:      Paamese       sou-sou     'k.o. banana'
>

                                                                                        Staple foods   279


<
POe *bwera 'Musa cultivar'
  PT:    Gapapaiwa bora-bora                  'k.o. banana'
  PT:    Budibud      bwela-mweza             'banana'
  NCV: Paamese        a-voi                   'k.o. banana'
  Mic: Puluwatese (wuru)pwer                  'k.o. banana enjoyed cooked'
>

<
POe *baqun 'banana cultivar'
  Adm: Loniu         pak:Jw        'k.o. wild banana'
  MM: Teop           pauna         'banana; kidney'
  SES: To'aba'ita ba?u             'banana plant and fruit' (syn.fudi, now archaic)
  SES: Dori'o        ba?u          'banana'
PSV *n-ban 'banana (generic)' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:   Sye          ni-mpa        'k.o. banana with long fruit'
  SV:   Lenakel      niJ-piJn      'banana'
  SV:   SWTanna niJ-pwan           'banana'
  Mic: Puluwatese (wuru)pawo 'k.o. cooking banana'
cf. also:
     NNG: Nenaya              bayup           'banana' (Stober 2005)
>

<
PWOc *bwatiq 'banana cultivar'
 PT:   Taw ala       bihiya                   'banana plant'
 PT:   Misima        bwahiki                  'banana'
 PT:   Nimoa         bwasihe                  'banana'
 MM: Vitu            beti                     'banana'
 MM: Vagunu          batia                    'banana'
>

   There is evidence for PWOc *pudi-pudi "wild banana', a transparent reduplication of the
generic POe term for banana (see ch. 2, §7.2).

__pre__
      NNG: Mangap              pin-pin         'wild banana'
      PT:  Sudest              yudu-yudu       'wild banana seeds'
      MM: Ramoaaina            udu-udu         'wild banana'
      MM: Tolai                vudu-vudu       'wild banana, Ensete glaucum' 20 (Arnaud & Horry
                                               1997: 19)

    Names for the various parts of the banana plant are discussed in chapter 4. Some are
also mentioned in §2.2.1, as they are also used for the taro (and probably for other plants,
too). Sorting out glosses is sometimes difficult, but the following inferences appear to be
well founded (section numbers refer to ch. 4): the banana plant has a main stem, *baRa-baRa
(§2.2) of its own, from which protrudes a stem holding a bunch, *pu!JU (§2.8) of bananas,
from which in tum grow small stems, *kul'o (§2.8) each holding a hand, *qiti!J (§2.8) of
bananas. [21] A new banana plant is planted with a slip or cutting, *[s,j]uli(q) (§2.6), and the
new growth first appears as a shoot, *qili (§2.6).

[20] The genus Ensete belongs, like Musa, to the Musaceae family. Its members have edible roots.

[21] Ross (1996c: 185) reconstructed a form *paRa(l,R) 'stem, bunch (of bananas)' supported by Wayan baba
'leaf-stalk', Tawala halana 'bunch/hand ofbananas' and Bingparar 'stem of/cluster (bananas, betelnut, etc);
handle of axe'. The Bing term also means 'axe handle' and in fact reflects widely reflected POe *paRara 'axe
handle' (AcD). Tawala halana is at best a borrowed reflt:x of this term, and perhaps not a reflex at all. Wayan
baba is a regular reflex of POe *baRa-baRa (ch.4, §2.2).

280    Malcolm Ross



                                                               segments

            Figure 9.6      Fruit, leaves and sections of breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis





 4 Artocarpus altilis (syn. A. communis! A. incisus), breadfruit, TP kapiak, P
  beletiutu (Moraceae)

Breadfruit trees grow throughout the Oceanic-speaking region, except for New Zealand and
the Chatham Islands. Breadfruit tend to be co·-staples with other starchy foods, providing
starch when the other staples are out of season and vice versa. In Melanesia it is most signifi-
cant as a staple in the Temotu Province of the Solomons, but is also important in SE Papua, the
Bismarcks and Bougainville, 22 on the coasts of the islands of Vanuatu, in Micronesia, in Fiji
and in parts of Polynesia (Henderson & Hancock 1988:36, Walter & Sam 2002: 107-108).

    Breadfruit trees grow to a height of20 m and usually at altitudes below 1200 m. They are
fairly tolerant with regard to soil, and grow in the coral soils of atolls. In the South Pacific, a
tree yields 50 to 150 ovoid grapefruit-sized pale yellow to yellow-orange fruit per (annual)
season. In some areas there is a second smaller fruiting halfway between main annual fruit-
ings. The breadfruit is a syncarp, a compound fruit with many segments arranged around the
core, which itself is the spike of the original flower. Each segment contains a seed surrounded
by flesh and growing from the core on a fleshy receptacle. The segments are visible on the
skin of the fruit as hexagon-like shapes, as shown in Figure 9.6. A breadfruit may weigh as
much as 5 kg.

[22] Kennedy & Clarke (2004) draw attention to the often overlooked but very considerable importance of bread-
fruit in Papua New Guinea.

                                                                            Staplefoods     281


    Breadfruit seeds have a high protein conltent and are nutritionally the most valuable part
of the fruit (Paijmans 1976: 123). Breadfruit are very rich in starch and contain about 25 %
carbohydrates. They are usually roasted, baked, fried, or boiled before being eaten. The cook-
ing method depends on the cultivar. They can be eaten raw, but in Papua New Guinea and
the Solomons they are commonly baked whole in a fire or an oven, and then the skin and
seeds are removed. Some fruit have seeds about the size and texture of chestnuts and taste
rather like very dense young potatoes. They are removed from the baked fruit and sometimes
roasted over the fire before eating. In New Guinea this is usually the only part that is eaten
(Walter & Sam 2002: 107-110, Bourke & Allen forthcoming).

    The description above applies to breadfruit varieties in New Guinea and the Bismarck
Archipelago. As one moves eastward across the Pacific, one finds breadfruit varieties that
have been increasingly selected for flesh rather than seeds, so that most cultivars in Polynesia
are seedless and are propagated by root cuttings. The genetic history is more complex than
this implies, however, as two other species have contributed to the varieties subsumed under
A . altilis. One is A . camansi, sometimes called 'breadnut', which occurred both wild and
cultivated in New Guinea, the other A . mariannensis, endemic to the high islands of western
Micronesia (Yen 1991 , Zerega 2003 , cited by Kennedy & Clarke 2004 ).

    Because breadfruit trees usually produce large crops at certain times of the year, preser-
vation is an issue. In parts of Papua New Guinea and in the Temotu archipelago, breadfruit
are dried into a sort of biscuit (French & Bridle 1978:40, Henderson & Hancock 1988: 37).
A traditional preservation technique in Vanuatu, Micronesia and Polynesia is to bury peeled
and washed fruits in a leaf-lined pit where they ferment over several weeks and produce
a sour, sticky paste. So stored, the product may last a year or more, and some pits are re-
ported to have produced edible contents more than 30 years later (for terms associated with
fermentation, see vol.l , ch.6, §4.2).

    A common breadfruit product is a mix tune of cooked or fermented breadfruit mash mixed
with coconut milk and baked in banana leaves. In Vanuatu breadfruit are sometimes grated
before cooking, or made into small balls and cooked in coconut milk.

    All parts of the tree yield latex, a milky juice, which is used in some locations for boat
caulking. At least in parts of New Britain and Vanuatu it is used to catch birds (Powell1976,
Walter & Sam 2002: 109). It also has medicinal uses. On Manus (Admiralties) the latex is di-
luted and drunk as treatment for dysentry, diarrhoea and stomach ache (O ' Collins & Lamothe
1989). On Vanua Lava (Banks Islands, Vanuatu) latex from the breadfruit is mixed with la-
tex from Ficus adenosperma as a potion against excessive menstrual discharge (Bourdy &
Walter 1994). It is also used in Vanuatu to 'patch' damaged yams for storage (Walter & Sam
2002: 109).

    The Bola and the Nakanai of New Britain beat the inner bark into cloth and use it for
articles of clothing, including rain capes and it was formerly also used in this way in Tonga
(Floyd 1954, Powell 1976, Walter & Sam 2002: 109). Infusions of the bark and leaves are
used to treat disorders of the digestive tract in parts of Vanuatu. The wood sometimes serves
for making outriggers and paddles and for firewood.

    Two POe terms for 'breadfruit' are reconstructed with reasonable certainty, *kuluR and
*baReko, whilst a third, *beta, is less well supported.

282       Malcolm Ross


    By far the most widespread and frequently reflected of the three is POe *kuluR, inherited
from PMP, with reflexes in the Admiralties and Mussau, North New Guinea, Papuan Tip,
Bali-Vitu (MM), the Willaumez group (MM), New Caledonia and Central Pacific. It is ap-
parently also reflected in the Chuukic subgroup of Micronesian with a change in denotation
to Barringtonia asiatica. A variant form *kunuR is reflected in North New Guinea, languages
of the Ngero-Vitiaz and Markham groups and in the Willaumez (MM) language Meramera
(which has probably borrowed it from a Ngero-Vitiaz language). 23 There are also possible
reflexes of *kunuR in Papuan Tip languages, but these are open to two interpretations. One
is that they indeed reflect *kunuR. The other is that the Dobu, Kalokalo and Wedau forms
below reflect *kuluR, as POe *I is regularly refllected as n in these languages, and that Suau
and the Central Papuan languages (Balawaia, Motu, Roro and Mekeo) have borrowed from
a language with a n. This second hypothesis encounters a problem. Although the Central
Papuan languages have a number of loans from the Are-Taupota group to which W edau be-
longs (Ross 1994b), Suau shows no sign of such loans. What is more, Suau (Daui) unuli and
Suau (Kwato) ?unuli are the expected reflexes of *kunuR, displaying a uniquely Suauic par-
agogic -i after the earlier final consonant, and Wedau kunori is clearly a loan from Suauic.
Thus the first hypothesis is apparently correct: Papuan Tip languages also reflect *kunuR.
In consequence, *kunuR can be reconstructed to PNGOc, and it is tentatively marked thus
below-'tentatively', because we would expect all North New Guinea terms to reflect the
PNGOc etymon, but some of the Bel languages (Bilibil, Gedaged and Takia) and all the
Schouten languages (Wogeo, Manam, Ali and Sissano are cited below) instead reflect POe
*kuluR, and I have no explanation for this.

    Reflexes of POe *baReko are found in New Ireland (MM), NW Solomonic (MM), SE
Solomonic, Temotu, North-Central and Southem Vanuatu. In three Central Papuan languages,
Lala, Roro and Kuni, the reflex of *baReko denotes 'sago palm', a shift from one starch
source to another. In the sense 'breadfruit', reflexes of *kuluRrv*kunuR and *baReko are
geographically in complementary distribution. The distribution of *baReko forms an unin-
terrupted block across much oflsland Melanesia excluding New Caledonia, with reflexes of
*kuluRrv*kunuR across most of the remaining Oceanic-speaking region. Just two reflexes of
*baReko in the sense 'breadfruit' occur outside the block. One is Tawala beleha, which dis-
plays the wrong vowels and may be a chance resemblance. The other is Tomoip bu!J-biria. 24
Tomoip is situated near the languages ofthe Mengen family (NNG), but it is a New Ireland
outlier (Ross 1988: 292-293) and as such is an extension from the block.

    How are we to explain the complementary distribution? It is clear from non-Oceanic
cognates and from its Oceanic distribution that the usual POe term for breadfruit was *kuluR.
But on our criteria for POe reconstruction (ch. 1, §3.2.3) *baReko must also be reconstructed
to POe, as it is reflected in Westem Oceanic (MM), SE Solomonic, Temotu, and North and
South Vanuatu. The distributions suggest that POe *kuluR was the default term for A. altilis
and that it was then replaced by *baReko in a block from New Ireland to South Vanuatu.
However, the reflexes of *baReko are generally regular, suggesting that replacement took
place very early in the history of Oceanic.[25]

[23] In New Caledonian languages -n- regularly reflects *-l-.

[24] Tomoip bu!]- is a classifier that occurs on fruit names.

[25] Cf. ch.l3, §3.4, where a similar but not identical situation is described with regard to Morinda citrifolia.

                                                                            Staple foods    283


    POe *baReko or perhaps *beta may have denoted A. calamansi or a particular breadfruit
cultivar or, for example, the cooked breadfruit, but these possibilities remain speculations.
    Scattered areas-many North New Guinea languages on New Britain, scattered languages
in the islands of the Papuan Tip area, much of Central and South Vanuatu, and Microne-
sia-have a breadfruit term other than *kuluRrv *kunuR and *baReko. Two of these, POe(?)
*beta and PROc *maRi, are sufficiently widespread to warrant mention

    POe (?) *beta has a more restricted distribution: its reflexes occur in the New Georgia
group, within SE Solomonic only in Gela, and in North-Central Vanuatu. This distribution
requires that it be reconstructed for POe. The fact that its only non-Eastern Oceanic reflexes
are in Nduke and Roviana in New Georgia in the northwest Solomons raises the possibility
that *beta is a PEOc term that has been borrowed westward, but there is no other evidence I
know of for Eastern Oceanic loans in New Georgia.

    A fourth term, PROc *maRi 'breadfruit', is limited to South Vanuatu, Micronesian and
Polynesian, but Geraghty (2004: 88) attributes Polynesian reflexes ofthe form mei (presum-
ably for tmai or tmal) to borrowing, presumably from a Micronesian source. Again the
distribution requires an explanation, this time because it is bipartite, but I can provide none.

<
PMP *kuluR 'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *kuluR 'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis'
  Adm: Muss au        ulu           'breadfruit'
  Adm: Loniu          kun           'breadfruit'
  Adm: Titan          kul           'breadfruit'
  Adm: Ponam          gut           'breadfruit'
  NNG: Bilibil        uti           'breadfruit'
  NNG: Gedaged        ul            'breadfruit'
  NNG: Takia          ul            'breadfruit'
  NNG: Wogeo          kul           'breadfruit'
  NNG: Manam          kulu          'breadfruit'
  NNG: Ali            kul           'breadfruit'
  NNG: Sissano        utC           'breadfruit'
  MM: Vitu            kulu          'breadfruit'
  MM: Bola            ulu           'breadfruit'
  MM: Nakanai         ulu           'breadfruit'
  NCal: Pije          cin           'breadfruit'
  NCal: Nemi          cin           'breadfruit'
  NCal: NyeHiyu       yen           'breadfruit'
  NCal: Nelemwa       cen           'breadfruit'
  NCal: Iaai          i-oun         'breadfruit'
  Fij:   Wayan        kulu          'breadfruit'
  Pn:    Samoan       ?ulu          'breadfruit'
Proto Chuukic *kulu 'Barringtonia asiatica' Bender et al. (2003)
  Mic: Chuukese       kuun          'Barringtonia asiatica, B. racemosa'
  Mic: Puluwatese kuul              'tree, used for fish poison'
>

284   Malcolm Ross


<
PNGOc *kunuR 'breadfruit'
  NNG: Kove          unu             'breadfruit'
  NNG: Gitua         unu             'breadfruit'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) kun             'breadfruit'
  NNG: Sio           kunu            'breadfruit'
  NNG: Tami          kun             'breadfruit'
  NNG: Sukurum       gunik           'breadfruit'
  NNG: Adzera        guni            'breadfruit'
  NNG: Mato          UIJ             'breadfruit'
  NNG: Wab           un              'breadfruit'
  NNG: Bing          un              'breadfruit'
  PT:  Dobu          ?unu            'breadfruit'
  PT:  Kalokalo      kunu            'breadfruit'
  PT:  Wedau         kunori          'breadfruit' (loan from Suauic)
  PT:  Suau (Daui) unuli             'breadfruit'
  PT:  Suau (Kwato) ?unuli           'breadfruit'
  PT:  Balawaia      ?unu            'breadfruit'
  PT:  Hula          ?unu            'breadfruit'
  PT:  Motu          unu             'breadfruit'
  PT:  Roro          unu             'breadfruit'
  PT:  Mekeo         unu             'breadfruit'
  MM: Meramera       unu             'breadfruit' (borrowed from a NNG source)
>

<
POe *baReko 'breadfruit' (French-Wright 1983)
  PT:   Taw ala      beleha       'breadfruilt' (for tbale[h]o)
  PT:   Lala         bale?o       'sago palm'
  PT:   Roro         pare?o       'sago palm'
  MM: Lavongai       bei!Jo       'breadfruilt'
  MM: Tigak          bego         'breadfruilt' (Beney 1980)
  MM: Nalik          baraua       'breadfruilt'
  MM: Tabar          bareu        'breadfruilt'
  MM: Lihir          bale         'Artocarpus altilis' (Burley 2006)
  MM: Tangga         hie          'breadfruilt'
  MM: Tomoip         (bu!J )biria 'breadfruilt'
  MM: Nehan          bario        'breadfruilt'
  MM: Halia-Haku baleo            'breadfruilt'
  MM: Tinputz        baniu        'breadfruilt'
  MM: Teop           banio        'Artocarpus altilis' (Record 1945)
  MM: Uruava         bareo        'breadfruilt'
  MM: Babatana       bario        'Artocarpus altilis' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
  TM: Aiwoo          fii-biilo    'breadfruilt'
  TM: Natiigu        bia          'breadfruilt'
  TM: Tanema         baloe        'breadfruilt'
  TM: Burna          bale         'breadfruilt'
  SES: Gel a         baleyo       'a pair of breadfruit tied together'
  SES: Lengo          be yo           'breadfruit'
  SES: Talise         baleyo          'breadfruit'
  SES: Longgu         bale?o          'breadfruit'
  SES: Kwaio          bale?o          'breadfruit tree, breadfruit'
  SES: Birao          baleho          'breadfruit'
  SES: Lau            bwaleo          'breadfruit'
  SES: Kwara' ae      baleo?          'breadfruit'
  SES: 'Are ' are     pare?o          'breadfruit'
  SES: Sa' a          pwale?o         'breadfruit'
  SES: Arosi          bware?o         'breadfruit'
  SES: Bauro          pareyo          'breadfruit'
  NCV: Mota           pego            'breadfruit sp.'
  NCV: Nduindui       baeko           'breadfruit'
  NCV: NEAmbae        baego           'breadfruit'
  NCV: Nokuku         peko            'breadfruit sp.'
  NCV: Tamambo        baeho           'breadfruit'
  NCV: Raga           baeyo           'Artocarpus altilis' (Walsh 2004)
  SV:  Lenakel        nu-(v() )vaau   'k.o. breadfruit with very large fruit '
>

                                                                             Staple foods   285


<
POe *beta 'breadfruit'
  MM: Nduke            beta           'breadfruit'
  MM: Roviana          beta           'breadfruit'
  SES: Gel a           beta           'breadfruit'
  NCV: Mwotlap         b[e]te         'breadfruit'
  NCV: Mwesen          per            'breadfruit' (Bourdy & Walter 1994)
  NCV: Naman           ne-bet         'breadfruit'
  NCV: Tape            p()te          'breadfruit'
  NCV: Avava           e-bet          'breadfruit'
  NCV: Lonwolwol beta                 'breadfruit'
  NCV: Paamese         veta           'breadfruit'
>

<
PROc *maRi 'breadfruit' (Geraghty 1990)
  SV:  Ura           ni-mal         'breadfruit'
  SV:  Sye           n-mar          'breadfruit'
  SV:  White sands n()-mei          'breadfruit'
  SV:  Kwamera       ne-mer         'breadfruit'
  SV:  Anejom        in-ma, in-mer- 'breadfruit'
                     in-mer-        'breadfruit' (in compounds)
  Mic: Kiribati      mai            'breadfruit'
  Mic: Marshallese may              'breadfruit'
  Mic: Woleaian      may            'breadfruit'
  Mic: Puluwatese mcey              'breadfruit'
  Mic: Chuukese      mcey           'breadfruit'
  Pn:  Tongan        mei            'breadfruit'
  Pn:  E Futunan mei                'breadfruit'
  Pn:  Marque san mei               'breadfruit'
>

286       Malcolm Ross


      Names of some breadfruit parts are reconstructed in chapter 4. They are:
      • PWOc *kalijo 'edible kernel of breadfruit segments' (ch.4, §2.9)
       • POe *malo- 'breadfruit flower, breadfruit core' (ch.4, §2.9)
       • POe *bul[i,u]t 'sap (of plant) or other sticky substance; be sticky' (Micronesian and
         Polynesian reflexes denote the latex of the breadfruit tree; ch.4, §2.11)


9.5 Plants which store starch in their stems

9.5.1 Metroxylon spp., sago palm, TP saksak, P hevinat, aevrinat, Bnatanggura (Arecaceae)

The starch source in aM etroxylon sagu palm is the pith within its trunk. The palm only flowers
and fruits once, and large stocks of carbohydrate are accumulated in the trunk in preparation
for this event, after which the palm dies. This reserve of starch reaches its maximum just
before flowering, when sago-eaters fell the palm and harvest its starch.

    Sago palms are species of the genus M etroxylon. They grow in fresh-water swamps and
wetlands, but not on permanently flooded sites. The species which produces most food starch,
M. sagu, reaches 15 min height and has a bole diameter without leaf sheaths of 35-60 em.
Each palm is produced from a root stock which gives out several shoots, with the result that
sago stands are naturally very dense. Other species vary in height, some smaller, some larger,
the very largest, M. amicarum, growing to 33m.

    There are a number of different species of M etroxylon found in the Oceanic-speaking
region. Those upon which the literature (Barrau 1955:45--46, 1962: 140--143, Henderson &
Hancock 1988: 34--35, McClatchey et al. 2006b) appears to agree are: 26

     M. sagu                   New Guinea, Bismarcks, Bougainville, Choiseul, New Georgia27
     M. bougainvillense        New Guinea, Bismarcks, Bougainville, Choiseul, New Georgia28
     M. solomonense            Solomon Islands
     M. warburgii              Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Rotuma, Samoa29
     M. vitiense               Fiji
     M. amicarum               Micronesia

    It seems probable that sago starch was consumed by POe speakers. The POe homeland
was in the Bismarcks (vo1.2, ch.2) and it is there: and in areas nearby (New Guinea, Bougain-
ville, Choiseul and New Georgia) that Metroxylon palms are used for food purposes. This is
almost certainly related to the fact that this region is the domain of the two species, M. sagu
and M. bougainvillense, which provide the best supplies of starch (Henderson & Hancock
1988: 34--35). Outside the sago-eating region sago species usually do not grow naturally but
are cultivated for their leaves.

[26] The term 'sago palm' is also used in North America and in New Zealand for a decorative cycad, Cycas
revoluta, because of its vague resemblance to aM etroxylon palm.

[27] According to Barrau (1962: 142), M. sagu is a sterile cultivar of M. rumphii. Barrau (1955: 45) also lists M.
oxybracteatum (New Guinea). Other sources do not list it.

[28] French ( 1986: 2 7) and McClatchey et al. (2006b) say that M. bougain villense is a synonym of M. solomonense,
but other sources view them as markedly separate specks.

[29] McClatchey et al. (2006b) also list M. paulcoxii (Samoa) but say it is possibly a cultivar of M. warburgii.

                                                                                  Staple foods   287



                                                            washing the pounded sago pith

                     Figure 9.7   Extracting the starch from a sago trunk



    It is probably true to say that in Oceanic-speaking communities sago is only a staple where
a marshy environment causes other staples to be in short supply. Except at locations in the Ad-
miralties, it is always a supplement to garden staples, not a replacement. Although there are
communities in New Guinea which get their sago entirely from natural palm stands, Oceanic-
speaking communities probably also plant palms from suckers (transplanting seedlings is
rare ; Rhoads 1986).

    Sago palms grow very quickly, up to 1.5 m of vertical stem growth per year. They are
harvested at the age of 7 to 15 years just before they flower. The palm is felled, the trunk
is cut into sections. These are either split lengthways or the bark is half peeled off, and in
pre-contact times the pith was extracted with tools made from hard wood, rough stone or
sharpened bamboo. Commonly the crushed pith is washed and pounded, crushed or wrung
(POe *poRos, vol.1 ,ch.9, §7) in an inclined trough made from a sago leaf petiole (see Figure
9.7). The starchy liquid thus extracted from the fibrous residue runs through a coconut frond-
netting strainer (POe *Runut, vol.l , ch.6, §5.6; this volume, ch.12, §5.2) and is collected
in leaf pans to settle. The water is decanted so that the starch can dry. The dried starch is
sago flour, which is almost pure carbohydrate, for which reason it is rarely eaten alone. To
preserve it, sago flour is wrapped in sago leaves or placed in clay pots and simply dampened
with water from time to time. It is sometimes eaten as a porridge with additional ingredients,
sometimes made into a paste which is baked into a pancake or biscuit with other ingredients,
and sometimes baked in a hollow bamboo over a fire (May 1984: 54).

288    Malcolm Ross


    At least on Malaita and in the Temotu archipelago chunks of unprocessed pith are some-
times baked as an emergency food (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 191 , Henderson & Hancock
1988: 34). Throughout Oceania, sago leaves, which are pinnate, not palmate, provide excel-
lent roofing thatch. They were evidently used for this purpose by POe speakers, who called
the leaves and thatch *qatop (vol.1 , ch.3 , §3.4). Parts of the sago palm have a variety of uses,
and not just in the sago-making process itself. As well as thatching, among the Bola ofNew
Britain the leaves are used for making screens, pillows, and canoe sails, laths of skin from
the leaf midrib are made into matting which             as a fish trap, and midribs are used to
make internal partitions and heavy stiff rope (Powell 1976). The Kwara'ae feed the pith to
pigs. They use the leaf spines to make needles for stitching sago thatch and darts for shooting
birds, as well as for making brooms. The leaf shoot is stained and used to make decorative
armbands. The frond bases used to be used as stools, and a fallen palm becomes a source of
sago grubs and sago fungus, both ofwhich are 1eaten (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 191).

    There was apparently just one POe term for the sago palm, namely POe *Rabia. As the
Fijian and Polynesian reflexes below show, early Central Pacific speakers reassigned PCP
*abia, reflecting POe *Rabia, to another starch source, Tacca leontopetaloides, Polynesian
arrowroot (§2.3.2). Kikusawa (2003: 49) argues-correctly, I think-that PPn *pia 'Polynes-
ian arrowroot' is cognate with Bauan yabia 'arrowroot', and reflects loss of initial *a- from
PCP *abia.[30]

<
PMP *Rambia 'sago palm' (Blust 1989)
POe *Rabia 'sago, Metroxylon spp., mainly Metroxylon sagu (syn. Metroxylon rumphii)'
  (Grace 1969: *r(a,u)bia)
  Adm: Seimat           api          'sago' (Sorensen 1950)
  Adm: Titan            api          'sago'
  Adm: Bipi             abi          'sago'
  NNG: Maenge           lam via      'sago'
  NNG: Malasanga        labia        'sago'
  NNG: Kaiwa            labi         'sago'
  NNG: Kairiru          rabi         'sago'
  PT:     Muyuw         yabiy        'sago' (F. Damon, pers. comm.)
  PT:     Kilivila      yabia        'sago'
  PT:     Bwaidoga      labia        'sago'
  PT:     Suau (Saliba) labia        'sago'
  PT:     Balawaia      labia        'sago'
  MM: Bola              rabia        'sago'
  MM: Babatana          rabia        'Nypafruticans' (McClatchey et al. 2005)
  TM: Nebao             ni!'-ri!'    'sago'
  TM: Asuboa            (lov)ne-te   'sago'
  TM: Tanabili          no-kwo       'sago'
  TM: Burna             :Jt:Jv:J     'sago'
  SV:     Kwamera       ni-epi       'Metroxylon warburgii'
PCP *abia 'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca leontopetaloides'
  Fij:    Bauan         yabia        'arrowroot, starch, Tacca leontopetaloides'
PPn *pia 'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca leontopetaloides'
  Pn:     Samoan        pia          'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca leontopetaloides' (old
                                     term; Wl1istler 2000: 192)
  Pn:     Pileni        pia          'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca leontopetaloides'
  Pn:     Rarotongan pia             'Polynesian arrowroot, Tacca leontopetaloides'
>

[30] Samoan pia (and its cognates) thus do not reflect POe *piRaq 'giant taro,Alocasia macrorrhizos', as I assumed
in Ross (1996c). The regular PPn reflex of POe *piRaq would be t*fia.

                                                                                      Staple foods     289


    In Ross (1993) I followed Dutton (1994)1 in reconstructing POe *sag(u) 'sago starch' as
a continuation ofDempwolff' s (1938) PMP *sa[!J]gu 'sago starch' . I now think this recon-
struction is too insecure to stand. As Chowning (200 1: 79) points out, some of the supporting
data are semantically doubtful reflexes, and others may represent borrowings from Tok Pisin
saksak 'sago '. I still think that Kara (E) sa-sak 'sago', Solos sa-sak and Haku saka-saka, both
'sago pancake', may represent a continuation ofDempwolff' s etymon, but I cannot be sure.

    A glance through chapter 4 shows that where the parts of a sago palm resemble those of
the coconut palm, the same terms are used for both. Thus most ofthe terms in §5.1 of ch.12
probably also applied to the fronds of the sago palm. The petioles of some sago species are
covered in thorns, for which the POe term was *ruRi or *druRi ( ch.4, 2.12).


9.5.2 Cycas spp., cycad, Malayan palm fern, TP baibai, Bnamele (Cycadaceae)

Cycads are palm-like plants of the family Cycadaceae (unlike sago, coconut, betelnut and the
black, fan and nipa palms, all members of the family Arecaceae). Until a decade ago Cycas
rumphii (syn. Cycas circinalis) was believed to be the only cycad species in Oceanic-speaking
territory. However, recent work on the genus reported by Laubenfels & Adema (1998) has
established that two species, C. rumphii and c, have almost identical distributions extending
from the north coast of New Guinea eastward through the Bismarcks and into the Solomons
with outliers in Micronesia. At least one of these is evidently also present in Vanuatu and
New Caledonia, to judge from the data listed below.31

    The description here is limited to C. rumphii, but, as some sources treat C. scratchleyana
as a synonym of C. rumphii, I assume that the two species have almost identical features.
C. rumphii grows 3-10m tall. Guppy (1906: 413), cited by Barrau (1965), considered C.
rumphii to have been one of the early food sources of the Pacific Islands. Barrau mentions
oral traditions about its use in New Guinea, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji. The seeds
were and sometimes still are used at least as famine foods on islands throughout its Pacific
distribution. Such is the strength of these oral traditions that Barrau concurs with Guppy' s
view that it was at one time more than a famine food, pointing to the popularity of food
made from the seeds, for example, on Guam. Other sources mention the seed pudding as
something prized in places as far apart as the Ninigo Islands (Sorensen 1950) and Bellona
(Christiansen 1975). Exploitation of the stem starch seems to have been much rarer in the
Pacific (it is more common in parts of Asia; Thieret 1958, Whiting 1953), but it occurred at
Wedau (north coast of SE Papua, Kahn 1986), in the Solomons and in New Caledonia. In
the Solomons the starch was processed in much the same way as sago starch (and as with
sago, the starch was harvested before fruiting; ch.9, §5.1 Parkinson 1907). In New Caledonia
the stem starch was cut up and cooked (Jumelle 1907, cited by Thieret 1958). In Tonga the
grated stem starch was rinsed and the starch that settled out was collected as a famine food
(Whistler 1991b).


[31] A third species, C. celebica, has a discontinuous distribution- from Borneo to the Moluccas, and from Bou-
gainville to Tonga, with an outliers in the Marianas.

290    Malcolm Ross


    The seeds need considerable processing before they can be eaten, as they contain the
toxin hydrocyanic acid. In the Ninigo Islands the otherwise poisonous fruit is submerged
in salt water until the skin begins to peel off, then washed in fresh water and dried in the
sun. This process removes the toxin, and the seeds are then pounded into flour, made into
a pudding and baked (Sorensen 1950). The process on Guam was similar (Safford 1905,
cited by Whiting 1953). On Rennell and Bellona Islands the seeds are wrapped in a fern leaf
(M icrosorium scolopendria) and soaked in water for five or more days, then pounded and
baked (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 140). In Fiji the seeds were boiled until they were soft,
then eaten (H. B. R. Parham 1943, cited by Thi1eret 1958).

                                                        C. rumphii also has a variety of other uses. Its
                                                    bark sap is reported as a wood glue in Marovo
                                                    and northern Malaita. In a number of places
                                                    in the Bismarcks and the Solomons seeds are
                                                    threaded on a string and used as a bull-roarer
                                                    toy (Peekel 1984: 35, Henderson & Hancock
                                                    1988: 140, Hviding 2005: 143).

                                                        Various parts of the plant are used to cover
                                                    small wounds and tropical ulcers. In the Bismar-
                                                    cks it is the resin of the fruit (Peekel 1984: 35,
                                                    Holdsworth et al. 1982); in the Morobe Province
                                                    of Papua New Guinea, the raw seeds (Barrau
                                                    1965); among Drehet speakers in Manus, it is
                                                    sap obtained by cutting a notch in the bark
                                                    (Beard n.d.); on Santa Ana (Solomons), the pulp
                                                    of a scraped fruit. In the Reefs a bark preparation
                                                    is used to treat a stomach ailment (Henderson &
                                                    Hancock 1988: 140).

                                                        Barrau's assertion that C. rumphii played
                                                    an important role in earlier Oceanic cultures
                                                    rec1eives some support from the fact that sev-
                                                    eral terms for it are reconstructable: POe
                                                    *p(w)atoRu and *bai-bai(t), PEOc *mwa(q)ele and
Figure 9.8 Cycas rumphii: A, plant with             PCP   *lo!Jo-lo!Jo. The geographic distributions of
fronds removed to show fruit; B, apex of leaf these terms scarcely overlap.
wiili leaflets; C, fruit; D, single fruit, longitu-     The glosses of many of the terms listed be-
dinal section.                                      low  refer simply to 'cycad' or 'Cycas'. None is
                                                    identified as 'C. scratchleyana', and there is rea-
sonable support for glossing all of them 'Cycas rumphit, but this is likely to be due to the
fact that the two species were not distinguished until recently.

<
PMP *patuRu 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii' 32
POe *p(w)atoRu 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
     Adm:   Mussau        otou           'Cycas rumphit
     Adm:   Seimat        haato          'Cycas rumphit (Sorensen 1950)
     Adm:   Lou           paro           'Cycas rump hit
     Adm:   Drehet        potop          'Cycas palm'
     MM:    Nakanai       patola         'cycad' (-a for t-u)
>

[32] PMP *patuRu is supported by the Oceanic data here and by the following non-Oceanic cognates: Pinatubo
Samba! patogo, Tagalog patugo, Hanunuo pitugu, Panay Bisayan pitogo (Madulid 2001b: 87), Kangean
Madurese p<Jtoko, Gorontalo patuhu, Buolpotugu, Buginese patuku (Heyne 1950: 107).

                                                                         Staple foods     291


<
PMP *ba(y)it 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii' (Ross 1996c)
POe *bai-bai(t) 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii' (Ross 1996c)
  PT:    Minaveha hai-hai           'palm'
  MM: Patpatar         be-be        'cycad palm'
  MM: Tolai            bai-bai      'arborescent fern sp.; cycad palm'
  MM: Nehan            be-be        'cycad'
  TM: Aiwoo            (nwasi)poyi 'Cycas rumphit
  TM: Aiwoo            (nwasi)poyi 'Cycas rump hit
  SES: Longgu          bai-bai      'cycad palm'
  SES: Lau             bai-bai      'k.o. cycad; nut ofthis tied to strings and made to
                                    hum, a bull-roarer'
  SES: Kwara'ae        bai-bai      'Cycas rumphit
  SES: Baelelea        gwae         'cycad palm'
  SES: Kwaio           bai-bai      'k.o. cycad; nut used in whirling toy'
  SES: 'Are'are        pai-pai      'k.o. cycad'
>

<
PCP *lo!Jo-lo!Jo 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
  Fij:   Bauan          lo!Jo-lo!Jo 'Cycas rumphit (Ryan 1988: 140)
  Pn:    Tongan         lo!Jo-lo!Jo 'Cycas rumphit
  Pn:    Niuean         lo!Jo-lo!Jo 'Cycas rumphit
  Pn:    W Uvean        lo!Jo-lo!Jo 'Cycas rumphit
  Pn:    Tikopia        ro!Jo-ro!Jo 'Cycas rumphit
  Pn:    Emae           ro!Jo-ro!Jo 'cycad'
>

   Most of the forms below point to PEOc *mwele. However, Namakir and Wayan point to
*mwali, Santa Ana and Paamese to *mwa(q)ele, and Naman and Neve'ei also reflect a vowel
sequence. Since the vowel sequence *ae is not known to have occurred in POe, I posit a
medial *-q- and reconstruct PEOc *mwa(q)ele.

<
PEOc *mwa(q)ele 'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
  SES: Ulawa          mwaele       'Cycas rumphii' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Santa Ana mwaere            'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Mwotlap        mwez         'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Mota           mweze        'cycad'
  NCV: NEAmbae mweze               'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Kiai           mete         'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Raga           mweze        'Cycas sp.' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Naman          meil         'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Neve'ei        ni-mwiyil    'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Tape           ni-mwil      'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Uripiv         na-mwez      'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Araki          (vi)mele     'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Tamambo vu-mwele            'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV: Paamese        maili        'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV:    Lewo          (puru)m wela   'Cycas rump hit
  NCV:    Namakir       m waz          'Cycas rumphii'
  NCV:    Nguna         na-mwele       'Cycas rump hit
  NCV:    S Efate       na-mwel        'Cycas rump hit
  SV:     Sye           no-mol         'Cycas rump hit
  SV:     Lenakel       na-ma!         'Cycas rump hit
  SV:     Kwamera       na-mur         'Cycas rump hit
  SV:     Anejom        no-mwoc        'Cycas rump hit
  NCal:   Pije          !Jen           'Cycas rump hit
  NCal:   Fwai          !Jen           'Cycas rump hit
  NCal:   Nemi          !Jen           'Cycas rump hit
  NCal:   Jawe          !Jen           'Cycas rump hit
  NCal:   Nyelayu       m we!J         'Cycas rump hit
>

292   Malcolm Ross



9.6 Summary

This chapter has treated POe terms for staple foods, i.e. sources of starch. 'Starchy food ' was
evidently a POe category of meal ingredient and was the hyponymous sense of POe *kana!J
'food' . Additional ingredients to accompany starch were probably POe *tamaji.

     The main root crops grown by POe speakers were evidently *qupi, the greater yam
(Dioscorea alata), *pwatika, the potato yam (D. bulbifera), and *talo(s) or *mwapo(q), taro
(Colocasia esculenta) (*talo(s) was the inherited term, *mwapo(q) a borrowing from a New
Guinea mainland Papuan language). They also grew *piRaq, giant taro (Alocasia macror-
rhizos). The importance of the greater yam and Colocasia taro is attested by the fact that
several terms can be reconstructed for (cultivars of?) each. The lesser yam, PWOc *kamisa
or *mamisa (Dioscorea esculenta), seems to have been domesticated by early Oceanic speak-
ers shortly after the break-up of POe.

     The swamp taro, Cyrtosperma merkusii, was a later introduction, reaching Melanesia
probably from Micronesia. The arrival of other modem root crops postdates the European
presence in Central and South America: they are the sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), cassava
(Manihot esculenta) and Xanthosoma taro.

     The banana, *pudi (M usa cultivars), and the breadfruit, *kuluR and *baReko (Artocarpus
altilis) were also important sources of starch for POe speakers, but the sago palm, *Ra-
bia (Metroxylon species), was probably no more than a supplementary or emergency starch
source.



10 Green vegetables and figs

10.1 Introduction

Green vegetables form an important part of *tamaji (ch.2, §6.2), the ingredients of a meal
which accompany *kana!J, starchy food (ch.2, §6.1). Henderson & Hancock (1988: 83) point
out that there is often no meat or fish component in the accompanying ingredients in the
Solomons, and that these often consist only of green vegetables, which are a major source
of protein. This explains the popularity of the high-protein Abelmoschus manihot. Solomon
Islanders consume a diverse range of green v,egetables, some cultivated, some collected from
the wild, and the same is true in the Bismarcks.

    Probably the most widely cultivated leafy vegetables in the Bismarck Archipelago are
Abelmoschus manihot (§2.1) and various species of Amaranthus (§2.2). However, all the lat-
ter except Amaranthus tricolor are introduced plants (R.M. Bourke, pers. comm.) and were
most probably not present in the gardens of Proto Oceanic speakers. Young leaves and peti-
oles of Colocasia esculenta taro (ch.9, §2.2.1) are also commonly eaten as vegetables, and
many languages have a separate word for them (ch.4, §2.5).

    Ferns recorded as being eaten include species of Asplenium, Athyrium, Ctenitis, Cyathea
(§3.1), Dennstaedtia, Diplazium and Dryopteris, as well as Cyclosorus truncatus (Paijmans
1976: 125). Diplazium esculentum is noted by Henderson & Hancock (1988: 84) as the most
widely eaten fern in the Solomons. However, the only fern for which a POe term is recon-
structed here is Cyathea (§3.1).

    An important seasonal food in some areas is the inflorescence (the unopened flower) of
Saccharum edule (§3.2). Another edible grass, Setaria palmifolia (no reconstruction), is an
important vegetable in inland areas of the Bismarcks and New Guinea (M. Bourke, pers.
comm.). The stinging herb Laportea interrupta (syn. Fleurya interrupta, Urtica interrupta)
is cultivated and eaten by the Tolai of the Gazelle Peninsula ofNew Britain (ch.7, §6.3 .2).
The leaves of M orinda citrifolia are also eaten as a green vegetable in parts of Papua New
Guinea (ch.l3, §3.4). Despite the large number of species that serve as green vegetables,
however, only a few terms for them have be1;:n reconstructed.

    Trees of the genus Ficus (§4) are included here because leaves of some freestanding
species serve as green vegetables in NW Island Melanesia. This is not true of all Ficus species
in the region, but it is convenient to keep all species ofthe genus together, as there are diffi-
culties in tying the glosses of some reconstmctions down to particular species.

294    Malcolm Ross




Figure 10.1 Abelmoschus manihot: A, plant (height 1.5 m); B, stem with leaf (edible) and flower
bud; C, flower; D, varieties displayed to show the diversity in leaf shape.



10.2 Leafy vegetables

10.2.1 Abelmoschus manihot (syn. Hibiscus manihot), slippety cabbage, bush cabbage, island cabbage, TP aibika, P slipari kabis, Bkabis aelan (Malvaceae)

Abelmoschus manihot is a low, many-branched tree-like shrub, seemingly present in ev-
ery garden throughout the Bismarck Archipelago and the Solomons (Figure 10.1). Barrau
(1955: 77) calls it 'truly the traditional vegetable of the whole of Melanesia'. Cuttings are
planted in mixed crop gardens and are also harvested from young regrowth in abandoned
gardens. There are many varieties, the young shoots and leaves of which have a high protein-
to-calorie ratio and are cooked in stone ovens, boiled or steamed in bamboo containers or
roasted in bark (Paijmans 1976: 124, Hviding 2005: 131).

    POe *wasa primarily denoted A. manihot, evidently the most salient and commonly con-
sumed green vegetable in Lapita communities, but it also appears to have been used hyper-
nymously for 'green vegetables' in general, to judge from the glosses below.

<
POe *wasa 'Abelmoschus manihot; green vegetables in general' (French-Wright 1983)
  Adm: Mussau       wasa         'vine (generic?)'
  NNG: Tuam         (ai)waz      'edible greens, Gnetum gnemon '
  NNG: Mangap       (kai)wos     'edible greens, Gnetum gnemon'
  NNG: Bing         was          'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NNG: Matukar      wai          'greens' (Kasprus 1945)
  NNG: Takia        wos          'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NNG: Sissano      (eyl-)wuas 'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NNG: Kairiru      was          'vegetable greens; legumes'
  MM: Madak         vas          'Abelmoschus manihot'
  MM: Patpatar      wasa         'fern, Dryopteris aridis'
  MM: Tangga        (fun)wes     'Abelmoschus manihot'
  SES: Arosi        wata         'herb with edible leaves, Amaranthus'
  NCV: Mota         as           'a convolvulus, Ipomoea sp.'
PSV *na-was 'Abelmoschus manihot' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Kwamera     nu-vas       'Abelmoschus manihot'
  SV:   Lenakel     nu-hua       'Abelmoschus manihot'
>

                                                              Green vegetables and figs    295


    French-Wright (1983: 162) also reconstmcts a term POe *bele which apparently denoted
A. manihot alone. Geraghty (2004: 85) suspects that the Polynesian terms are borrowed from
Fijian, since Fijian bele can be glossed as 'soft leaf'. If, however, the Gedaged, Sye and Ura
terms are cognate, this observation is not relevant.

<
POe *bele 'Abelmoschus manihot' (French-Wright 1983)
  NNG: Gedaged          bel           'shrub like the croton with aromatic dark green
                                      leaves'
  SV:     Sye           (nta)mple     'Abelmoschus manihot'
  SV:     Ura           (da)mle       'Abelmoschus manihot'
  Mic:    Kiribati      here          'Abelmoschus manihot' (Polynesian borrowing?)
  Fij:    Wayan         bele          'taxon including Abelmoschus manihot and A.
                                      moschatus'
  Fij:    Bauan         bele          'Abelmoschus manihot'
  Pn:     Tongan        pele          'Abelmoschus manihot'
  Pn:     Samoan        pele          'Abelmoschus manihot'
>

   Two terms for A. manihot can be recons1ructed in lower interstage languages.

<
PROc *sasaRu 'Abelmoschus manihot'                 2004: Proto Banks *sasar)
  NCV:    Vures         sasar         'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NCV:    Lemerig       n-sasar       'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NCV:    Merlav        na-ssar       'Abelmoschus manihot'
  Fij:    Wayan         sasau         'wild spinach taxon, bitter tasting, eaten boiled'
  Fij:    Ba            sasau         'Abelmoschus manihot' (Preston et al. 1998)
>

<
PNCV *vera 'Abelmoschus manihot' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Maewo    jere                  'Abelmoschus manihot' (Preston et al. 1998)
  NCV: NE Ambae were                  'Abelmoschus manihot'
  NCV: Tamambo (ha)vera               'Abelmoschus manihot'
     NCV: Uripiv    nu-ver                   'Abelmoschus manihot'
     NCV: Rerep     ne-ver                   'Abelmoschus manihot'
     NCV: Lonwolwol (faha)ver                'green edible plants or leaves, a general term for
                                             native
>

296      Malcolm Ross


    The meaning of the etymon reconstructed below is not clear. It may have been another
generic for green vegetables in general or denoted a kind of green vegetable. On the evidence
ofLau alone, may have been Abelmoschus manihot. It was probably not Amaranthus viridis,
as this appears to have been unknown to POe speakers.

<
POe *pwa(k,g)e 'k.o. green vegetable (?)'
  Adm: Lou              pwakc        'fern'
  Adm: Drehet           pwake        'greens; fibrous/stringy, mainly stems after cooking,
                                     found wild near water or grown in gardens'
  PT:   Dobu            pai          'green foods'
  MM: Tolai             pe-pege      'Amaranthus viridis'
  SES: Lau              kwake        'Abelmoschus manihot'
>


10.2.2 Amaranthus tricolor (syn. A. gangeticus, A. oleraceus), Chinese spinach, Joseph's coat amaranth, TP aupa (Amaranthaceae)

Amaranthus tricolor is described by Peekel
(1984: 166--168) as an erect plant 0.6--1.2 m tall,
with many long leaves growing directly from the
stem and no or almost no terminal flower cluster.
Varieties with the multicoloured leaves to which
tricolor refers are decorative plants in gardens in
western countries, but the varieties grown as a
green vegetable in gardens in India, China, In-
donesia, Papua New Guinea and the Solomons
usually have green leaves.

    A number of Amaranthus species are grovm
in New Guinea and the Bismarcks today, but
probably only A. tricolor, an ancient introduction
from SE Asia, was present traditionally. 1 Others,
mostly Central and South American domesticates,
have been introduced by Europeans since 1870
(Bourke forthcoming, Bourke & Allen forthcom-
ing).

    A. tricolor is grown from seed in mixed gar- Figure 10.2 Aramanthus tricolor, Chinese
dens and gathered whole after 1-2 months growth.                spinach
Some plants are left to go to seed, and the seeds
stored for planting. The spinach-like leaves are,
like Abelmoschus manihot, cooked in stone ovens, boiled or steamed in bamboo containers
or roasted in bark (Paijmans 1976: 124-125).

[1] The antiquity in New Guinea of A. dubius, also ofSE Asian origin, is unknown; Bourke & Allen forthcoming.

                                                               Green vegetables and figs    297


    The only reconstruction is at the level ofPNCV:

<
PNCV *keka 'cockscomb plant, Amaranthus tricolor'
  NCV: Mota         yeya        'cockscomb plant, Amaranthus sp. '
  NCV: Raga        gega         'cockscomb plant, Amaranthus sp.'
  NCV: Apma        kek          'Amaranthus tricolor'
  NCV: Namakir     kek          'tree sp. with green leaf'
>


10.2.3 Gnetum gnemon, TP tulip (Gnetaceae)

Gnetum gnemon is a small tree found in lowland
forests in the Bismarcks, the Solomons, Vanu-
atu and Fiji, growing to between 8 and 15 m
in height. Leaf stalks grow directly from the
branch in pairs: hence its Tok Pisin name, tulip
'two-leaf' (Figure 10.3). The young leaves and
shoots are widely cooked and eaten as a veg-
etable. It has red or orange fruit, the seeds and
mesocarp of which are roasted and eaten in some
areas (Paijmans 1976: 124, Evans 1999: 19-21 ,
Hviding 2005: 139): Evans singles out the is-
lands of the Temotu Province of the Solomons
for special mention. In the wild it grows along
rivers and streams, but not near the beach, as it
appears to dislike salt spray (Manner & Elevitch
2006a). Peekel (1984: 37) describes it as a 'cul-
tivated tree ' and Kennedy & Clarke (2004) men-
tion it in their list of species that are subjeclt to
arboriculture.

    On New Britain and Manus and in the Siassi
Islands the bark fibre of G. gnemon is reported
as being used to make ropes and string (Floyd
1954, O' Collins & Lamothe 1989, Bugenhagen Figure 10.3 Gnetum gnemon: A, tree; B,
& Bugenhagen 2007). On Manus the bark is also fruiting branch with edible young leaves and
used as a wrapping material.                          fruit; C, mature edible fruit; D, flowering
    POe *kusaq 'k.o. edible greens' may have branch with edible flower.
denoted G. gnemon, but more widespread re-
flexes are needed before we can be sure of this. Like the other terms for green vegetables
reconstructed in this chapter, reflexes refer to more than one kind of green vegetable.

    Misima kusai provides evidence for the final *-q of POe *kusaq. Misima has borrowed
much of its vocabulary from Suauic dialects: these add paragogic -i after a final consonant,
and -i here points to the earlier presence of *-q.

298    Malcolm Ross

<
POe *kusaq 'k.o. edible greens'
  PT:   Misima         kusai               'Gnetum gnemon '
  PT:   Sudest         uoa                 'Gnetum gnemon'
  SES: Kwaio           ?uta                'Abelmoschus manihot'
>


10.2.4 Polyscias spp., panax, B nalaslas (Araliaceae)

Polyscias species are erect thin shrubs between one and 5 m in height found at least as far
east as Fiji. They grow wild in shady environments and have green foliage which is eaten
as a green vegetable in New Guinea, the Bismarcks, the Solomons and Vanuatu. In NW Is-
land Melanesia they are often planted (from cuttings) as hedges, but when they are cultivated
in sunlight, their appearance changes, as the foliage turns pale green or yellow and culti-
vated shrubs are often pruned to obtain a thick bushy form. French (1986: 74) names five
species growing in Papua New Guinea, namely P. cumingiana, P. scutellaria, P.fruticosa, P.
macgillivrayi and P. verticillata, and Henderson & Hancock ( 1988: 111-112) list all except
the first for the Solomons (Figure 10.4). They comment that the greens have 'a pleasant mild
"curry" taste'.




Figure 10.4 Polyscias species: A, P. scutellaria, young shoot with small portion of inflorescence; B,
terminal portion of inflorescence; C, P. verticillata : flowering shoot and leaf; D, P. fruticosa: leaflet;
E and F, leaflets of two other Polyscias species.

                                                              Green vegetables and figs    299


    Peekel ( 1984: 421-422) describes the first three. P. cumingiana (syn. P. pinnata, P. rumphi-
ana) and P. scutellaria (syn. Nothopanax scutellarium, Crassula scutellaria) are tree-like
shrubs respectively 2-5m and 3-6m in height, the leaves of which are used for packing fish
for cooking and as a green vegetable. Hviding (2005: 122) notes that in Marovo the large
green and yellow leaves of P. cumingiana are used as ingredient in stews. P.fruticosa (syn.
Panax fruticosum, N othopanax fruticosum ), is a smaller shrub, 0.8-3 m high, with smaller
leaves. According to Gardner & Pawley (2006), on Wayajuice extracted from the leaves of
Polyscias was dropped into the nostrils as a cure for earache or headache.

    No POe term is unambiguously reconstmctable, but it is possible that the reflexes below
of PSOc *(la)lawis 'Polyscias sp.' may be cognate with Muyuw (PT) (a)lawiluw (Damon
2004) and Lau (SES) lausi, both denoting 'Celtis nymanii', a small tree used in housebuilding
and firewood , the leaves of which provide a cure for rheumatism (Fox 1974, Kwa' ioloa &
Burt 2001: 157-158). If so, then POe *lawis, gloss unknown (a tree-like shub or small tree
species), would be reconstructable. Lau lausi presents a problem, however, as it reflects a
form *lawisi with final *-sand echo vowel *-i: this is a canonic NW Solomonic form, and we
are forced to postulate borrowing into Lau, where such borrowings do not usually occur.

<
PSOc *(la)lawis 'Polyscias sp. '
  NCV: Neve'ei        (na!Ja)lelav    'Polyscias sp.'
  NCV: Tape           a-lap           'Polyscias sp. '
  NCV: Larevat        ne-lav          'Polyscias sp. '
  SV:    Sye          (i)lawih        'Polyscias sp.'
  SV:    Anejom       (na-pwo)jev     'Polyscias sp.'
>

<
PNCV *bei 'Polyscias scutellaria' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: NE Ambae bei                 'Polyscias sp.'
  NCV: Araki         pwe-pwei       'Polyscias scutellaria'
  NCV: Raga           bei           'Polyscias sp.' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Uripiv         na-bi         'Polyscias scutellaria'
>

    The items reflecting PNCV *lalaso 'Polyscias scutellaria' (?)below appear to be cognate
with Lau, Kwara'ae (SES) lalato 'Xylocarpus granatum' (ch.6, §4.6). However, they are not
cognate in the strict sense. Each set of items reflects an independent innovation entailing
reduplication of a reflex of POe *lasoR 'testicles' . In the case of Xylocarpus granatum the
comparison is with rounded fruit that hang heavily (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 122). Explain-
ing PNCV *lalaso is more problematic. Lynch (2004a) glosses the reconstruction 'Polyscias
scutellaria' on the basis of the gloss of its reflexes in Paamese, Lewo, Apma, Nguna and S
Efate. However, its denotation in Mota seems to be the aerial yam, Dioscorea bulbifera (ch.9,
§2.1.3), and it is easy to infer a perceived resemblance between testicles and tubers on the
vine. If this inference is correct, then D. bulb!fera may have been the PNCV sense of *lalaso,
rather than P. scutellaria.

<
PNCV *lalaso 'Polyscias scutellaria' (?)(Clark 1996a; gloss from Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mota          lalaso         'a kind of half-wild yam, with tubers on the vine '
  NCV: Paamese       lelaso         'Polyscias scutellaria'
  NCV: Lewo          (puru)le       'Polyscias scutellaria'
  NCV:     Apma         latah         'Polyscias scutellaria'
  NCV:     Namakir      latah         'yellow hedge around houses '
  NCV:     Nguna        na-lalaso     'Polyscias scutellaria'
  NCV:     S Efate      na-ulalas     'Polyscias scutellaria'
>

300     Malcolm Ross




10.3 Other green vegetables

10.3.1 Cyathea spp., B blakpam (Cyatheaceae)

Among the many ferns eaten in Melanesia, there is just one tree-fern genus for which a
putative POe term has been reconstructed. This is PROc *b (wJata 'Cyathea' . POe *b(wJata
is also reconstructed below, but only one cognate has been found outside Remote Oceania:
Kove va-vala 'cycad'. This means that we can be reasonably certain that POe *b (wJata denoted
a tree fern, but we as yet have no way of knowing for certain whether this was a Cycas
or a Cyathea . The most widespread tree-fern in the Bismarcks Cyathea contaminans (syn.
Alsophila latebrosa), with a stem 5-8 m tall (Peekel 1984: 9), is a good candidate for the
denotation of *b(wJata, but a better distributed cognate set is needed in order to confirm this.
The Nakanai of New Britain ate the fronds of Cyathea spp. and used the trunks to make
fishing spears (Floyd 1954). On Waya Island (western Fiji) the sap of the young parts ofthis
tree-fern was applied externally to cure headaches, and the scales were used to stuff pillows.
The pith ofthe trunk was eaten as famine food (Gardner & Pawley 2006).

<
POe *b(wJata 'tree fern, Cycas or Cyathea sp.'
  NNG: Kove            va-vala         'cycad'
PROc *b (wJata 'Cyathea sp.'
  NCV: Nguna           na-pwaza       'a fern '
  SV:     Sye          ni-val         'wild coconut, Montgomery palm, Veitchia arecina'
  Fij:    Bauan        bala-bala      'Cyathea spp.' (Keppel et al. 2005)
  Fij:    Wayan        bala-bala      'Cyathea l'unulata '
  Fij:    Yasawa       bala-bala      'tree fern, Cyathea sp.'
  Pn:     Niuean       pala           'fern sp. '
                       pala-tao       'fern with huge fronds, Angiopteris evecta'
  Pn:     E Futunan pala-pala         'a tree fern '
  Pn:     WFutunan para-fara          'a tree fern '
  Pn:     Tikopia      para-para      'a tree fern, Cyathea sp. '
  Pn:     Emae         bala-bala      'a tree fern '
  Pn:     Tahitian     para           'a root eaten in times of scarcity'
  Pn:     Hawaiian     pala           'tree fern sp., Marattia douglasii'
  Pn:     Rarotongan para             'a large mountain fern, Marattiafraxinea ; potato
                                      fern M arattia salicina'
  Pn:      Maori        para          'King fern, Marattia salicina'
>

                                                                      Green vegetables and figs         301


10.3.2 Saccharum edule, 'coastalpitpit' (in Papua New Guinea), TP, Ppitpit, Bnaviso (Poaceae)

Saccharum edule is a tall grass related to sugar-
cane (Saccharum officinarum). Henderson & Hancock
(1988: 101) write, 'It grows in a variety of locations, but
seems best adapted to low altitude, where it can form
quite dense stands sometimes attaining heights of four
metres or more.' It is cultivated for the unopened inflo-
rescence (flower) at the tip of the cane, harvested as an
important seasonal vegetable which is either roasted in
its leafy sheath or cooked in coconut cream with other
vegetables (Figure 10.5).

     S. edule was apparently domesticated long ago, and
its several varieties are propagated only by cultivation
(Barrau 1962: 157-158). It is grown from cuttings con-
sisting of three or four nodes of the cane, i.e. 30--40 em
long, and usually grows in clumps up to t\¥0 or three
metres in height. In Papua New Guinea it is cultivated in
gardens up to an altitude of 1800 m. It is also grown in
the Solomons, Vanuatu and Fiji.

     It is possible that Far East Manggarai, Kepo, Waer-
                                                                   Figure 10.5 Saccharum edule: A,
ana, Razong, Rembong (all CMP) tebor 'Saccharum sp. '              stand of plants; B, swollen tips ready for
(Verheijen 1990: 240) are cognate with the items below.            market (ca 50 em long); C, stem with
If it is, then PCEMP *tabuqaR is reconstructable and the           suckers; D, semi-mature edible
reconstruction below is elevated to POe.                           inflorescence.

<
PWOc *tabuqaR 'Saccharum edule' (Pawley 1978: *tabukal)
     NNG:     Kove        tavuhai                'Saccharum edule' (A. Chowning, pers. comml
     NNG:     Malai       taboyar                'Saccharum edule' (Lincoln 1976)
     NNG:     Gitua       tabuar                 'Saccharum edule'
     NNG:     Takia       tabu                   'Saccharum edule'
     NNG:     Mapos Buang abuxk                  'Saccharum edule'
     PT:      Molima      tabu? ala              'Saccharum edule'
     PT:      Roro        kapua                  'Saccharum edule'
     MM:      Vitu        tabu yare              'Saccharum edule'
     MM:      Nakanai     tabua                  'Saccharum edule'
     MM:      Teop        tabuana                'Saccharum edule'
     MM:      Mono-Alu    tavuala                'Saccharum edule' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
     MM:      Kia         tavolohi               'Saccharum edule' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
cf. also:
     PT:      Motu              tabogana         'wild pitpit' (for ttabu(y)a: apparently borrowed)
>

[2] In her publications Chowning cites the alternant tavuahi.

302   Malcolm Ross


10.4 Ficus spp., banyans, figs (Moraceae)

10.4.1 Terms for classes of Ficus

Worldwide there are about a thousand species of Ficus, including the common fig, F . carica.
Over 500 species occur in the Asia-Pacific region. Many of them have a limited distribution.
F . granatum, for example, is limited to Vanuatu, F. scabra to Vanuatu, New Caledonia,
Fiji, Tonga and Samoa (Walter & Sam 2002: 164, 166). As a consequence, it is difficult to
gloss reconstructed terms with their species, as the same term was apparently applied to
similar species at different locations. The one distinction that is more easily made is between
independently growing species and stranglers.

    Independently growing Ficus species are usually of medium size, up to about 15 m tall,
and often have edible leaves. Strangler figs , however, sometimes grow to 40 m and form part
of the forest canopy. A strangler starts its life as an epiphyte high in a tree where a tiny sticky
seed has been deposited in animal droppings. The new seedling grows slowly at first, getting
nutrients from leaf litter. It sends out thin roots that snake down the trunk of the host tree
or dangle as aerial roots from its branches. When the roots reach the ground they dig in and
grow aggressively, competing with the host tree for water and nutrients. The roots form a
network that encircles the host and fuses together. As the roots grow thicker they squeeze the
host' s trunk, cutting off its nutrient supply. In the canopy the strangler' s leaves grow more
densely than the host' s, depriving it of sunlight. Eventually the host dies from strangulation,
insufficient sunlight and root competition, and the strangler fig stands on its own. If the host
rots away, a hollow centre remains.

    A salient feature of the genus Ficus is its figs , which technically are not fruits. A fig is a
'false fruit ' or multiple fruit, in which the flow1;o:rs and seeds grow together to form a single
mass. What is commonly called the 'fruit' of a fig is a syconium, an almost closed receptacle
with many small male and female flowers arranged on the inner surface. Technically, the
fruit of a fig is one of the many seed-bearing flowers inside the syconium. The syconium
typically has a bulbous shape with a small opening at the distal end that gives access to tiny
wasps (Agaoninae spp.) that pollinate the flowers in the process of laying their eggs within
the syconium, thus enjoying a symbiotic relationship with the fig tree.

    The literature reports numerous instances of the bark, the latex or the leaves of one or
other Ficus species being used for medicinal purposes. On Vanua Lava (Banks Islands, Van-
uatu) latex from Artocarpus altilis and Ficus adenosperma is mixed as a potion against ex-
cessive menstrual discharge (Bourdy & Walter 1994). On Chuuk the bark of Ficus prolixa
is used as medicine against evil spirits, its fruits and leaves used as medicine, and its roots
are used to flavor a special breadfruit pudding (Goodenough & Sugita 1980). On Lihir the
leaves are heated and rubbed on painful joints, bones, muscles. They can also be used to heal
sickness after eating the wrong kind of fish. They also have ritual power, and are used to
make parcels containing several other types of medicinal leaves (S . Foale 2001).

    The inner bark of Ficus species is used in New Britain for male garments, and old pieces
of these are used to bind the heads of children in order to elongate the skull, and for wrapping
food for cooking in a stone oven (Arentz et al. 1989: 94, A. Chowning, pers. comm.). How-
ever, Mahdi ( 1999) shows that strangler figs have sacred and ceremonial significance across
much of the Austronesian speaking region, including in Oceania at least southern Vanuatu
and New Caledonia.

                                                                           Green vegetables and figs        303


    Three POe terms for apparently superordinate Ficus taxa are reconstructable: *nunuk,
*qayawan and *ba[k,g]a.

    POe *nunuk denoted either a taxon including all Ficus species known to POe speakers or
a taxon including just small freestanding species ; it is unclear which. The fact that Peekel does
not give Tolai nunu as the name for any of the 16 species for which he provides vernacular
names implies that it is a generic term for all Ficus. On the other hand, the fact that the more
carefully specified glosses other than Lou denote small freestanding species (F. aspera, F.
subulata and F. vitiensis) suggests the latter.

    Mahdi ( 1999) suggests either that *nunuk reflects the same root as that in POe *[qa]nunu
'shadow' or that some Oceanic terms for Ficus species reflect*[qa]nunu rather than *nunuk,
but I see no evidence for either proposal.

<
PMP *nunuk 'banyan, Ficus benjamina' (ACD, Mahdi 1999)
POe *nunuk 'fig trees, Ficus taxon ' (Ross 1996c)
     Adm:     Lou             nun              'tree with numerous aerial roots, the banyan'
     Adm:     Lenkau          nun              'banyan'
     PT:      Sudest          nunu             'edible nut'
     MM:      Kara (E)        nunui            'cycad' (-i < POe *-k)
     MM:      Tolai           nunu             'banyan tree '
     MM:      Ramoaaina       nunu             'banyan tree '
     MM:      Nehan           nun              'Ficus sp.'
     MM:      Varisi          nunu(ra)         'Ficus copiosa' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
     NCV:     Maewo           nunue            'Ficus aspera' (Walter & Sam 2002: 293) 3
     SV:      Sye             (novo)nuy        'Ficus subulata'
     Fij:     Bauan           nunu             'fig tree taxon, including Ficus vitiensis and other
                                               freestanding species' (J. Parham 1972: 137-139)
>

    It is probable that *qayawan denoted a strangler fig taxon. The Gedaged, Kara, Tolai
and Patpatar reflexes each denote a taxon of strangler figs: Ficus benjamina ('weeping fig,
Java fig, Java willow' ), F . katabibi and F. rebareba are described by Peekel (1984: 139) as
stranglers.4 The Micronesian and Niuean reJflexes denote F. prolixa, also a strangler. Kara,
Tolai and Patpatar are located in New Ireland, i.e. in the Oceanic heartland of the Bismarcks,
and I assume that they are likely to retain the original sense of *qayawan, whereas F. tinctoria
(Muyuw, Wayan) and F . pritchardii (Wayan), neither of them stranglers, are more likely
to reflect shifts in denotation. Whether POe *qayawan denoted a taxon which included all
strangler fig species or just a subset, we cannot tell.

<
PEMP *qayawan 'banyan tree, Ficus sp. ' (Blust 1978a: *ayawan)
POe *qayawan 'Ficus strangler fig taxon ' (Ross 1996c)
PAdm *qaiwa 'banyan, Ficus spp.' (Blust 1996b)
     Adm: Wuvulu              aiwa                   'banyan tree '
   Adm: Nauna                 kew        'banyan'
   Adm: Titan                 yew        'banyan'
   SJ:  Sobei                 eya        'banyan'
   NNG: Amara                 (a)kao     'Ficus sp.'
   NNG: Gitua                 aiowan     'Ficus sp. with short leaf; sometimes chewed
                                         with poapoa bark in lieu of betel'
  NNG: Gedaged        aiau               'several spp. of strangler fig, Ficus'
  NNG: Takia          ayao               'Ficus sp.'
  NNG: Numb ami aiyowana                 'banyan'
  NNG: Wogeo          vaiawa             'banyan tree'
  NNG: Kairiru        ayou               'ficus tree'
  PT:   Muyuw         (a)gi-gaway        'Ficus tinctoria (metathesis < *gayaw)'
  PT:   Taw ala       kiyaha             'tree type, edible fig'
  MM: Kara (E)        iuan               'Ficus benjamina, F. katabibi and F. rebareba'
  MM: Tolai           kiau, kuiau        'Ficus benjamina, F. katabibi, F. rebareba, F.
                                         prolixa' (Record 1945: kuiau 'F. indica')
  MM: Patpatar        kiaua              'Ficus benjamina, F. katabibi and F. rebareba'
  MM: Babatana        kanava (pitalata) 'Ficus copiosa' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Nduke           eana               'Ficus spp.'
  SV:   Kwamera       (niJsu-)aio        'banyan sp., bark used for tapa cloth'
  Mic: Nauruan        eaeo               'Ficus prolixa'
  Mic: Kiribati       aiao               'Ficus prolixa'
  Mic: Ponapean       aiaw               'Ficus prolixa var. carolinensis' 5
  Mic: Chuukese       aw                 'Ficus prolixa var. carolinensis'
  Mic: Carolinian ao                     'banyan tree' (Christian 1899: 350)
PCP *qayawa 'Ficus spp.'
  Fij:  Bauan         yaoawa             'banyan tree, Ficus sp.'
  Fij:  Wayan         awa                'Ficus pritchardii, Ficus tinctoria'
  Fij:  Rotuman       iieva              'banyan tree'
PPn *qawa 'banyan tree, Ficus prolixa (?)'
  Pn:   Tongan        ?ovava             'banyan tree, Ficus prolixa and F. obliqua'
                                         (Whistler 1991 b: 99-1 00)
  Pn:   Niuean        ovava              'banyan tree, Ficus prolixa'
  Pn:   Emae          raoa               'banyan'
  Pn:   Rennellese ?aoa                  'banyan, Ficus benjamini'
  Pn:   Tikopia       aoa                'banyan tree, Ficus sp.'
  Pn:   Samoan        aoa                'banyan tree, Ficus prolixa and F. obliqua'
                                         (Whistler 2000: 157)
  Pn:   Rarotongan aoa                   'banyan tree'
>

[3] Walter and Sam gloss this as 'F . adenosperma ' in their appendix of vernacular names. This seems to be an
editorial error, as F . aspera is the species described in the body ofthe book (161- 162).

[4] F . katabibi and F . rebareba are Peekel's temporary names: I have found them nowhere else in the literature.

304     Malcolm Ross


    POe *qayawan also seems to have a second set of reflexes in Micronesia. A putative PMic
*kawani 'Ficus sp.' can be reconstructed. However, the correspondences here-especially
the word-final reflexes of *n-indicate that this is an early borrowing via the Caroline Islands
from a western Austronesian language.


[5] Bender et al. (1983) use the gloss F. carolinensis, but Ddilipps et al. (1988) list this as a variety of F. prolixa.

                                                                             Green vegetables and figs           305


    Mic:      Kosraean         k:Jn(-yc)         'banyan tree'
    Mic:      Chuukese         <Jwar             'Ficus tinctoria'
    Mic:      Puluwatese       yawann            'banyan'
    Mic:      Satawalese       awal              'banyan'
    Mic:      Woleaian         gewann            'banyan'
    Mic:      Ulithian         howe!             'banyan'

    POe *ba[k,g]a denoted a taxon of freestanding, medium-sized Ficus species. Denotata
of reflexes include F. nodosa, F. wassa, F. prolixa, F. obliqua, F. mutabilis and F. tinctoria,
none of them stranglers. [6]

    The items under 'cf. also' are probably not cognate. Three of them point to a term for a
nut tree, a species of either Canarium or Terminalia, but data are insufficient to reconstruct
this term. Mahdi (1999) suggests that this term is cognate with Western Malaya-Polynesian
terms reflecting a putative *pakat 'root'.

<
POe *ba(k,g)a 'banyan tree, medium-sized Ficus spp., not stranglers' (Biggs 1965: *baka;
  Ross 1996c)
  MM: Sursurunga         pak          'tree sp.'
  MM: Patpatar           paka         'Ficus nodosa'
  MM: Tolai              paka         'Ficus sp. (Record 1945)'
  MM: Roviana            pako-pako 'Ficus wassa' (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 125)
PROc *baga 'Ficus spp.; generic for Ficus?'
  NCV: Mota              paka         'banyan, various spp.'
  NCV: Araki             (vi)Jaka     'banyan spp.'
  NCV: Nduindui          (vi)v-voye   'Ficus wassa' (Walter & Sam 2002: 293)
  NCV: Raga              baga         'Ficus sp.' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Lonwolwol         bak          'banyan'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-mba!Jg        'banyan, Ficus bengalensis'
  NCV: SE Ambrym         veak         'Ficus wassa' (Walter & Sam 2002: 293)
  NCV: Paamese           a-veka       'Ficus sp.'
  NCV: Nguna             na-paga      'banyan, Ficus bengalensis'
  NCV: Namakir           bag          'banyan, Ficus bengalensis'
  NCV: S Efate           mpak         'Ficus spp.'
  SV:    Sye             n-pa!J       'banyan, generic'
  SV:    Lenakel         n<J-p<Jk     'banyan, generic'
  SV:    Kwamera         n<J-pek      'banyan, generic'
  SV:    Anejom          (n)pak       'banyan'
  NCal: Nemi             (ce)ba!J     'Ficus mutabilis'
  NCal: Jawe             (ce)ba!J     'Ficus mutabilis'
  NCal: Iaai             bik          'Ficus prolixa'
  Fij:   Wayan           baka         'banyan taxon, including Ficus obliqua, F. prolixa
                                      and F. tinctoria'
  Fij:   Bauan           baka         'Ficus obliqua'
cf. also:
  Adm:      Mussau          paka            'T erminalia catappa'
  Adm:      Mussau          baga(laim)      'large variety of Malay apple, Syzygium gomata '
  Adm:      Titan           baga-bak        'tree sp . with nut-like fruit '
  MM:       Tolai           baga            'Canarium mehenbethene (Record 1945)'
>

[6] F. obliqua may be freestanding or a strangler. F. bengalensis (if it is correctly identified), is a recent introduc-
tion.

306    Malcolm Ross


Figure 10.6 Left Ficus copiosa: A, tree; B, shoot with leaves; C, leaf; D, figs on trunk. Right Ficus
wassa: A, tree; B, shoot showing leaf arrangement and figs on stem; C, young shoot with edible leaves;
D, fruit on lower branch.


10.4.2 Ficus copiosa and F. wassa, sandpaper cabbage, sandpaper fig, TP kumu musong (Moraceae)

Bourke (n.d.) names three lowland indigenous Ficus species in Papua New Guinea that have
edible figs: F . copiosa (TP kumu musong), F. wassa and F. tinctoria . They are small free-
standing trees or shrubs and grow both in the highlands and in the lowlands. The three species
are self-sown and there is no evidence of cultivation in Papua New Guinea. The figs of the
three species are eaten, particularly those of F. copiosa, which are eaten raw. However, the
main food product of these species in Papua New Guinea, and again especially of F. copiosa,
is their young leaves, which are used as a green vegetable (in Papua New Guinea by about
one-third of the rural population; Bourke & Allen forthcoming). The Tok Pisin term kumu
musong means 'hairy greens'.

                                                                     Green vegetables and figs   307


     F. copiosa and F. wassa are similar (Figure 10.6). Both rejoice in the name 'sandpaper
cabbage' in the Solomons because oftheir coarse texture (even when cooked). The leaves of
F. wassa are more abrasive than those of F. copiosa, and therefore somewhat less popular as
food (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 123, 125)

     F. copiosa (syn. F. longipedunculata, F. acanthrophylla) has twigs covered in bristles
(Peekel 1984: 141). It grows widely in New Guinea, the Bismarcks and the Solomons. In
Marovo F. copiosa is traditionally an important leaf vegetable, and young leaves and shoots
are either cooked in coconut cream or mixed with crushed smoked Canarium nuts (Hviding
2005: 138).

     F. wassa (syn. F. portus-finschii, F. papus (Peekel), F. uauasie (Peekel) is a tree 5-20 m
tall with twigs that are hairy and pungent and figs that tum red when ripe (Peekel1984: 141).
It is found from eastern Indonesia through New Guinea, the Bismarcks and the Solomons to
Vanuatu (Walter & Sam 2002: 168). The leaves of the wild trees are cooked as a vegetable in
Papua New Guinea, the Solomons and Vanuatu (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 125, Wheatley
1992: 170--172). In Vanuatu green figs are 1eaten cooked. Figs ripen quickly, and must be
eaten immediately. Lactating women regularly eat the leaves, which are said to stimulate
milk production (Walter & Sam 2002: 168-169).

     There is enough agreement among the meanings of reflexes of POe *iguRa to suggest
that it had sandpapery leaves and denoted ei1cher F. copiosa or F. wassa or both.

<
POe *iguRa 'Ficus species with sandpapery leaves, either F. copiosa or F. wassa or both'
  (Chowning 2001)
  MM: Nakanai         igura        'Ficus sp. with sandpapery leaves'
  MM: Patpatar        ikur-kur     'Ficus gut'
  PT:   Bwaidoga (a)ikula          'banyan'
  PT:   Motu          igula(ra)    'Ficus sp.'
  SES: Bugotu         igula        'sandpaper cabbage, Ficus wassa' (Henderson &
                                   Hancock 1988: 125)
  SES: Kwaio          igula        'tree sp., leaves of which are used to polish wood'
>

    POe *pwabosi is the most likely candidate for a term denoting F. wassa. All named re-
flexes denote a small or medium-sized freestanding Ficus sp. The set below, from which I
tentatively reconstruct POe *pwabosi, contains some doublets and a number of phonological
irregularities, especially in regard to the bilabials. I infer that the two POe bilabials were not
identical, but that assimilation has operated to make them so in several reflexes. Doublets
are probably the outcomes of local borrowings. An interstage ancestral to Solos, Petats and
probably Teop replaced the initial bilabial obstruent with *u-.

<
POe *pwabosi 'freestanding small or medium-sized Ficus sp., probably F. wassa'
     NNG:    Bing            bubos            'wild tig tree (poor quality wood) '
     MM:     Nakanai         vovosi           'Ficus sp., with edible leaves' (-v- fort-b-)
     MM:     Kara (E)        [ka]pavus        'small Ficus sp., F. wassa' (Peekel1984: 141)
     MM:     Patpatar7       habos            'Ficus pachystemon'
                       pap us         'Ficus wassa'
  MM: Tolai            papu(-kubar) 'Ficus wassa'
                       uauai(na)      'Ficus pachystemon' (Holdsworth 1975b)
  MM: Nehan            boh            'Ficus spp.'
  MM: Solos            uabos          'Ficus sp.' (Holdsworth 1977: Noupan village)
  MM: Petats           uabos          'Ficus sp.'
  MM: Teop             ivoi           'Ficus sp.'
                       poi            'Ficus sp.'
PSOc *(b(a,o))bosi 'Ficus sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mwotlap         no-woh         'Ficus aspera'
  NCV: Apma            wowos          'Ficus wassa'
PSV *na-bVbosi Ficus sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:    Kwamera       nu-kwesi       'fig sp.'
  SV:    Anejom        ne-ppa8        'Ficus sp.'
  NCal: Nemi           bo             'banyan sp. without aerial roots'
  NCal: Jawe           bo             'banyan sp. without aerial roots'
>

[7] One of these forms, probably papus, is presumably a borrowing.

308     Malcolm Ross


      POe *qa(l,R)a may have been another term for Ficus copiosa (§4.2).

<
PMP *qaRa? 'Ficus spp.' (Blust 1986)
POe *qa(l,R)a 'Ficus sp.'
  NNG: Gedaged           ala             'tree sp.'
  MM: Nakanai            kaloli          'Ficus sp., probably F. copiosa' (A. Chowning,
                                         pers. comm.)
  MM:       Tolai        kala-kala, kaka 'Ficus copiosa'
  MM:       Patpatar     kala-kala       'Ficus copiosa'
  MM:       Roviana      kala-/a         'banyan, Ficus sp.'
  MM:       Marovo       kala-/a         'banyan, Ficus spp.'
  SES:      To'aba'ita   8ala            'Ficus variegata'
>


10.4.3 Ficus tinctoria, dye fig (Moraceae)

Ficus tinctoria is an erect shrub 2-4 m tall with yellow-orange or red edible figs, found on
coral rocks and cliffs on the foreshore or inland in coral soil. It is distributed from India and
China through SE Asia, New Guinea and right through the islands as far as western Polynesia,
but is absent from New Caledonia (Peekel 1984: 147, Walter & Sam 2002: 169). Its leaves
are a green vegetable in Papua New Guinea (Bourke n.d.).

    POe *tmJa appears to have denoted F. tinctoria. This is its meaning in New Ireland. In
southern Vanuatu it denotes F. granatum, another medium-sized freestanding species with
edible figs, limited in its distribution to Vanuatu (Walter & Sam 2002: 163-164).

<
POe *ta!Ja 'Ficus tinctoria'
  MM:      Kara (E)      ta!Ja           'Ficus tinctoria'
  MM:      Patpatar      (sa!Ja )ta!Ja   'Ficus tinctoria'
  MM:      Tolai         ta!Ja(tata)     'Ficus tinctoria'
>

                                                             Green vegetables and figs    309

<
PSV *na-ta!J 'Ficus sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:    Sye            na-to!J     'Ficus granatum'
  SV:    Lenakel        na-re!J     'Ficus granatum'
  SV:    Kwamera        ne-ra!J     'k.o. tree with stinging leaves'
  SV:    Anejom         na-te!J     'Ficus adenosperma'
>

   POe *(c,j )api appears to have denoted a species with edible leaves, possibly F. tinctoria.

<
PMP *jabi 'Ficus sp.' (Blust 1972b)
POe *(c,j)api 'Ficus sp.' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Mapos Buang dtv                 'Ficus sp.; the leaftips are eaten'
  Fij:    Bauan           savi(rewa) 'Ficus tinctoria'
>


10.4.4 Other names for Ficus species

The reconstructions below denote Ficus species, but it is not usually certain which one(s).

     It is possible that POe *seRa denoted Ficus adenosperma, a freestanding tree 5-15 m
tall with green or yellow figs that are eaten in times of food shortage in some communities
(Peekel1984: 147; Walter & Sam 2002: 169).

<
POe *seRa 'Ficus sp., perhaps F. adenosperma'
  Adm:    Mussau        si            'Ficus sp.'
  MM:     Patpatar      sera          'Ficus adenosperma'
  MM:     Tolai         ere           'Ficus adenosperma'
  MM:     Nehan         her           'Ficus sp.'
>

   POe *bauRa may have denoted a species of strangler fig.

<
POe *bauRa 'Ficus sp.', perhaps a strangler fig
  NNG: Mapos Buang bduk                 'Ficus sp.'
  SES: Lau         baola                'banyan'
  SES: Kwara'ae    baola                'strangler fig, Ficus microcarpa'
>

   The glosses give no real clue to the denotatum of POe *ka(mwa)-kamwa, other than that it
was perhaps a freestanding species.

<
POe *ka(mwa)-kamwa 'Ficus sp., perhaps Ficus nodosa'
  PT:     Misima        ka-kamwa    'k.o. tree, with small, rounded, light green leathery
                                    leaves and white and motley-coloured bark and
                                    small, fig-shaped fruit.'
  MM:     Madak         kem-kem     'Ficus nodosa'
  SES:    Santa Ana     kamwa-kamwa 'sandpaper cabbage, Ficus wassa'
>

    The gloss of PNCV *buliva is clearly Ficus scabra (a species found only in central and
souther Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji and w1estem Polynesia; Walter & Sam 2002: 166), but
the denotation of PEOc *bulipa remains unclear.

310   Malcolm Ross


<
PEOc *bulipa 'Ficus sp.' (Clark 1996a: PNCV *buliva)
  SES: Kwara'ae      bu-bulia       'Ficus austrina'
PNCV *buliva 'Ficus scabra'
  NCV: Mota          puliva         'a climbing Ficus; the leaves cooked and eaten'
  NCV: Apma          bwilip         'Ficus scabra' (Walter & Sam 2002)
  NCV: Maewo         gwiliva        'Ficus scabra' (Walter & Sam 2002)
  NCV: Raga          buliva         'Ficus sp."
  NCV: Uripiv        bwiliw         'Ficus scabra, Ficus septica'
  NCV: Lonwolwol bulva              'wild cotton, burau tree'
  NCV: Lewo          (puru)piliva   'Ficus scabra' (Walter & Sam 2002)
  NCV: Nguna         na-puliva      'sycamore'
  NCV: Namakir       na-biliv       'Ficus scabra' (Walter & Sam 2002)
  NCV: S Efate       na-plip        'Ficus granatum'
>

<
PSOc *rivu-rivu 'small or medium-sized freestanding Ficus sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV:   NE Ambae     (va)rivu      'nambalanggo', i.e. 'Ficus wassa'
  NCV:   Raga         revrevo       'Ficus obliqua' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV:   Uripiv       awraw         'Ficus tinctoria'
  SV:    Sye          na-revrep     'Ficus obliqua'
  SV:    Kwamera      (kwa)ruviru   'Ficus sp."
  SV:    Anejom       ne-rere       'Ficus obliqua'
>



11 Nut andfruit trees


11.1 Introduction

Arboriculture apparently played a role in Bismarcks food production long before the arrival
of Austronesian speakers and the latter quit1e possibly acquired some of their arboriculture
practices from Papuan speaking neighbours (chapter 2, §4). With the introduction of agricul-
ture, garden and forest tended to overlap. Sometimes the garden would include food-bearing
trees that survived from the primary forest, and sometimes food-bearing species would be
planted in a garden or orchard or near to the village. At the same time, forest trees continued
to be tended in situ and came to be owned by particular families.

     Kennedy & Clarke (2004) and others have emphasised the cline that ranges from trees
which grow wild in the bush to trees that are: cultivated in orchards, with various degrees of
tree-tending between the two extremes. Continuous cultivation entails domestication, i.e. on-
going control of reproduction and selection of varieties through the planting of ripe fruits or
germinated seeds or through the transplanting ofvigorous seedlings (Yen 1991). The result-
ing cultivars often have separate local names, whereas forest varieties generally do not. Wal-
ter & Sam (2002: 73-74) suggest that the geographic distribution of domesticated tree species
reflects human settlement in the Pacific. As domesticated species they list the following: can-
arium nuts, Canarium spp., the Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer, cutnuts, Barringtonia
edulis, B. novae-hiberniae and B. procera, the Polynesian plum, alias golden apple, Spondias
cytherea, the island lychee, Pometia pinnata, and the Malay apple, Syzygium malaccense. To
this list Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg (1998: 56-57) add the dragon plum, Dracontomelon
vitiense and Yen (1991) adds Burckella obovata. Paijmans (1976: 123-124) notes that in the
New Guinea region Terminalia catappa and T. kaernbachii are also often planted.

     All are actively cultivated close to villages and have been subject to continuous selec-
tion. Often they grow interspersed with coconut palms and breadfruit trees (themselves both
domesticated species) on a piece of land close to the village, along with recently introduced
citrus species. Actual tending is minimal; young seedlings are protected from the sun, weeds
are removed, dead or damaged branches are cut off and the tree is sometimes pruned to reduce
its height (Walter & Sam 2002: 74--76).

312   Malcolm Ross


     The remainder of this chapter is organised as follows. First, domesticated nut trees are
treated (§2), then domesticated fruit trees (§3), and finally trees that are regularly exploited
for their fruit but are generally not domesticated (§4). The boundary around this last category
is somewhat arbitrary. It includes trees which are often mentioned in the literature as sources
of edible fruit. It excludes trees that are more often mentioned as having other uses: these
include Morinda citrifolia, and various species of Diospyros, Macaranga and Garcinia, the
fruits of which are all mentioned by Paijmans (1976: 124) as occasionally consumed. It also
excludes those species of Ficus which have edible figs , as these are treated in ch.1 0, §4.

    The trees investigated by Kennedy & Clarke (2004) in their examination ofarboriculture
include three that are considered among the staple foods in chapter 9: the banana plant (ch.9,
§3), the breadfuit tree (ch.9, §4), and the sago palm (ch.9, §5.1). Another cultivated tree is
Gnetum gnemon, the leaves of which serve as a green vegetable, treated in chapter 10, §2.3.
These trees and plants are not considered further here, nor is the coconut palm, which is
discussed in some detail in chapter 12. Instead, the focus of this chapter is nut- and fruit-
bearing species that loom large in Bismarcks arboriculture.


11.2 Domesticated nut trees

Ironically none of the genera considered in this section is a true nut, but agriculturalists writ-
ing about Pacific plants (Bourke 1996, Evans 1999) call them nuts and it is convenient to
retain this usage. Botanically nuts are single-seed dry fruits in which the seed remains sepa-
rate from its hard enveloping pericarp. Examples are the hazelnut, Corylus americana, and
the chestnut, Castanea dentata. Many 'nuts' in popular parlance are botanically drupes rather
than nuts. In a drupe the peri carp consists of an outer skin or exocarp, a middle layer or meso-
carp and a very hard inner layer or endocarp surrounding the seed. 'False nuts ' consist of the
endocarp and seed of a drupe. They include th1~ first five genera discussed here-canarium
almonds, Canarium spp. (§2.1 ), the sea almond and the okari nut, Terminalia spp. (§2.4), cut-
nuts, Barringtonia spp. (§2.3), and the various species of Pandanus-as well as the coconut
(see ch.12, figure 12.1), the candlenut, Aleurites moluccana (ch.l3 , §3.2), the macadamia,
Macadamia integrifolia, and the almond proper, Prunus dulcis. Fleshy fruits like the peach,
P. persica, the plum, P. domestica , the apricot, P. armeniaca, the ocean lychee, Pometia pin-
nata (§3 .5) and mangoes, Mangifera spp. (§3.4), are also drupes, but the fleshy mesocarp is
eaten, not the endocarp and seed. Some 'nuts', like the Brazil nut, Bertholletia excelsa, and
the canarium nut, Canarium indicum, are simply seeds.


11.2.1 Canarium spp. (Burseraceae)

Canarium is one of a suite of plants that wer,e domesticated in the rain forests of north-
em New Guinea during the early Holocene. Other members of the suite were the bread-
fruit (Artocarpus altilis) and the two fruit trees Pometia pinnata and Burckella obovata (Yen
1996). Canarium is the most important nut-bearing genus in Papua New Guinea, cultivated
by almost a third of the rural population (Bourke & Allen forthcoming) .

                                                                              Nut and fruit trees        313




                                                                         Whole fruit



                                                                                 ~
                                                                                              lesh/




                                                         0                        ~mesocarp

                                                                                  ~
                                                                                            ""-skin/
                                                                                               exocarp
                                                                          Nut in shell



                                                           0
                                                                        Kernel in skin
                                                                                            skin/testa
                                                                                    ~            ·
                                                                                            kernel
                                                                                            = 2 seeds




Figure 11.1 Left Canarium indicum: A, tree; B, portion of leaf showing terminal four leaflets;
C, portion of branch showing large stipules (leaftike appendages at base of leaf stalk); D, immature
inflorescence; E. cluster of fruit. ; F, opened pericarp (exocarp + mesocarp + endocarp) ; G, opened
shell/endocarp; H. edible kernel. Right Parts ofthe Canarium indicum fruit




    A number of Canarium species occur today in northwest island Melanesia (eight have
been recorded in the Solomons) but only three cultivated species are common within their
respective ranges: C. indicum (P ngali), C. salomonense (P andoa) and C. harveyi (Evans
1999: 3). 1 Of these, only C. indicum occurs in New Guinea and the Bismarcks (Bourke 1996),
and was presumably the only common species known to POe speakers before they reached
the Solomons. Its range extends from Halmahera to Vanuatu. C. salomonense is found in
Bougainville and the Solomons and in New Guinea, but not in the Bismarcks. C. harveyi
apparently originated on Santa Cruz Island as the result of selection and has spread eastward
to Tikopia, Anuta, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga and Niue (Leenhouts 1959,Yen 1996). [2]

[1] Two other nut-bearing species are cultivated in NW Melanesia: C. lamii along the north coast of New Guinea
and the species with the largest trees and largest nuts,C. decumamum , in the Admiralties (Yen 1996). Their
ranges are too narrow for them to be relevant here.

[2] Wild specimens with inedible nuts occur westward from Santa Cruz (Yen 1985 : 320, Kwa'ioloa & Burt
2001: 104).


314   Malcolm Ross


    C. indicum grows to a height of 15-30 m and in the wild is one of the smaller trees of
the rain forest canopy. The fruit is a drupe with an oily edible kernel. The skin (exocarp)
of the fruit is green when unripe, black when ripe. The ripe flesh (mesocarp) is edible but
astringent and deteriorates rapidly. Inside the: flesh is the shell (endocarp) and inside the shell
is the edible kernel consisting usually of two seeds, each enclosed in its own skin (testa),
which is peeled off before the seeds are eaten (Evans 1999: 6; see Figure 11.1).

     Particular tree species display considerable: variation in their forms, and this variation
reflects the time depth of cultivation and domestication. Thus round fruit predominate in
Vanuatu, oval fruit in the Solomons. Nuts may contain one kernel or two, which may be white
or yellow. The rhythm of flowering, which can be altered by vigorous pruning, varies so that
trees can be harvested at different times. C. indicum trees are usually individually owned
and in some areas are tended where they have grown naturally in the forest. In the Solomons
most are planted near villages. C. salomonense is usually a cultivated tree. Solomon Islanders
consider C. indicum to require more light than C. salomonense, and hence more attention has
to be paid to clearing other trees around it (Evans 1999: 40). Walter & Sam (2002: 153) report
that in Vanuatu spontaneously germinated seedlings or fully ripened fruits are sometimes
planted in gardens or villages.

     C. indicum and C. salomonense are especially valued for their oily nuts and there is ev-
idence that this was already true in POe times ( ch.2, §4). Canarium nuts are broken open
with a stone. Along the northeast coast of New Guinea, in the Bismarcks, in Bougainville
and in the Solomons, their kernels are eaten raw or smoked, or the smoked nuts are pounded
with sago, bananas or a root crop 3 to make an oily pudding (POe *puro-IJ, ch.12, §4.2) (Paij-
mans 1976: 123-124,Peekel1984:281,Bourke 1996,Kwa'ioloa&Burt2001: 102).ATakia
speaker once described the pudding to me as 'pork when there is no pig': it is presented to
honoured guests. Hviding (2005: 128, 133) says it is 'a very important food, as much now
as in the old days' in Marovo, where traditionally the first puddings were presented to spir-
its. Similarly on Small Malaita and Ulawa there were ceremonies associated with the first
nuts: on Small Malaita this occurred with the first harvest in early August, on Ulawa when
the first smoked nuts are ready. In both cases a priest sacrificed nuts and pudding to the
ancestors (Ivens 1927: 367-369). On Choiseul C. salomonense has been elevated to a high
level of spiritual significance manifested in a variety of practices (McClatchey et al. 2006a ).
The cultural importance of Canarium is seen in the Marovo term buruburu 'Canarium spp.
(generic)', which is also used for 'year', the interval between two ripenings of canarium nuts
(Hviding 2005: 107).

     Among the Kwara'ae Canarium wood is r,egarded as unsuitable for building, as it be-
comes worm-eaten (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 103), but Powell (1976) reports that the Bola
use it for canoe hulls and building materials. The Kwara'ae use its resin for caulking cracks
in canoes.

     C. harveyi is almost identical in appearance to C. salomonense and was earlier thought to
be a variety of the latter. C. salomonense is dio1~cious, whereas C. harveyi is polygamodioe-
cious, presumably as a result of selection (Evans 1999: 59). Both are similar in appearance to
C. indicum. 4 The shell of a C. salomonense nut cracks into two halves when it is hammered,
whereas the shell of C. indicum shatters. Both are processed and eaten in much the same
ways (Record 1945; Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 104).

[3] For example among Takia and Kwara'ae speakers and on Small Malaita the pudding is made with taro
(Colocasia esculenta), on Ulawa with yams (Dioscorea esculenta) (personal observation, Kwa'ioloa & Burt
2001: 102, Ivens 1927: 367-369).

[4] According to Record (1945) C. salomonense is shorter than C. indicum, around 15 m. tall, but Evans'
(1999: 40) survey of Solomons Canarium species found that the two had similar average heights, around 20m,
both 7 m taller than C. harveyi.

                                                                              Nut and fruit trees   315


    Of the three terms reconstructed below, POe *[ka]!JaRi was almost certainly the term for
C. indicum as well as the generic term for Canarium species.[5]

    Note that the initial syllable of *[ka]!JaRi is reflected only in Admiralties, North New
Guinea and Papuan Tip languages (and perhaJPS in Raga and Namakir), whereas Meso-Melanesian
and Eastern Oceanic reflexes point to *!JaRi. This distribution justifies the reconstruction of
POe forms with and without initial *ka- , which may represent or have been reanalysed as
the prefix *ka- 'tree' reflecting earlier *kayu 'tree' (ch.2, §7.1.2). Bola ta!Jari may reflect the
addition of an otherwise unknown prefix ta- to *!JaRi.

    Marshallese ka!Jal 'Pisonia grand is' looks as if it is a borrowing from a language retain-
ing initial ka- , i.e. Admiralties or Western Oceanic, but on current knowledge of Oceanic
settlement history it is difficult to see how this could have occurred.

<
PCEMP *ka(n!J)aRi 'canarium almond, Canarium spp.'
POe *[ka]!JaRi 'canarium almond, Canarium indicum'
  Adm:     Lou           kane       'canarium almond'
  Adm:     Titan         a!Jei      'almond '
  Adm:     Baluan        kanai      'canarium almond' (Nevermann 1934)
  Adm:     Sori-Harengan kenai      'canarium almond' (Nevermann 1934)
  Adm:     Papitalai     a!Jei      (glossed 'almond' by Nevermann 1934)
  NNG:     Kove          a!Jahi     'canarium almond' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG:     Lukep (Po no) ka!Jar     'canarium almond'
  NNG:     Maenge        ka!Jali    'canarium almond'
  NNG:     Takia         a!Jar      'canarium almond'
  NNG:     Manam         ka!Jari    'canarium almond'
  PT:      Muyuw         kinay      'canarium almond'
  MM:      Bola          ta!Jari    'canarium almond, Canarium indicum' (t- for
                                    expected tk-)
  MM: Kara (E)          !Jai        'canarium almond, Canarium indicum'
  MM: Patpatar          !Jar        'canarium almond, Canarium indicum'
  MM: Uruava            nari        'canarium almond'
  MM: Vagunu            !Jari       'canarium almond'
  MM: Kusaghe           !Jari       'Canarium indicum' (Evans 1999:39)
PEOc *[qa]!JaRi 'canarium almond, Canarium spp.'
  SES: Bugotu           !Jali       'canarium almond' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Gela             !Jali       'canarium almond'
  SES: Kwara' ae        !Jali       'canarium almond'
  SES: Lau              !Jali       'canarium almond'
  NCV: Mwotlap          na-!Jey     'canarium almond'
  NCV: Mota             !Jai        'canarium almond'
  NCV: NE Ambae         !Jai        'canarium almond'
  NCV: Araki            !Ja-!Ja     'canarium almond'
  NCV: Raga             a!Jai       'native almond ; kidney '
  NCV: Naman            n-e!Je      'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Nese          n-e!Ja                 'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Port Sandwich ni-!Jai                'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Paamese       i!Jti                  'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Lewo          (pur )!Ji              'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Namakir       ?a!Ja                  'canarium almond'
  NCV:      Nguna         na-!Jai                'canarium almond'
  NCV:      S Efate       na-!Je                 'canarium almond'
  SV:       Sye           na-!Jai                'canarium almond'
  SV:       Lenakel       na-!Je                 'canarium almond'
  SV:       Anejom        na-!Jai                'canarium almond'
  SV:       Sye           na-!Jai                'canarium almond'
cf. also:
  Mic       Marshallese         ka!Jal           'Pisonia grand is'
>

[5] PCEMP *ka(nYJ)aRi is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data here and of Bima kanari, Far East
Manggarai (Toring) kenari, Solorese kenari (all CMP) (Verheijen 1990: 197).

316    Malcolm Ross


    The denotatum of PWOc *pinuaq is not clear, as the one Papuan Tip witness is glossed
'Terminalia catappa', the Meso-Melanesian witnesses all 'canarium almond', presumably C.
indicum. It is possible-but not probable-that lthe items listed below reflect POe *pinu(q)an
'Macaranga spp. ' (§2.5) with a change in denotatum.

<
PWOc *pinuaq 'a nut tree, perhaps Canarium sp. (?)'
 PT:   Lala           vi!Ju        'Terminalia catappa'
 MM: Patpatar         hinuai       'canarium almond, Canarium indicum'
 MM: Bilur            inuai        'canarium almond'
 MM: Kandas           nui          'canarium almond'
 MM: Tinputz          winoa        'canarium almond'
 MM: Kia             finua         'Canarium salomonensis' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
>

     The POe reconstructions *(q)alipa and *lalipa are problematic both semantically and
formally. The nut described in the Drehet gloss is not readily recognisable ; the Mangap reflex
is glossed Terminalia catappa, the Kwara' ae lnocarpus fagifer , and the rest, all NNG or
MM, 'canarium almond'. The principal formal difficulty is the initial consonant. Drehet has
accreted n- , reflecting the PAdm article *na, and points to POe initial *q- or the absence of an
initial consonant (Ross 1988: 340-341), i.e. *(q)alip, as do the Tami and Numbami reflexes.
The other North New Guinea forms and Kwara' ae (SES) reflect a variant *lalip. The Minigir
and Tolai reflexes reflect a variant in g-, rather than expected tk- reflecting *q- . Finally, the
Drehet, Mangap and Tolai forms point to the presence of a final vowel, and Tolai attests
to -a,6 but Kwara' ae unexpectedly lacks the final syllable. If this term did indeed denote
the canarium nut, then it may be that cultivars of this culturally significant item have been
propagated from one location to another, and the term for them has been borrowed at the
same time.


[6] The Drehet final consonant points to loss of a following vowel. In Mangap a final vowel is regularly assimilated
to the penultimate vowel. In Numbami -a is added after the reflex of a POe final consonant, and so final -a is
not diagnostic of a POe final vowel.

                                                                       Nut and fruit trees    317


<
POe *(q)alipa, *lalipa 'nut sp. , possibly canarium almond, Canarium sp. ' (?)
  Adm: Drehet            n-elip        'k tree: nut, grows wild, very hard skin, oval, about
                                       one centimetre long, dark green' (perhaps
                                       Canarium chinare; J. Kennedy, pers. comm.)
  NNG:    Mangap         !eli vii      'Terminalia catappa'
  NNG:    Dami           !ali          'canarium almond '
  NNG:    Tami           yalip         'canarium almond'
  NNG:    Numbami        yalipa        'canarium almond'
  NNG:    Yabem          lanip         'canarium almond'
  NNG:    Kaiwa          Ia lip        'canarium almond'
  NNG:    Kairiru        laliu         'big, red canarium almond '
  NNG:    Ulau-Suain     liliu         'canarium almond '
  MM:     Minigir        galip         'canarium almond '
  MM:     Tolai          galipa        'canarium almond '
  SES:    Kwara' ae      (?ai)lali     'Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer' (lit. 'kidney
                                       tree')
>

   Kwa' ioloa and Burt (2001:119) note that Kwara' ae !ali is also used for 'kidney' . How-
ever, the semantic extension is from 'nut' to 'kidney' , not vice versa, as the use of 'nut'
words for kidneys is quite common, e.g. Arosi kora i mabwe 'kidneys' (lit. 'fruit of Tahitian
chestnut' ), Niueanfua-iji 'kidney' (lit. 'fruit of Tahitian chestnut' ).


11.2.2 Inocarpus fagifer (syn. ! fagiferus, ! edulis), Tahitian chestnut, Pacific chestnut, Polynesian chestnut, TP aila, Bnamambe (Fabaceae)

I no carpus fagifer is a common second storey tree of
the foreshore or lowland forest, reaching 15-30 min
height in the Bismarcks but shorter on islands further
east. Its trunk is straight and fluted (Figure 11 .2). Its
fruit is a pod about 8 em long which does not release
its single white seed, which must be cooked to be palat-
able. The enormous variety of its forms reflects the fact
that it has long been cultivated (Bourke & AUen (forth-
coming) report that it is cultivated by a sixth of Papua
New Guinea' s rural population). Leaves may be elon-
gated and narrow or oblong and wide. The fruit may be
rounded, crescent-shaped or elongated-oval and green,
brown or yellow (Walter & Sam2002: 183-184). Right
across Oceania it is either boiled or roasted like a
chestnut (Paijmans 1976: 124, Evans 1999: 19-21, S.
Foale 2001 , Walter & Sam 2002: 183, Gardm:r & Paw-
ley 2006). Hence the English term 'Tahitian chest-
nut'. It is then either eaten without further treatment,
or in the Solomons and Fiji grated on coral and made Figure 11.2 Inocarpus fagifer, Tahitian
into bread or pudding (Capell 1941 , Peekel1984: 245 , chestnut: A, tree; B, portionofbranch bear-
Evans 1999: 19, Walter & Sam 2002: 185). In parts of ing fruit; C, inflorescence.
Vanuatu it is a major alternative food between the two yam seasons, and the nuts are stored
in various ways (Walter & Sam 2002: 185).

318    Malcolm Ross


     The cooked seed varies in taste and villagers choose trees according to the taste of their
seeds. The tree spreads naturally and prolifically and is then often carefully protected. Seed-
lings that grow around the base of the trunk are left in place if the tree is little used, but
removed from others so that fallen fruit can be harvested more easily. In Vanuatu seedlings
of trees bearing fruit preferred by villagers are transplanted close to the village, but this seems
to occur less commonly in the Solomons (Walt1~r & Sam 2002: 184--185).

     On Lihir the leaves of I nocarpus fagifer are used to parcel up food for cooking in a
stone oven (S. Foale 2001). The wood is brittle and susceptible to borers and in general little
used, but in Fiji and Tonga tool handles are made from the flutes of its trunk (Walter & Sam
2002: 186, Gardner & Pawley 2006).

     Blust (AcD) argues that Dempwolff (1938) confused reflexes of POe *qipil 'ironwood,
Intsia bijuga' (ch.7, 4.9) with those of POe *ipi 'Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer'. The
difference between the two denotata, he suggests, justifies separate reconstructions. He is
certainly right, as Marovo has distinct reflexes ofthe two terms, respectively kivili and ivi.[7]

<
POe *ipi 'Tahitian chestnut, I nocarpus fagifer'
  Adm:      Mussau        ll                    'Tahitian chestnut'
  NNG:      Amara         (e)ip                 'Tahitian chestnut, I no carpus fagifer'
  NNG:      Lukep (Po no) ip                    'nut-bearing tree'
  NNG:      Gitua         ipi                   'Tahitian chestnut'
  NNG:      Bing          yip                   'Tahitian chestnut'
  NNG:      Takia         ip                    'Tahitian chestnut'
  PT:       Bwaidoga      yivi                  'wild chestnut'
  MM:       Simbo         ivi                   'Tahitian chestnut'
  MM:       Nduke         ivi                   'Tahitian chestnut'
  MM:       Marovo        ivi                   'Tahitian chestnut'
  MM:       Gao           na-efi                'Tahitian chestnut, I no carpus fagifer' (W.
                                                McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM:       Maringe            na-iji           'Tahitian chestnut, I no carpus fagifer' (W.
                                                McClatchey, pers. comm.)
PEOc *ipi 'Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer'
  Mic: Kiribati          ibi          'Tahitian chestnut'
  Fij:   Bauan           ivi          'Tahitian chestnut'
  Fij:   Wayan           ivi          'Tahitian chestnut'
  Fij:   Rotuman        ?iji          'Tahitian chestnut'
  Pn:    Tongan          iji          'Tahitian chestnut, I no carpus fagifer'
  Pn:    Anutan          ipi          'Tahitian chestnut'
  Pn:    Samoan          iji          'Tahitian chestnut, I no carpus fagifer'
  Pn:    Rarotongan      i?i          'Tahitian chestnut'
>

[7] Reasons for the confusion are (i) that Rotuman ?ifi 'Inocarpus fagifer' has an unexpected initial ?- (this is
probably an outcome of borrowing), and (ii) that Samoan-as a result of regular sound changes-reflects both
as ifi, and disambiguates them by adding an extra morpheme when the term denotes the ironwood: ifi-lele 'a
large timber tree, Intsia sp.' and ifi-fatu 'a hard-grained ifi-lele' as opposed to ifi 'Inocarpus sp.'. Bwaidoga y-
refiects an unpredictable accretion.

                                                                                Nut and fruit trees      319


<
PEOc *mabwe 'Tahitian chestnut, Inocarpusfagifer' (Lynch 2004a; Chowning 2001:
  *m(w)ap(w)e)
  SES: Sa'a             map we       'Tahitian chestnut'
  SES: Santa Ana        mwapwe       'Tahitian chestnut'
  SES: Kahua            mabe         'Tahitian chestnut' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  NCV: Mota             mabwe        'tree sp.'
  NCV: NEAmbae          mag  we      'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Nokuku           mape         'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Kiai             mape         'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Tamambo          (vu)mabue 'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Araki            ueJe         'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Raga             mwabwe       'tree sp.'
  NCV: Nese             na-mab       'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-mbwe         'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Namakir          mwamw        'Tahitian chestnut'
  NCV: Nguna            na-mwapwe 'Tahitian chestnut'
  SV:    Anejom         n-mapw       'Tahitian chestnut' (Wheatley 1992: 143)
  Pn:     Rapanui       mape         'kidney'
  Pn:     Mangarevan    mape         'local chestnut'
  Pn:     Pukapukan     mape         'ovary'
  Pn:    Tahitian       mope         'kidney; I no carpus fagifer'
>

    Ivens (1929) assumes that Sa'a (SES) mapwe 'Inocarpus fagifer' is a borrowing from
Mota, but this supposition seems unnecessary.

    The Tahitian reflex above is glossed 'kidney' as well as 'Inocarpusfagifer', and the Ra-
panui reflex denotes only 'kidney'. As noted in §2.1, there is a tendency for names of nuts
also to be used as (or as part of) the term for the kidney.


11.2.3 Barringtonia spp. other than B. asiatica, cutnut, bush nut, TP pao, Bnavele (Lecythidaceae)

The genus Barringtonia has a number of species (see also ch.5, §5.2), but only three have edi-
ble nuts: B. novae-hiberniae (syn. B. oblongifolia, B. brosimos), B. procera (syn. B. magnifica,
B. excelsa, B. schuchardtiana, B. guppyana) and B. edulis (syn. B. calyptrata, B. excelsa, B.
samoensis, B. seaturae). They are small trees, growing to between 7 and 20m, which fruit 2-3
times a year, producing a fruit with a fleshy e:xocarp, a thin fibrous mesocarp and a thin, hard
endocarp, within which is a large oily seed with a thin, minutely hairy skin (Figure 11.3). 8
The seed is edible raw or cooked (Evans 1999: 12-17, 31, 44, Gardner & Pawley 2006). Bar-
ringtonia species with edible nuts grow today in villages on northeast mainland New Guinea
and in the Bismarcks, the Solomons and in Vanuatu.

    Peekel 1984: 397 says that the seeds of B. novae-hiberniae are superior to those of B.
procera. Otherwise the three species are very similar and are sometimes confused in botanical
reports. Jebb (1992) provides a careful and relatively recent study of the edible species, and
the synonyms above are based on his listing. There are numerous cultivars, and this has led
to the proliferation of synonyms as well as confusions about which species a given cultivar
represents. Evans (1999: 38) comments that in indigenous Solomons taxonomies B. edulis is
often classified with B. novae-hiberniae.

[8] In view of the discussion in this section, a figure showing B. novae-hiberniae would be preferable, but none
could be found.

320   Malcolm Ross


                                                                    --style (filiform extension
                                                                        of the ovary)

Figure 11.3 Barringtonia edulis, cut nut: A, tree; B, flowering shoot; C, flower; D, portion of string
of fruit; E. longitudinal section of ripe fruit and edible kernel (from Henderson & Hancock 1988: 62),
F, detailed longitudinal section of fruit; G, transverse section of fruit.



    Of the three species, it seems probable that only B. novae-hiberniae was present in the
Bismarcks in early Oceanic times, although, like B. edulis, it is only a minor food source in
present-day Papua New Guinea. It is the only species of the three which grows wild in the
forests of Papua New Guinea (Jebb 1992), and it is also the species which Peekel (1984: 397)
reports as being tended or planted in gardens and around villages inN ew Ireland for its edible
seeds.

    All three species grow wild in the forests of the Solomon Islands, often in wet places. B.
novae-hiberniae is more likely to grow wild (it is considered to be the most shade-tolerant
of the three species), whilst B. procera and B. edulis are more likely to grow near villages
where they are often transplanted to groves along with Canarium trees (Evans 1999:40-41,
Hviding 2005: 146).

                                                                                Nut and fruit trees      3 21


    Jebb (1992) reports that wild specimens of B. procera have only been found in the Solo-
mons. Cultivated varieties of B. procera abound in the Solomons and Vanuatu, suggesting
that it has long been domesticated there (Walter & Sam 2002: 118). Indeed, local informants
told Yen ( 1996) that B. procera originated on Santa Cruz Island in the extreme east of the
Solomons, and he appears to entertain this possibility. Thus it seems to have been transported
from the Solomons and Bougainville to New Ireland and thence to the Gazelle Peninsula of
New Britain and the Admiralties (Bourke 1996), perhaps in the last thousand years. The fact
that it had not spread to the rest of New Britain or to New Guinea by 1870 suggests that
its spread occurred later rather than earlier.9 J. Kennedy's (pers. comm.) informants in the
Admiralties regard B. procera as old there, and Bourke (forthcoming) regards it as a pre-
contact introduction. If this reconstruction of events is correct, then it may be that B. procera
displaced earlier B. novae-hiberniae cultivation in the Bismarcks.[10]

     Peekel apparently did not find B. edulis in New Ireland during his work, which predated
the second World War. On the other hand, in Fiji it is the only edible Barringtonia species
and grows wild in both open and dense forest (it is rarely cultivated there; Jebb 1992). It also
grows in the wild and occurs in many varieties in the Solomons and Vanuatu, indicating a
long cultivation history (Walter & Sam 2002: 112-113). These facts suggest that B. edulis
may have been brought to the Bismarcks very recently.

     These considerations influence the interpretation and glossing of the reconstructions be-
low. Only one POe term, *pala(!J), can be convincingly reconstructed for edible Barringtonia,
and it is a reasonable inference that it denot1;:d B. novae-hiberniae. Peekel reports two vari-
eties in New Ireland: the more desirable variety has fruit 'blackish-purple to wine-red ', the
other pale green. In Patpatar, the red variety is called paua kubar, the green paua pala. 11 It
is thus possible that POe *pala(!J) denoted the green variety.

     The final *-(!J) is added on the basis of Kara fala!J . However, the absence of a reflex
in other Meso-Melanesian languages, where a final-consonant reflex is expected, makes its
reconstruction doubtful.

<
POe *pala(!J) 'cut nut, bush nut, Barringtonia novae-hiberniae (green variety?)'
     MM:   Kara (E)        fala!J       'Barringtonia novae-hiberniae'
     MM:   Patpatar         (paua) pala 'Barringtonia novae-hiberniae, variety with pale
                                        green fruit '
     MM:   Kokota          fa/a         'cut nut'
     MM:   Gao             fa/a         'Barringtonia edulis' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                        comm.)
     MM:   Maringe         fa/a         'Barringtonia procera, cut nut' (Evans 1999:39)
     TM:   Tanabili         no-volo     'cut nu1c'
     TM:   Tanema           vara        'cut nu1c' (-r- for t-1-)
>

[9] Its spread to locations elsewhere in Papua New Guinea is a post-contact phenomenon (R.M. Bourke, pers.
comm.).

[10] In Kara, Patpatar and Tolai ofNew Ireland the name of B. procera is a compound (e.g. paua-hutun in Patpatar)
of the names of B. novae-hiberniae (paua) and B. asiatica (hutun) (Peekel1984: 397). Jebb (1992) suggests
that this is evidence for a recent introduction of B. procera into the Bismarck Archipelago (he cites Bourke's
research). This is only weak circumstantial evidenc1~ , however, as a glance through Peekel shows that such
compound plant names are common, and Evans (1999) reports that such a compound is used inS Malaitan to
denote B. edulis because the nut is eaten but fish poison is extracted from the bark.

[11] Predictably, kubar means 'red' . However, pala means 'coconut husk', perhaps alluding to the green pericarp
of an unhusked young coconut. However, this term does not reflect either of the POe terms reconstructed for
' coconut husk' (ch.12, §4.4.)

322   Malcolm Ross

<
PEOc *pala 'cut nut, bush nut, Barringtonia sp . '
  SES: Talise         vala          'cut nut'
  SES: Kwara'ae       fa/a          'B. procera, B. edulis, B. novae-hiberniae' (W.
                                    McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Arosi          hara          'Barringtonia edulis'
  SES: Bauro          hara          'cut nut'
  SES: Kahua          hara          'cut nut'
  NCal: NyeHiyu       palac         'Barringtonia neocaledonica'
  Fij:  Wayan         (kutu)vala    'Barringtonia edulis, with large seed edible raw or
                                    cooked'
>

    Also seemingly reconstructable on the basis of the cognate set below is POe *pele, but the
fact that it differs from POe *pala(!J) only in its vowels suggests that some or all of the terms
in the set reflect borrowings associated with the westward expansion of either B. procera
or B. edulis. Additionally problematic are the fact that the two terms found in New Britain
(Nakanai, Meramera uele) denote other nut trees and not a Barringtonia sp., and the fact that
they reflect POe initial *w- rather than *p-.

__pre__
   MM:     Nakanai        uele          'Canarium mehenbethane' (Floyd 1954)
   MM:     Meramera       uele          'Tahitian chestnut'
   MM:     Vaghua         vele          'cut nut'
   MM:     Babatana       vele          'B. procera, B. edulis, B. novae-hiberniae' (W.
                                        McClatchey, pers. comm.)
   NCV:    Mota          vele           'Barringtonia edulis'
   NCV:    Tamambo       (vu)vale       'Barringtonia edulis'
   NCV:    Raga          vele           'Barringtonia edulis'
   NCV:    Apma          vwez           'Barringtonia edulis'
   NCV:    Lonwolwol     woleh          'a common edible nut'
   NCV:    Namakir       vii            'Barringtonia edulis'
   NCV:    Nguna         na-vlla        'Barringtonia edulis'
   SV:     Sye           vel(!Jah)      'Barringtonia edulis'
   SV:     Ura           ni-ver(!Ji}    'Barringtonia edulis'

   Although *kinu 'edible Barringtonia species' has reflexes in both Meso-Melanesian and
SE Solomonic languages, the members of the set are spread across the border between West-
em and Eastern Oceanic, so borrowing is more probable than shared inheritance from POe.

__pre__
   MM:     Roviana        kinu          'Barringtonia sp., with edible nut'
   MM:     Nduke          kino          'cut nut'
   MM:     Hoava          kinu          'cut nut'
   MM:     Kusaghe        kinu          'Barringtonia procera, cut nut' (Evans 1999:39)
   SES:    Gel a          kinu          'k shore tree with ed. fruit'
   SES:    Lau            kinu          'cut nut, Barringtonia edulis'
   SES:    Kwaio          kinu          'cut nut'
   SES:    Kwara'ae       kiun-kinu     'cut nut, Barringtonia edulis' (Evans 1999:39)

                                                                                 Nut and fruit trees      323


                                                                              ~11--- endocarp
                                                                                         testa
                                                                                          kernel(= 2 seeds)

Figure 11.4 Terminalia catappa, sea almond: Left A, tree; B, shoot bearing fruit; C, flowering
shoot; D, fruit with edible kernel (from Henderson & Hancock 1988: 71). Right Parts of fruit: E,
longitudinal section.



11.2.4 Terminalia spp. (Combretaceae)

A number of T erminalia species have edible 'nuts', but only two are reported to be planted
in NW Island Melanesia. They are T . catappa (sea almond, Indian almond, Java almond,
TP talis, P alite, B natavoa) and T . kaernbachii (okari nut, B natalie). 12 T. catappa is dis-
tributed from southern India to Polynesia, but T. kaernbachii occurs indigenously only in
New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago (Bourke 1996, Walter & Sam 2002: 260). Sev-
eral other species with edible nuts occur in NW Island Melanesia but are only harvested
from the wild (T. copelandii, T . impediens; lPaijmans 1976: 123-124), and yet other species
have fruits with edible flesh (T. megalocarpa, syn. T. solomonensis, T. lapalagon). Several
T erminalia species found indigenously in the Solomons provide good timber: T. brassii, T.
calamansanai and T. sepicana (Evans 1999: 10--11).


[12] In Hiri Motu, the lingua franca of parts of southern Papua New Guinea, the term okari denotes T. kaernbachii;
in Tok Pis in it denotes T. impediens, cultivated on the coasts of the Madang, East Sepik and Sandaun Provinces
of mainland Papua New Guinea; (Bourke & Allen forthcoming) .

324   Malcolm Ross


    T erminalia catappa is a stout broad tree growing to 10-25 m, with a short, often twisted,
easily climbed bole. It prefers moister environments, is a common foreshore tree in New
Guinea and the Bismarcks, and grows along the coastal strip up to an altitude of 300 m.
It also grows in the floodplain forests and streambanks of Bougainville (Peekel 1984:403,
Mueller-Dombois & Fosberg 1998: 60, Bourke & Allen forthcoming). Its leaves tum red and
fall about four times a year, providing a calendrical marker in lagoon environments in Fiji.
The fruit of T. catappa has a thin, fleshy exocarp covering a fibrous mesocarp fused with a
thick, hard, irregular endocarp (the stone), within which is an edible seed with an almond-like
taste enclosed in a red skin (testa) (Figure 11.4), eaten raw or roasted (Evans 1999: 12-13).

     Terminalia kaernbachii is more slender and has thinner branches than T. catappa. It is
also taller, growing to 20-40 m (Peekel 1984:403, Evans 1999: 41). Its fruit is the largest
known among the Combretaceae and contains a large edible seed which ranges in weight
from 1.5 to 10 g. Its distribution is quite different from the coastal T. catappa. It prefers
instead inland environments up to an altitude of 1100 m with a greater diurnal temperature
range. Until recently its distribution in the Bismarcks was limited to the extreme west ofNew
Britain and to Manus Island in the Admiralties (Walter & Sam 2002:260, Bourke & Allen
forthcoming, pers. comm.). Unfortunately, T. kaernbachii has received relatively little atten-
tion in the literature, partly perhaps because of its restricted distribution and partly because
it is overshadowed by the better known and far more widespread T. catappa.

     The literature also attributes little importance to T. catappa, but this reflects a decline in
its consumption since European contact. In the Solomons and Fiji the nuts tend to be eaten
raw as snacks and collected by children, but they are not (or no longer?) used in cooking. Pai-
jmans (1976: 123-124) and R.M. Bourke (pers. comm.) report that it is often planted and is a
common village shade tree in New Guinea and the Bismarcks. Walter & Sam (2002: 255) say
that T. catappa nuts are sometimes preserved by smoking in New Britain and Bougainville.
The situation in Vanuatu is ambiguous. Walter & Sam (2002: 255) report that T. catappa is
largely spread by birds and bats, and little cultivated, but the fact that there are many varieties
there may point to past selection through planting.

     In Vanuatu and on Waya (Fiji) the wood ofT. catappa was carved. In Vanuatu it is also
used for canoes and for the frameworks ofbuildings (Walter & Sam 2002:255-256, Gardner
& Pawley 2006). In Marovo juice squeezed from the leaves makes a medicine against vari-
ous pains including toothache. Bark scrapings wrapped in leaves and heated over a fire are
squeezed to produce a liquid given to children who have a sore throat, cough or diarrhoea,
and it has similar uses in Vanuatu (Walter & Sam 2002:256, Hviding 2005: 145).

     Comments in the agronomic literature about the relative insignificance of T. catappa are
belied by the fact that there is a term with very widespread reflexes, namely POe *talise.
The denotatum of reflexes from New Guinea and the Bismarcks is usually noted simply as
'Terminalia sp.', but it is a reasonable inference that reflexes from coastal locations in New
Guinea, from New Britain and New Ireland and from small islands all denote T. catappa
(R.M. Bourke, pers. comm.) and that this was the denotatum of POe *talise. If this inter-
pretation is correct, then no term for T. kaernbachii is reconstructable on the basis of the
available data.

<
PMP *talisay 'Terminalia catappa' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *talise 'T erminalia catappa' (Milke 1961)
  Adm: Seimat            tali!          'Terminalia sp.' (Sorensen 1950)
  Adm: Lou               telit          'Terminalia sp.'
  Adm: Loniu             tel us         'Terminalia sp.'
  Adm:    Titan         drilis        'T erminalia sp.'
  NNG:    Maenge        talisi        'T erminalia catappa'
  NNG:    Kove          talize        'T erminalia sp.'
  NNG:    Tami          talit         'T erminalia sp.'
  NNG:    Kela          tarik         'T erminalia sp.'
  NNG:    Takia         tali          'T erminalia sp.'
  NNG:    Kairiru       tal is        'T erminalia sp.'
  MM:     Vitu          taoile        'Terminalia sp.' (metathesis)
  MM:     Bola          tarile        'Terminalia sp.' (metathesis)
  MM:     Lavongai      tal is a      'T erminalia sp.'
  MM:     Madak         ralis         'tree sp.'
  MM:     Sursurunga    tal is        'Indian chestnut'
  MM:     Tolai         tali          'T erminalia sp.'
  MM:     Ramoaaina     tiJliiJ       'T erminalia sp.'
  MM:     Babatana      tal ike       'Terminalia catappa' (-k- fort-@-)
  MM:     Nduke         ta-talise     'T erminalia catappa'
  MM:     Roviana       ta-talise     'T erminalia catappa'
  MM:     Marovo        talise        'Terminalia catappa'
  MM:     Kia           (na)klihe     'Terminalia catappa' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                      comm.)
  MM: Maringe          (na)klise      'T erminalia catappa'
PEOc *talise 'T erminalia catappa'
  SES: Gela             talihe       'Terminalia catappa'
  SES: Lau             a lite        'T erminalia catappa'
  SES: Kwara'ae        a/ita         'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Mwotlap          t[I]!Is      'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Mota             salite       'Terminalia catappa' (metathesis)
  NCV: Tolomako na-talise            'Inocarpusfagifer'
  NCV: Apma             telis        'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Nguna           na-talie      'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: S Efate         n-tali        'Terminalia catappa'
PSV *niJ-talis 'Terminalia catappa' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:     Sye          nteli         'Terminalia catappa'
  SV:     Lenakel       telh         'k.o. tree with fiattish oval brown fruit which is
                                     cracked open and eaten'
  SV:     Anejom       n-teje8       'T erminalia catappa'
PCP *talise 'T erminalia catappa'
  Fij:    Bauan        dalioi        'T erminalia catappa'
  Pn:     Tongan        telie        'Terminalia catappa'
  Pn:     Niue an       telie        'T erminalia catappa'
  Pn:     E Futunan talie            'Terminalia catappa'
  Pn:     Samoan        talie        'Terminalia catappa'
  Pn:     Luangiua      talie        'tree sp. with big yellow berries'
  Pn:     Marque san ta?ie           'Terminalia catappa'
  Pn:     Rarotongan taria           'Terminalia catappa'
     Pn:      Rennellese    tagie           'T erminalia catappa'
     Pn:      Tokelauan     talie           'T erminalia catappa'
>

                                                                     Nut and fruit trees   325


326        Malcolm Ross


    Two other POe terms possibly denoted Terminalia species: *tapoRa and *qatV. The POe
denotatum of *tapoRa is unclear. In PEOc it evidently denoted a species of T erminalia,
possibly T. catappa, 13 but the glosses ofthe Takia and Nehan reflexes make it impossible to
determine its POe denotation.

<
POe *tapoRa 'a nut-bearing tree sp.' (Geraghty 1990)
  NNG: Takia           tapa!         'nut tree, like Canarium, but less oily' 14
  MM: Nehan            tauol        'Inocarpusfagifer' (Glennon & Glennon 2005)
PEOc *tapoRa 'Terminalia spp.' (Geraghty 1990)
  SES: Kwara'ae        dafo         'Terminalia brassii'
  NCV: Mwotlap         na-twoy      'Albizia saman'
  NCV: Mota            tawora       'Albizia saman'
  NCV: NE Ambae        tavoa        'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Tamambo         (vu)tavoa    'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Maewo           tavoa        'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Raga            tavoa        'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Uripiv          dawo         'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Nese            tavo         'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Port Sandwich ravo           'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Lonwolwol       tavoro        'a fruit'
  NCV: Paamese         hoai         'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Lewo            (puru)tawo 'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Baki            (bur)tavu    'Terminalia catappa'
  NCV: Namakir         tauwo, tawo 'Terminalia catappa'
  Fij:  Bauan          tavola       'Terminalia catappa' [15]
>

    The set below appears to reflect a POe *qatV. Superficially Nehan kasasas appears cog-
nate, but it is at best a borrowed reflex. The expected Nehan reflex would be *ata: Nehan k-
and -s- reflect POe *k and *s respectively. T. complanata and T. sepicana are both unculti-
vated edible species, the nuts of which are occasionally consumed as snacks, and so the gloss
'Terminalia sp. with edible nut' is well enough supported.

<
POe *qatV 'Terminalia sp. with edible nut'
     MM: Madak             (var)?a          'Terminalia complanata'
     NCV: S Efate          n-at             'Terminalia sepicana (eaten only by fruit bat)'
     Mic: Chuukese         asas             'Terminalia catappa'
     Mic:   Carolinian      asas             'T erminalia catappa'
cf. also:
     MM:    Nehan           kasasas          'T erminalia samoensis'
>

[13] The gloss of the Mwotlap and Mota terms, Albizia sam an, can be ignored for reconstructive purposes, as the
latter is an introduced tree (ch.7, §3.2), and was certainly not a POe denotatum of *tapoRa.

[14] This term was recorded only in the inland dialect in which coastal Takia land rare merged as l, i.e. tapa[ is
a regular reflex of *tapoRa.

[15] E Fijian l usually reflects POc/PEOc *l, but Geraghty (1990) shows that it sometimes reflects *R. Geraghty
(2004: 80). however, thinks it is a borrowing from an unidentified Solomons source.

                                                                                 Nut and fruit trees       327



11.2.5 Pandanus spp., screw pines (Pandanaceae)

Pandanus trees are an easily recognised fea1ture in the forests ofNW Island Melanesia. All
species have aerial roots and very large thick leaves. The leaves of some species serve on
canoes as sails, awnings, deck-houses, bailers and in houses as roofing, mats and wall lin-
ing. Sewn leaves are used for rain capes. POe *qebal 'pandanus mat' is reconstructed in
vol. 1, ch.4, §3.1. The fruits of all species are syncarps, compound fruits with many seg-
ments, each a drupe, arranged around a core, and the fruits and/or seeds of various species
are a source of food . Recognition of the various species, however, is much more difficult,
partly because of intra-species variability which is at least partly the result of cultivation.
Barrau (1962: 161-163) remarks that there is much confusion in the Linnaean naming of
Pandanus species, and Henderson & Hancock (1988: 80, 232-236) do not provide names
for the Solomons species they describe. Our sources are also often vague in their glosses of
terms for pandanus types. Consequently it is possible that there are inaccuracies here. The
four species for which POe terms can be reconstructed with reasonable certainty are: 16
      • P. tectorius, the coastal pandanus: the most widespread and most exploited species
        throughout Oceania; its leaves are used for making mats;
      • P. dubius: it is widely distributed and r,emarkable for the size and strength of its leaves.
      • P. conoideus, with its long red or yellow fruit (Tok Pisin marita), a salient species in
        New Guinea but not common in the Bismarcks;
      • P. lamekotensis: seemingly restricted to the Admiralties and to northern and central
        New Ireland, but a POe term for it is reconstructable.
All except P. dub ius are sources of food, and the third and fourth are cultivated. Although P.
dubius is not a food source, I have included it here in order to keep the genus together.

11.2.5.1 Pandanus tectorius (syn. P. odoratissimus) , coa.stal pandanus (Pandanaceae)

Pandanus tectorius usually grows just behind the shore line to a height of 5-10 m. Its leaves
are 1-2 m long, fiat sheets tapering to a point. The orange fruit is made up of 'fingers' 6--8
em long, 4--5 em wide, each consisting of 8--17 parallel nuts (Figure 11 .5, left). The species
shows considerable variability, consistent with having been cultivated over a long period of
time, and is often found near villages and old village sites (Peekel 1984:38, Walter & Sam
2002: 216--217). In NW Island Melanesia its use is patchy: it is used in Manus, the south
coast ofNew Britain, in New Ireland and in Bougainville (Bourke n.d.).[17]

[16] There are a number of other Pandanus species in New Guinea and the Bismarcks (Kennedy & Clarke 2004),
including P. julianettii, P. antarensis and P. brosimos, all with fruit known as karuka in Tok Pisin and a major
nutritional source in highlands areas, but they do not grow in the lowlands and do not concern us here .

[17] Its use elsewhere in the Solomons is unclear because Henderson & Hancock 1988 provide no species iden-
tifications for the pandanus types they describe .

328   Malcolm Ross


    Selection has resulted in cultivars with thick but pliable leaves with edges free from
spines, which serve as rain hoods and are used for making mats and baskets. In Vanuatu
baskets are made from leaves softened in the fire , cut into narrow strips, steeped in water,
then bleached and dried in the sun (Walter & Sam 2002: 216-217).

    The alimentary use of P. tectorius is less significant than uses of its leaves, but it is re-
ported from Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, Tonga and Samoa. The ripe globular fruit are
sucked to obtain a sweet juice, perhaps more by children than by adults. This practice may
have been far more common in the past, before the arrival of sweetened soft drinks (Walter &
Sam 2002:217, Bourke n.d.). On Waya (Fiji) the juice was famine food (Gardner & Pawley
2006). Barrau (1962: 88) reports that the ends of the aerial roots are baked and eaten in some
Micronesian and Polynesian societies, especially in atoll communities, where its fruits are
also an important food source.

    On W aya the trunks are used for house rafters and leaves for thatching (Gardner & Paw ley
2006).

    POe *padran appears to have specifically denoted Pandanus tectorius, but was evidently
also used as a generic for pandanus species. POe *kiRe and *poipoi probably denoted only
P. tectorius or perhaps certain cultivars of P. tectorius.

<
PAn *pa!JudaL 'pandanus' (Blust 1982)
PMP *pandan 'pandanus ' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *padran 'coastal pandanus, Pandanus tectorius; pandanus (generic)' (Biggs 1965:
  *para)
  Adm: Mussau           arana        'littoral pandanus the leaves of which are used in
                                     plaiting mats and baskets, P. tectorius'
  Adm: Leipon          padr          'kind of pandanus with narrow light-green leaves,
                                     used in plaiting mats'
  Adm: Lou             par           'pandanus'
  Adm: Titan           par           'pandanus fruit ' (Bowem 1999)
  NNG: Amara            (a)pada-pada 'pandanus sp. with succulent fruit'
  NNG: Mangap          pa"da         'pandanus tree '
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) pada             'pandanus sp. '
  NNG: Malai           padan         'pandanus'
  MM: Lavongai          a ran        'pandanus'
  MM: Kara (E)         foran         'Pandanus tectorius'
  MM: Kokota            (i)fra       'pandanus variety, small, used for making mats'
  TM: Tanema            vadane       'pandanus'
  SES: Lau             fada-da       'pandanus'
  NCV: Mota             van a        'a pandanus, inedible variety of female P.
                                     odoratissimus'
  NCV: Lakon            vac          'Pandanus tectorius' (Fran~fois 2004)
  NCV: Vera' a          vada         'Pandanus tectorius' (Fran9ois 2004)
  NCV: Sakao            ne-vor       'Pandanus cominsii'
  SV:    Kwamera        niJ-fara     'pandanus'
  NCal: Jawe            wan          'coastal pandanus'
  NCal: NyeHlyu        pan           'coastal pandanus'
  Mic: Puluwat         far           'pandanus, used for mats and thatch'
     Mic:   Carolinian      fa.sa             'pandanus (generic)'
     Fij:   Wayan            vadra            'Pandanus tectorius'
     Pn:    Tongan          fa                'taxon of several Pandanus spp.' (Whistler
                                              199lb: 24)
     Pn:    Hawaiian        hala              'Pandanus tectorius'
>

                                                                             Nut and fruit trees     329

<
PMP *kiRay 'Pandanus sp. ' [18]
POe *kiRe 'coastal Pandanus sp., probably Pandanus tectorius' (French-Wright 1983)
  PT:    Gapapaiwa kire             'mat made of sewn pandanus leaves'
  PT:    Motu         gere-gere     'Pandanus tectorius'
  SES: Arosi          gire          'Pandanus tectorius '
  NCV: Mota           gire          'Pandanus tectorius'
  NCV: Mwotlap        ne-gey        'Pandanus tectorius' (Fran~ois 2004)
  NCV: Mwesen         ger           'Pandanus tectorius' (Walter & Sam 2002)
  NCV: Vures          (wo)gcer      'Pandanus tectorius' (Fran~ois 2004)
  NCV: Raga           gire          'native tree with fruit like pineapple; pandanus'
  NCV: Tamambo        hire-hire     'woven container from coconut leaf'
  NCV: BigNambas na-hei             'mat'
  NCV: Nguna          na-kie        'mat pandanus'
  Fij:   Bauan        kie-kie       'Pandanus sp. '
  Pn:    Tongan       kie           'a sterile variety of pandanus used for weaving
                                    mats' (Whistler 199lb: 56)
  Pn:    Pukapukan kie              'specially made mat sometimes used as sail'
>

<
POe *poipoi 'Pandanus sp., perhaps P. tectorius'
  MM: Nakanai           voivoi         'Pandanus sp.'
  SES: W Guadalcanal voivoi            'pandanus'
  NCV: Mwotlap          wow            'Pandanus sp. '
  NCV: Araki            gege           'Pandanus tectorius'
  NCV: Apma             wip            'Pandanus tectorius'
  NCV: Uripiv           waiw           'general word for pandanus'
                        weiw(bur)      'shore pandanus, has big leaves, unusable '
  NCV: Port Sandwich vaiv              'pandanus; skirt'
  NCV: Paamese          heiho          'Pandanus sp.'
  NCV: Lewo             (puru)vava 'pandanus'
                        vava           'pandanus'
  NCV: Namakir          vaiv           'smooth pandanus'
  SV:    Lenakel        nu-vie         'pandanus sp.'
  Fij:   Bauan          voivoi         'Pandanus thurstoni'
  Fij:   Wayan          voivoi         'cultivars of P. tectorius and possibly of P. dubius
                                       or P. whitmeeanus'
>

[18] The reconstruction ofPMP *kiRay is supported by the Oceanic data and by Manobo, Tboli (both Philippines)
kilay 'Pandanus sp.' (Madulid 200la: 373).

330   Malcolm Ross


Figure 11.5 Left Pandanus tectorius: A, tree at its tallest; B, young plant when leaves harvested;
C, end portion of leaf (no thorns); D, portion of surface of syncarp; E, longitudinal section of fruit
segment. Right Pandanus dubius: F, tree, height 3m; G, syncarp from above; H, longitudinal section
of fruit segment with edible kernel; J, leaf tip showing curved spike.


    Lynch (2004a) suggests that the following set may also reflect POe *poipoi.

<
PSOc *va(i,y)u 'Pandanus sp.'
  NCV: NE Ambae ve-veo             'Pandanus sp.'
  NCV: Tape           na-viu       'Pandanus sp.'
  NCV: BigNambas (Jiu              'Pandanussp.'
  NCV: Nese           na-(Jau      'Pandanus sp.'
  NCV: Baki           (buru)vewo 'Pandanus sp.'
PSV *na-va(i,y)u 'Pandanus sp.' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:   Sye           na-(ri)vyu   'Pandanus tectorius'
                      n-(or)veyu   ' 'bush pandanus'
  SV:   Lenakel       nu-vie
>


11.2.5.2 Pandanus dubius (syn. P. compressus) (Pandanaceae)

                                                                              Nut and fruit trees      3 31


Pandanus dubius is a coastal species distributed from the Philippines southeastward as far as
Vanuatu, where it is sometimes cultivated. It is the pandanus species with the broadest and
stiffest leaves in the Bismarcks, 2 m or more in length and up to 16 em wide. The syncarps
are made up of fingers 10-13 em long, 5-9 em wide, angular, but unlike other species not
grooved (Figure 11.5, rightY 9 (Peekel1984: 41 , Walter & Sam 2002: 212-213).

     The fruiting spike is edible but rarely eaten, Sorensen (1950) reports for the Ninigos and
Walter & Sam (2002: 212) for Vanuatu. The leaves are used for thatching, and with the spiny
parts removed dried leaves are sewn together as mats and large baskets (Sorensen 1950,
Peekel1984: 41).

     The POe term for P. dubius was *pakum. 20

<
POe *pakum 'Pandanus dubius' (Peekel1984: 41)
     Adm:   Muss au       aum              'broad-leafed pandanus, P. dubius'
     Adm:   Lou           p:Jk             'pandanus '
     Adm:   Titan         pek              'pandanus '
     NNG:   Malai         paum             'pandanus '
     NNG:   Takia          wak             'pandanus '
     NNG:   Manam         aku              'pandanus (big leaf) ; used to make grass skirt'
     NNG:   Bam            wak             'pandanus '
     NNG:   Kairiru       V'ak             'Pandanus dubius'
     MM:    Kara (E)      faum             'Pandanus dubius'
     MM:    Patpatar      hau              'pandanus '
     MM:    Tolai          vaum            'Pandanus dubius'
     MM:    Sursurunga    aum              'tree type similiar to pandanus'
     SES:   Kwara' ae     fa?u             'pandanus (generic); mat'
     SES:   Kwaio         fa?u             'pandanus '
     NCV:   Mota           vau             'a pandanus'
     NCV:   Mwesen        (wo)vag          'Pandanus dubius' (Walter & Sam 2002: 295)
     NCV:   Namakir       na-vak           'Pandanus dubius' (Walter & Sam 2002: 295)
     NCV:   Nguna         na-vaku          'pandanus sp.'
     NCV:   S Efate       n-fak            'Pandanus dubius'
     Pn:    Tikopia       fao              'broad-leaved Pandanus, Pandanus dubius'
                                           (possibly a borrowing from a SES language)
>

11.2.5.3 Pandanus conoideus, red fruit pandanus, TP marita (Pandanaceae)

Pandanus conoideus is a small tree, 4-7 m high, found in New Guinea, from the coasts up
to an altitude of 2000 m.It is less common in the Bismarcks. It grows in damp, shady places
around villages and on old village sites, and displays the variability typical of cultivation. Its
trunk is covered in short sharp spikes, and the long leaves have spiked edges. Its syncarps are
typically 20-40 em long, and sometimes reach 1 m and weigh as much as 10 kg. The fruit
are bright red or occasionally yellow, and get their colour from the oil in the pericarp (Figure
11.6) (French 1986:210, Walter & Sam 2002: 210--211.)

[19] Henderson & Hancock (1988) do not identify th<~ species of the right-hand drawing in Figure 11 .5, but
comparison with Barrau' s (1962: 160) picture of P. tectorius confirms its identification.

[20] It is possible that Far East Manggarai wako, Ngadlha waku 'broad-leafed Pandanus sp .' and their cognates
listed by Verheijen (1990 : 232) are cognate with POe *pakum . If so, it is a PCEMP etymon.

332    Malcolm Ross


    The fruit are prized as a foodstuff
and widely consumed. They are typically
split, wrapped in leaves and cooked in
an earth oven or roasted over a fire. The
pulp and seeds are removed from the core,
mashed with water and strained to produce
a thick, rich red sauce with which other
foods are seasoned (Sorensen 1950, Barrau
1962: 163, May 1984, Bourke in prepara-
tion).

    POe *mwafia apparently denoted Pan-
                                                        A
danus conoideus. 21 This reconstruction is
open to doubt, as there are no reflexes from
New Ireland or New Britain, where the
species is rare, and only one from main-
land New Guinea. It is possible that Maisin
mmJgi 'Pandanus sp.' and PMic *malJU
'pandanus leaf' are also cognate. If so, they
reflect a POe form in which *-fi- has been
replaced by *-IJ-.                              Figure 11.6 Pandanus conoideus, marita:
    Another interpretation of the data is                       A, syncarp.
also possible, namely that the items listed
below, other than Arosi mwa-mwana, reflect POe *mofiak 'fat, oil, coconut cream; tasty'
(ch.12, §4.2), since the fruit of Pandanus conoideus are both oily and tasty. If this were
so, then Arosi mwa-mwana and the items listed under 'cf. also' would probably reflect a PEOc
*mwa!JV 'pandanus leaf.

<
POe *mwafia 'Pandanus sp., perhaps Pandanus conoideus'
PAdm *mona 'pandanus with long red or yellow fruit, probably Pandanus conoideus'
  (Blust 1996b)
  Adm: Seimat          maun         'Pandanus conoideus' (Sorensen 1950) (*-o- >
                                    Seimat -au-)
  Adm: Lou             mon          'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Wuvulu          mona         'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Likum           mon          'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Nali            mon          'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Pak             mon          'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Lou             mon          'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Leipon          mofi         'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Loniu           mofi         'Pandanus conoideus'
  Adm: Bipi            moy          'Pandanus conoideus'
     Adm: Kele        moy                    'Pandanus conoideus'
     Adm: Lenkau      moy                    'Pandanus conoideus'
     Adm: Nauna       moy                    'Pandanus conoideus'
     Adm: Drehet      mu!J                   'Pandanus conoideus'
     NNG: Mapos Buang mon                    'Pandanus conoideus'
     SES: Arosi       mwa-mwana              'Pandanus sp., leaves plaited'
cf. also:
     PT:      Maisin [22]            mo!Jgi    'Pandanus sp.'
     Mic:     Kosraean             mwe!J     'pandlanus'
     Mic:     Marshallese          mti!J     'pandlanus leaves'
     Mic:     Chuukese             ma!J      'pandlanus leaf, especially when softened by a shell'
     Mic:     Woleai               mti!Jii   'pandlanusleaf'
>

[21] Blust (1996b) cites the Admiralties forms as representing a PAdm lexical innovation, but the Mapos Buang
and Arosi forms in this set show that the form is reconstructable to POe. In Ross (1996c) I reconstructed this
form as *m"aYJa on the basis of the forms listed under 'cf. also' below: this was perhaps an error, but see the
discussion in the text.

[22] Kosirava (coastal) dialect.

                                                                          Nut and fruit trees    333


11.2.5.4 Pandanus lamekotensis (Pandanaceae)

Peekel (1984: 41) remarks that Pandanus lamekotensis is readily distinguished from other
species. However, I have otherwise found it mentioned only by Kennedy & Clarke (2004),
who provide no additional information, and it is possible that its distribution is limited to
New Ireland. Indeed, Peekel did not find it in the south of New Ireland or on the Gazelle
Peninsula ofNew Britain. It grows only on swampy creek banks, 4--7 m high with from 5 to
8 leaves, and its fruit clusters are oval, not 'fingers'. The ripe fruits , like those of P. tectorius
are sometimes sucked by New Ireland villagers.

<
POe *kaRi(q)ana 'Pandanus lamekotensis'
  Adm: Baluan        kaya!J      'pandanus sp. similar to Pandanus lamekotensis'
  Adm: Nyindrou      kaya!J      'Pandanus sp.
  Adm: Bipi          kaihan      'Pandanus sp.
  MM: Kara (E)       kaiat       'Pandanus lamekotensis' (-t for t-n)
  MM: Nalik          kariat      'Pandanus lamekotensis' (-t for t-n) (Peekel
                                 1984:41)
  MM: Madak          [va]kei!J   'Pandanus lamekotensis'
  Mic: Kiribati      kaina       'Pandanus tectorius'
>

11.2.5.5 Other names for Pandanus species

The four reconstructions below each denoted a species or a variety of Pandanus, but the
glosses do not allow us to determine which.

<
PCEMP *ima 'Pandanus sp. with leaves useful for plaiting' (ACD)
POe *ima 'Pandanus sp. with useful leaves'
  NNG: Gedaged       im            'Pandanus sp.; has aerial roots, and its leaves are
                                   used to make rain capes '
  NNG: Kis              im            'bush pandanus'
  PT:  Gapapaiwa        imo(-kara)    'bush pandanus'
  MM: Tangga            im            'tall shrub with many stalks, the leaves of which
                                      provide wrapping material for a corpse prior to
                                      burial'
>

334   Malcolm Ross



<
POe *p(w)asa(r,R) 'large Pandanus sp.'
  Adm: Drehet           pwah        'large pandanus'
  PT:    Misima         pala        'mat made: of pandanus'
  MM: Babatana          (poro) basa 'Pandanus sp.'
  MM: Maringe           vahara      'Pandanus conoideus' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                    comm.)
  SES: Bugotu           vaha        'Pandanus aff. compressus martalli' (W.
                                    McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  Pn:    E Uvean       faha         'Pandanus sp.'
  Pn:    Samoan        fasa         'Pandanus tectorius'
>

<
PWOc *(s,j)a(q,k)umu 'Pandanus sp.'
  NNG:    Sio           samu            'pandanus'
  NNG:    Tami          Sat]            'pandanus'
  NNG:    Misim         sefJ            'pandanus'
  PT:     Suau (Saliba) dam             'indigenous Pandanus sp.'
  MM:     Varisi        sayumu          'pandanus' (Record 1945)
  MM:     Babatana      samu            'Pandanus dubius'
>

<
PWOc *moke 'Pandanus sp.' (Peekel1984: 41--42)
  NNG: Kove             moe           'Pandanus sp., used for sleeping mats, raincapes
                                      and sails' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG:    Gitua         moge          'pandanus'
  MM:     Bulu          moke          'Pandanus sp., inedible'
  MM:     Bola          moke          'pandanus umbrella'
  MM:     Nakanai       moe           'Pandanus sp.; sleeping mat and rain cape made of
                                      pandanus; used for house walls' (Arentz 1989:93)
  MM:     Sursurunga mo               'tree sp. similiar to pandanus with edible fruit;
                                      leaves used for making shelters'
  MM:     Patpatar      moh           'pandanus shrub, Pandanus dankelmannianus'
>


11.2.6 Sterculia vitiensis (syn. S. tannaensis) (Sterculiaceae)

In a sense Sterculia vitiensis does not belong here, as it was not known to POe speakers. There
are a number of small species of Sterculia in the Bismarcks and Solomons, but S. vitiensis
is a large canopy tree, up to 30m tall. It is found in the central and especially the southern
islands of Vanuatu and in Fiji.

                                                                                 Nut and fruit trees      335


    It is planted for its edible seeds (its wood is soft and not durable). The fruit is a large (9
x 7 em) hollow capsule, light yellowish green when it is ripe, with a groove down one side
which splits open to reveal a vermilion interior and a row of elongate ( 1-2 em) glossy black
seeds along the split edges. S. vitiensis is not particularly abundant, and tends to be found in
locations associated with human activity. The ripe seeds are grilled either in their shells or
separately (Wheatley 1992: 230, 232, Walter & Sam 2002: 247-248).

    Although the seeds of other species are sometimes eaten in the Bismarcks (Floyd 1954,
Powell1976), the only reconstructable name for a Sterculia species is, as one might expect,
a PROc etymon, *wasi-wasi 'Sterculia vitiensis' . There is a formally identical POe etymon,
POe *wasi-wasi 'Abroma augusta' . A . augusta is a small shrub (ch.7, §6.1.1) and S. vitiensis
a large tree, so it is not clear whether the two terms were innovated independently or have a
common origin.

<
PROc *wasi-wasi 'Sterculia vitiensis' (from data in Wheatley 1992, Lynch 2004a)
     NCV:   NE Ambae       wah-wah
     NCV:   Tangoa         (vitu)vaha
     NCV:   Raga           wahi-wahi
     NCV:   Apma           wah-wah
     NCV:   Tape           (v;m)woso-wos 'whitewood'
     SV:    Sye            wo-wo
     SV:    Lenakel        na-vha-vha 23
     SV:    Anejom         n-wo8-wa8
     Fij:   Buca Bay       waoi-waoi     (J. Parham 1972)
>


11.2.7 Pangium edule, pangi, ankle-rattle tree, TP sis, solomon, Bnavangge, nalake (Flacourtiaceae)

Pangium edule is included in this section because it is a cul-
tivated tree (Peekel1984: 384, Kennedy & Clarke 2004) and
produces a fruit the flesh of which is eaten in some places. It
is not a major food source.

    The tree grows 25-30 m tall, with 3-5 triangular but-
tresses up to 1 m in height. Leaves are arranged in spirals at
the ends of branches. The fruit of wild trees contains cyano-
genetic glucosides and is poisonous, but the fruit of culti-
vated trees is edible (Peekel 1984: 384). The fruit, up to 15
em long with a rough brown skin, is enclosed in a bright yel-
low mesocarp and green skin. It contains a number of red-
brown seeds, each in its own very hard case, surrounded by
a soft yellow strong-smelling pulp (French 1986: 193, Evans
1999: 19).                                                                  Figure 11.7     Pang ium edule


[23] The spelling n<J-vha-vha represents an attempt to interpret Wheatley's (1992) nawhawha and is not necessarily
accurate.

336   Malcolm Ross


     The seed is buried for 2-3 weeks in beach sand or soaked in fresh or salt water to make
it edible, then roasted and fermented (Peekel1984: 384, Hviding 2005: 121, Bourke & Allen
forthcoming). The Sengseng ofN ew Britain trade it as a delicacy (A. Chowning, pers. comm.).
The practice of eating the seeds extends eastward as far as Marovo (Evans 1999:21), but
Hviding does not mention their consumption. The seeds are a famine food in Vanuatu (Wal-
ter & Sam 2002: 47).

    A well known use of P. edule seed cases in the Bismarcks, the Solomons and Vanuatu is
in the manufacture of bangles and rattles for traditional dances. In the Solomons the leaves
are heated in the fire and used to kill headlice. The wood is generally not regarded as suitable
for construction (Henderson & Hancock 1988:246, Hviding 2005: 121).

     The only reconstructable term for P. edule is PEOc *paRage. Given that the tree is present
in the Bismarcks, it seems odd that no POe or PWOc term can be reconstructed, but this may
be due to the absence of relevant data from the sources.

<
PEOc *paRage 'Pangium edule'
  SES:    Tolo             valage        'k.o. larger seed pod worn to make noise while
                                         dancing'
  SES:    Kwara' ae       falake         'Pangium edule'
  SES:    Lau             falake         'tree sp . ; its seeds tied to legs in dancing'
  SES:    Kwaio           fa/age         'rattle '
  SES:    Arosi           harage         'sacred tree, has power to kill dogs '
  NCV:    Mwotlap         (wo)pyak       'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Mota            varake         'tree sp . ; its shells tied on the ankles as rattles in
                                         dancing'
  NCV:    Araki         lahe             'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Tamambo       varaf}e          'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Nduindui      vaf}e            'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    NEAmbae       vake             'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Raga          vaf}e            'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Sakao         ne-vay           'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Sa            wak              'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Nati          ne-vaf}k         'Pangium edule'
  NCV:    Port Sandwich (vi)vaf}g        'dance rattles'
>

11.3 Domesticated fruit trees

11.3.1 Burckella obovata (syn. Bassia erskineana, Payena mentzelii, Illipe hollrungii), red silkwood, TP bukabuk, Bnaduldule, nandunde (Sapotaceae)

                                                                      Nut and fruit trees    337


Burckella obovata tends to grow on smaller islands. It occurs on the small islands west of
Manus in the Admiralties, in New Ireland, in the: island groups north and east ofNew Ireland,
on the Duke of York Islands between New Britain and New Ireland, and on Buka and nearby
small islands in Bougainville Province. It is also found in the Solomons on Malaita and in
the Temotu Islands (and Hviding 2005: 111 reports its presence at Marovo) and in Vanuatu
(Paijmans 1976: 124, Bourke n.d.). It is a tree of medium size, about 20--30 m. tall, with a
massive trunk 1-3m in diameter at the base and white flowers that have a strong, somewhat
sickening scent. It has large edible fruit that has a rose-petal-like smell and is consumed
uncooked. In Vanuatu there are two main types of fruit: a more common elongated type,
reputed to be sweeter, and a round, sometimes very large type. The latter has two subtypes,
wrinkled and smooth. The smooth subtype is apparently the outcome of selection, and is
always cultivated. In the Solomons and Vanuatu the fruit is harvested before it is ripe in
order to beat the fruit bats (Walter & Sam 2002: 125). Two varieties grow in Marovo, wild
and planted. Coconut crabs eat the fruit ofthe wild variety (Hviding 2005: 111).

    In the Solomons and Vanuatu the wood is
used for crossbeams in houses, for outrigger
booms and for canoe paddles (Record 1945,
Henderson & Hancock 1988:55, Walter &
Sam 2002: 125). In Marovo it was formerly
used for the keels of war canoes and is still
sometimes used for making dugouts (Hviding
2005: 111).

    The POe form *fiatu was first reconstructed
by Blust (1978b) as an unnamed but de-
scribed tree type. Further reflexes indicate that
this is Burckella obovata, to which Gowers
(1976: 38) gives the English designation 'red
silkwood' . Evidence for POe *-q is provided
by Sye yetu and Ura ni-yere (John Lynch, pers.
comm.), where preservation of the final vowel
reflects the earlier presence of *-q.

    The gloss of PMP *fiatuq below, 'a hard-
wood tree taxon, including at least Palaquium
spp. ', is inferred from the glosses of Blust' s
supporting data. Species of Burckella and
Palaquium and perhaps other genera seem to
                                                  Figure 11.8 Burckella obovata: A, tree; B,
have been included in a single taxon through-
                                                  flowering shoot; C, shoot bearing fruit; D, old
out Oceanic history (see the discussion associ-
                                                  seed.
ated with PCP *bau 'hardwood taxon' in ch.7,
§4.10).

<
PMP *fiatuq 'a hardwood tree taxon, including at least Palaquium spp.' (Blust
  1978b:38-39)
POe *fiatuq 'Burckella obovata' (Blust 1978b: 38-39: *fiatu ; Ross 1996c)
  Adm: Mussau          natu         'Burckella obovata'
  Adm: Nauna           fiot         'tall timber tree with large sweet green fruit '
  Adm: Titan           fiat         'tall timber tree with large sweet green fruit '
  Adm: Lindrou         fiek         'tall timber tree with large sweet green fruit '
  Adm: Bipi            fiak         'tall timber tree with large sweet green fruit '
  Adm: Loniu           fiat         'tall timber tree with large sweet green fruit '
  Adm: Baluan          nout         'Burckella obovata'
  NNG: Takia           nat          'tree (with edible nuts or fruit, also used for timber)'
  NNG: Gedaged        nat          'tree, Sapotaceae '
  PT:    Kilivila     natu         'sp. of fruit tree'
  PT:    Muyuw        a-ntu-nat    'Palaquium sp'.
  PT:    Wedau        natu         'Malay apple, Eugenia megacarpa'
  MM: Kara (E)        natu         'Burckella obovata'
  MM: Sursurunga nat               'tree sp. with avocado-type fruit '
  MM: Ramoaaina natu               'tree sp. with a large pulpy fruit like an apple '
  MM: Nehan           not          'Palaquium sp.; Burckella obovata'
  MM: Babatana        natu         'Burckella obovata'
  MM: Nduke           natu         'tree sp.'
  MM: Kubukota         fiatu       'Burckella obovata'
  TM: Aiwoo            fii-nou     'Burckella obovata'
  TM: Natiigu         no-neu       'Burckella obovata'
PEOc *fiatuq 'Burckella obovata'
  SES: Sa' a          nau          'a fruit tree, teak'
  SES: Arosi          nau          'tree sp., fruit is eaten'
  NCV: Mwotlap        net          'Burckella obovata'
  NCV: Mota           natu         'a fruit tree '
  NCV: Araki          (vi)naru     'Burckella obovata'
  NCV: Uripiv         nor          'Burckella obovata'
  NCV: Paamese        a-natu       'Burckella obovata'
  NCV: Lewo           nar          'Burckella obovata'
  NCV: Nguna          na-natu      'Burckella obovata'
PSV *na-yatuq 'Burckella obovata' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:    Sye          yetu         'Burckella obovata'
  SV:    Anejom       n-yat        'Burckella obovata'
  SV:    Ura          ni-yere      'Burckella obovata'
  Pn:    Rennellese natu           'Burckella obovata'
  Pn:    Tikopia      natu         'Burckella obovata'
  Pn:    Anutan       natu         'Burckella obovata'
>

338   Malcolm Ross


11.3.2 Clymenia polyandra and Citrus spp. (Rutaceae)

Barrau (1955: 85) considers that all edible species of the genus Citrus were introduced to
Melanesia by Europeans, and R. M. Bourke' s (pers. comm.) research confirms this. We would
not therefore expect to find a reconstructable POe term meaning 'citrus' . But the reconstruc-
tion of POe *molis 'citrus fruit ' is well-supported (Lynch 1984), and its reflexes are today
used in many languages for several citrus species.

    How are we to explain this? There are two possible answers.
    One is that *molis referred not to Citrus species but to citrus-like fruit indigenous to
western Melanesia. Aburu (1982) reports on two indigenous citrus-like genera, Clymenia
and Microcitrus in Papua New Guinea. French ( 1986: 232) describes Clymenia polyandra as
a' Citrus relative ' whose fruit is yellow, the size of a large lime, and in some cases 'sweet and
pleasant-tasting' . The tree is 5-8 m tall. It is cultivated in Manus and New Ireland (where it
was also recorded by Peekel (1984: 272)) and does not occur outside Papua New Guinea.

                                                                               Nut and fruit trees      339


    The alternative answer is that there were inedible or barely edible Citrus species in Melane-
sia before European contact, which have be1;:n largely replaced by imported edible species.
A bush lemon, Citrus hystrix, with almost no edible flesh (French 1986: 226) may be one
of these. We can only infer that POe *mol is designated either citrus-like genera or inedible
species of Citrus, or both.[24]

<
POe *molis 'citrus fruit or citrus-like fruit, perhaps Clymenia polyandra' (Lynch 1984)
  Adm: Muss au            muli         'citms fruit'
  Adm: Drehet             mwili        'citms fruit: pomelo'
  NNG: Atui               molis        'citms fruit'
  NNG: Mangseng           m:Jlis       'citms fruit'
  MM: Vitu                moli         'citms fruit'
  MM: Patpatar            mulis        'citms fruit'
  MM: Nehan               molih        'Clymenia polyandra'
  MM: Halia (Haku) molihi              'citms fruit'
  MM: Kia                 mholi        'Citrus sp.'
  SES: Bugotu             moli         'Citrus sinensis (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  SES: Lau                moli         'introduced citrus fruit'
  SES: Arosi              mori         'wild orange'
  NCV: Mwotlap            ni-mwi!      'Citrus medica'
  NCV: Mota               mwoz         'Citrus medica'
  NCV: Tamambo            moli         'orange'
  NCV: Tape               mwiJ/iJS     'citms fruit'
  NCV: Uripiv             na-mul       'citms fruit'
  NCV: Port Sandwich vi-mor            'orange'
  NCV: Lonwolwol          wo-mul       'citms fruit'
  NCV: Paamese            a-moli       'citms fruit'
  NCV: Lewo               mwozu        'citms fruit'
  NCV: Namakir            mol          'citms fruit'
  NCV: Nguna              na-mwoli     'citms fruit'
PSV *ne-molis 'citrus fruit' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye               ne-mli       'citms fruit'
  SV:   Lenakel           niJ-miJlh    'citms fruit'
  SV:   SWTanna           (kwa)n-miJlh 'citms fruit'
  SV:   Kwamera           niJ-miJrhi   'citms fruit'
  SV:   Anejom            ne-pce()     'citms fruit' (p unexplained)
  Fij:  Wayan             moli         'citms fruit (generic)'
>

[24] Barrau (1962: 179) suggests that one edible citrus species, Citrus macroptera, is indigenous to Melanesia,
but there is no clear evidence of this. May (1984: 79) applies the term Citrus papuana to the green-skinned
bush orange, but this name properly applies as a synonym to the almost inedible Citrus hystrix, whilst the
green-skinned bush orange is Citrus sinensis, which, as its name implies, is an import to Melanesia (French
1986:226,231).

340       Malcolm Ross


11.3.3 Corynocarpus cribbianus (syn. C. australasicus, C. cribbiana, Helicia cribbiana) (Cocynocarpaceae)

A small fruit tree which was apparently cultivated in the past, Corynocarpus cribbianus is
reported from the Admiralties, from offshore islands around Madang (north coast of New
Guinea), from Tangga Island (east of New Ireland) and in the Solomons from Guadalcanal
and Malaita, but apparently not in New Britain or New Ireland. 25 It grows to a height of
7-10 m on Tangga Island, but sometimes to 20m elsewhere in Papua New Guinea. The
mango-shaped fruit, 10--12 em long and 8-10 em in diameter, grow in clusters at the ends of
branches. They are sweet but not juicy, and eaten raw or boiled. Two varieties are reported
from Tangga and Kwara' ae: one has red, pear-shaped fruit, the other white and more ovoid.
C. cribbianus continues to be grown from seed in some places but has become rare in the
Solomons, where it was apparently more widely cultivated in the past. Today it is only a snack
food for hunters in the forest (French 1986:234, O' Collins & Lamothe 1989, Kwa' ioloa &
Burt 2001: 168).

     Yen (1974a) reports a previously domesticated species of Corynocarpus on Santa Cruz
Island (Te Motu group, Solomon Islands). This may well have been C. simi/is, which grows
wild under the forest canopy in parts of Vanuatu and is cultivated there. Indeed, Walter and
Sam' s (2002: 152-153) description could easily be a description of C. cribbianus, right down
to its two varieties. Today it is regularly eaten only on the Torres Islands, where it was for-
merly cultivated and the fruits eaten boiled just before they became ripe, and on Tanna.
Elsewhere it is a famine food. The wood is used for digging sticks or utensil handles.

     POe *i(u)bu 'Corynocarpus cribbianus' is tentatively reconstructed-'tentatively' be-
cause the forms shown under 'cf. also ' appear to be formally connected with the members of
this set, suggesting a PEOc *tabwV, but the history ofthese forms or their relationship to the
apparent reflexes of *i(u)bu is unclear.

<
POe *i(u)bu 'Corynocarpus cribbianus'
  Adm: Nyindrou      fi-iubu      'Corynocarpus sp.' (O'Collins & Lamothe 1989)
  MM: Roviana        ib-ibu       'Cleidion spiciflorum' (Henderson & Hancock
                                   1988)
  TM: Aiwoo          (nua)dabu 'Corynocarpus cribbianus' (Henderson & Hancock
                                   1988)
  SES: Kwara'ae      ibo          'Corynocarpus cribbianus' (Henderson & Hancock
                                   1988)
  SES: Kwaio         ibo          'Corynocarpus cribbianus' (Henderson & Hancock
                                   1988)
cf. also:
     SES:     Lengo           tebu           'Corynocarpus cribbianus' (Henderson & Hancock
                                             1988)
     SES:     To' aba' ita    tebu           'Corynocarpus cribbianus' (Henderson & Hancock
                                             1988)
     NCV: Tamambo             tabwea         'Corynocarpus simi/is' (Walter & Sam 2002)
     NCV: Apma                tabwi          'Corynocarpus simi/is' (Walter & Sam 2002)
>

[25] It is not mentioned by Peekel (1984).

                                                                      Nut and fruit trees   341


11.3.4 Mangifera spp., mango (Anacardiaceae)

We cannot be completely sure of the original referents of the five mango terms reconstructed
below. When Austronesian speakers arrived in the Bismarcks, they encountered the fibrous
and ill-tasting indigenous mangoes Mangifera minor and M . foetida . The sweet-tasting M .
indica, the species widely consumed today, arrived with Europeans after about 1870 (Bourke
forthcoming).

    It is possible that PMP *pahuq referred 1co M . indica and PMP *wai to other Mangifera
species (ACD ). I have found only two refiexe:s of PMP *pahuq in Oceanic languags, namely
Vitu vau and Bola vao. Vitu (in the French Islands, north of New Britain) is among the most
conservative of Oceanic languages, and has remained quite isolated at least since early in the
spread of the Western Oceanic dialect network. Bola is close by on New Britain. One may
infer that *pau(q) occurred in POe, but not with the gloss 'M. indica'. It was replaced at a very
early stage by *wai, as this was the appropriate term for the indigenous (non-indica) species,
with *wai-wai perhaps denoting wild varieties (§7.2). The species M. minor was specifically
designated by POe *koRa.

    M . minor, the traditional wild mango indigenous to the Bismarcks, is 10-25 m tall. The
introduced M. indica needs a drier period each year to bear, whereas M. minor does not,
and so the latter continues to be eaten mainly in locations where M. indica does not bear
regularly. It is occasionally cultivated from seed. Its leaves are narrower than those of M .
indica (Peekel1984: 326, French 1986:206--207, Bourke in preparation, n.d.).

<
PMP *pahuq 'mango, probably Mangifera indica' (Dyen 1953)
POe *pau(q) 'mango, Mangifera sp. (not indica)' (Ross 1996c)
  MM: Vitu           vau           'mango '
  MM: Bola           vao           'mango ' (Arentz et al. 1989: 91)
>

<
PMP *wai 'mango spp. ' (Blust 1986)
POe *wai, *waiwai 'mango (generic)' (Ross 1996c)
  Adm: Titan         we-wey         'mango'
  Adm: Baluan        wie            'mango'
  NNG: Gitua         wo-wai         'mango'
  NNG: Mangap        we             'mango'
  NNG: Tami          woa-wai        'mango'
  NNG: Gitua         wo-wai         'mango'
  NNG: Mangap        we             'mango'
  PT:    Kilivila    wei-wa         'mango'
  PT:    Hula        wai-wai        'mango'
  SES: Arosi         wai-wai        'sp. of small tree '
>

<
POe *koRa 'wild mango, Mangifera minor' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Maenge       kula         'mango; has strings in it, Mangifera minor(?)'
  PT:   Roro        or-or        'mango'
  MM: Tolai         ko-kor       'Mang!fera minor(?)'
  SES: Gela         kola         'mango'
>

342    Malcolm Ross


    PWOc *kasuwai 'mango ' seems to be a compound, with an unidentified element *kasu-
and *wai 'mango'. TheSE Solomons terms below reflect PSES *yohai, which in tum reflects
a putative POe t *koyai. However, PSES *yohai probably reflects the borrowing of a reflex of
*kasuwai, perhaps before the dispersal of PSES, as the terms are regular reflexes of *yohai.

<
PWOc *kasuwai 'mango' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG:      Kove            korae         'mango ' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  PT:       Dobu            kasawe        'mango '
  PT:       Taw ala         kasawe        'mango'
  MM:       Patpatar        kasaua        'mango, Mangifera indica'
  MM:       Bulu            korae         'mango '
  MM:       Tolai           koai          'mango '
  MM:       Siar            kaswai        'mango '
  MM:       Banoni          dasowe        'mango ' (for tzasowe)
  MM:       Blablanga       kesu          'mango '
cf. also:
  SES:      W Guadalcanal yoai            'mango'
  SES:      Longgu        ?eoai           'mango'
  SES:      Arosi         ?ai             'mango '
  SES:      Pagani        yai             'mango '
>

<
PWOc *basi 'mango ' (Ross 1996c)
  PT:       Taw ala     basi(awa)     'mango'
  PT:       Sudest      mbaoi         'mango'
  MM:       Teop        bai           'mango'
  MM:       Tinputz     pee?          'mango'
>


11.3.5 Pometia pinnata, ocean lychee, island lychee, TP ton, taun, P obit, inkori, Bnandao (Sapindaceae)

Pometia pinnata, an ancient New Guinea domesticate (Yen 1996), is a tall canopy hardwood
tree of 20--45 m (Figure 11.9, left). Peekel (1984: 335) writes that its fruit, green or red and
4--6 em in diameter, the sweet pulp of which similar in taste and texture to a lychee and is
eaten raw, is the most valued in the Bismarck Archipelago after the Malay apple. The skin
of the ripe fruit is peeled off like that of a mandarin. The pulp surrounds a seed, up to 3 em
in diameter, which is poisonous and requires extensive processing and cooking before it can
be eaten. French (1986: 215) reports that there are also varieties of P. pinnata with inedible
flesh.

    P. pinnata displays considerable variety in form, especially in the New Guinea region,
attesting to long cultivation. Walter & Sam (20102: 229-230) report that its better forms are
often transplanted in the Bismarcks and in Vanuatu but apparently less so in the Solomons.
There are also widespread reports that it makes good building timber (Floyd 1954, Gowers
1976: 118, French 1986: 215). The wood is also used for carving on Waya (Gardner & Pawley
2006), and its plank buttresses provide axe handles in Marovo (Hviding 2005: 129).

                                                                 Nut and fruit trees   343


   The POe term for P. pinnata was *tawan, reflected in all major Oceanic subgroups except
Micronesian.

<
PEMP *tawan 'Pometia pinnata' (Blust 1978a)
POe *tawan 'Pometia pinnata'
  Adm: Muss au         taon          'Pometia pinnata'
  Adm: Lou             ta            'Pometia pinnata'
  NNG: Maenge          tau a         'Pometia pinnata'
  NNG: Gedaged         tau           'tree sp. with edible fruit; stem makes good timber.'
  NNG: Matukar         ta            'Pometia pinnata' (Kasprus 1945)
  NNG: Megiar          tau(ber)      'Pometia pinnata' (Kasprus 1945)
  PT:   Bwaidoga       tawana        'tree sp.'
  MM: Lavongai         ton           'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Kara (E)         taw;:m        'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Lihir            ta            'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Sursurunga       taw an        'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Patpatar         taw an        'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Tolai            ton           'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Tangga           taun          'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Sursurunga       taoana        'a hardwood tree'
  MM: Petats           tan           'Pometia pinnata'
  MM: Teop             tauana        'Pometia pinnata'
  TM: Natiigu          no-dae        'Pometia pinnata'
PEOc *tawan 'Pometia pinnata'
  SES: Lengo           tao           'Pometia pinnata' (Henderson & Hancock 1988)
  SES: Arosi           awa           'Pometia pinnata'
  SES: Sa'a            awa           'Nephelium pinnatum'
  SES: Kwara'ae        ako           'Pometia pinnata'
                       dawa          'Pometia pinnata' (borrowed form)
  NCV: Mwotlap         na-twen       'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Mota            tawan         'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: NE Ambae        dao           'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Araki           (vi)ca        'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Raga            dao           'Pometia pinnata' (Walsh 2004)
  NCV: Big Nambas      da-dau        'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-"rao         'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Namakir         to            'Pometia pinnata'
  NCV: Nguna           na-dau        'Pometia pinnata'
PSV *na-ntawa(n) 'Pometia pinnata' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye            ntau          'Pometia pinnata'
  SV:   Lenakel        natam         'Pometia pinnata' (-m unexplained)
  SV:   Kwamera        natumwi       'Pometia pinnata' (-mwi unexplained)
  SV:   Anejom         netva         'Pometia pinnata'
PCP *tawa 'Pometia pinnata'
  Fij:  Wayan          tawa          'Pometia pinnata'
  Fij:  Bauan          dawa          'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Tongan           tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Niuean           tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Samoan           tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      E Futunan        tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Emae             tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Tikopia          tava           'Pometia pinnata'
  Pn:      Tuamotuan        tava           'Pandanus sp.'
  Pn:      Maori            tawa           'Beilschmiedia tawa'
>

344     Malcolm Ross




Figure 11.9 Left Pometia pinnata, island lychee: A, young tree; B, shoot and edible fruit; C, inflo-
rescence. Right Spondias cytherea, golden apple: D, young tree; E, shoot with leaves, leaflets and a
cluster of edible fruit.



11.3.6 Spondias cytherea (syn. S. dulcis, S. mangifera), golden apple, Polynesian plum, hog plum, Tahitian apple, Bnaos (Anacardiaceae)

Spondias cytherea is a lowland sub canopy tree of medium height, 10-25 m. tall, distributed
from island SE Asia to western Polynesia, and occurring in several varieties, a probable
result of domestication (Figure 11.9, right). Within the Bismarcks it occurs mainly in the
Admiralties, on Mussau Island and in New Ireland (Bourke n.d.). The tree is widely cultivated
near villages in the Bismarcks, the Solomons (mainly in the Reeflslands) and Vanuatu, but
is also spread by fruit bats (Henderson & Hancock 1988:47, Walter & Sam 2002:243-244,
French 1986: 219).

                                                                               Nut and fruit trees    345


    The mature tree has a long trunk of up to 20 m with large buttresses up to 3 m. Its small
white flowers grow in clusters, and it has yellow or orange ellipsoid fruit, up to 7 em long.
According to Henderson & Hancock (1988: 47) there are two varieties. The fruit of one are
acidic and bitter, of the other slightly tart but pleasant to eat. The former are baked before
eating, whilst the latter are eaten raw. Hviding (2005: 135) reports ofthe second variety that
in Marovo the fruit are best eaten when unripe and rather sour. In Vanuatu the fruit are of
better quality than in the Bismarcks and the Solomons. They are picked while still green, just
before they ripen, and eaten a few days later after they have ripened inside the house.
    The wood is too soft for use in buildings, but in Vanuatu it is used to make canoe outrig-
gers. It has a variety of medicinal uses: a decoction from the leaves is used for coughs and
other ailments (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 49).

    There was a single widely reflected POe term, *quRis. I have assumed below that the
PCP form was *wi, with irregular loss of *q- from expected t*qul. However, loss of *q- is
regular in Fijian, and so Fijian wz is a regular reflex of either proto form. Geraghty (2004: 87)
suggests that the PCP form was indeed *qui and that the Polynesian forms reflect borrowing
from Fijian-but such a borrowing would have had to occur very early, to find its way to the
extremes of Polynesia. It seems more likely that the PCP indeed had *wl.

<
POe *quRis 'Spondias cytherea' (Grace 1969 (Wilhelm Milke, pers. comm.: *quRi); Ross
  1996c)
  Adm: Loniu           wi           'Spondias cytherea'
  NNG: Maenge         kuli          'Spondias cytherea'
  PT:    Motu         uri           'Garuga sp.' (Lane-Poole 1925)[26]
  MM: Nakanai         huri          'Spondias cytherea'
  MM: Kara (E)        us            'Spondias cytherea'
  MM: Patpatar        kulis         'Spondias cytherea'
  MM: Tolai           kuri          'Spondias cytherea'
  TM: Natiigu         n-oli         'Spondias cytherea'
  SES: Lau            uti           'Spondias cytherea'
  SES: Kwaio          uti           'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV: Mwotlap         ry           'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV: Mota           ur            'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV: Vera'a         n-ur          'Spondias cytherea'
PSV *na-viris 'Spondias cytherea' (Lynch 21004a)
  SV:    Sye          ne-viwi
  SV:    Ura          (u)vasele     'Spondias cytherea' (metathesis)
  SV:    Kwamera      na-kori       'Dracontomelon vitiensis'
  SV:    Anejom       n-huri        'Dracontomelon vitiensis'
PCP *wi 'Spondias cytherea'
  Fij:   Bauan        wz                      'Spondias cytherea'
  Pn:    Tongan       vi                      'Spondias cytherea'
  Pn:    Niue an      Vl                      'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      E Futunan  Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Emae       Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Rennellese bi                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Tikopia    Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Samoan     Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Tokelauan Vl                    'mango species found only in Samoa'
     Pn:      Rapanui    bi                   'Indian mango tree, M angifera indica'
     Pn:      Marque san Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Mangarevan Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Hawaiian   Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Tahitian   Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
     Pn:      Rarotongan Vl                   'Spondias cytherea'
>

[26] Note that Garuga (ch.7, §4.8) is said to resemble Spondias cytherea. See PNCV *mal-mali below.

346        Malcolm Ross



    In the Bismarcks an imported thorny shrub, Ximenia americana (syn. X. elliptica, X. ac-
uleata),27 is evidently perceived as resembling S. cytherea, to judge from the names below.
The resemblance is based on the fact that X. americana also has edible yellow ellipsoid fruit,
but no larger than a cherry (Peekel1984: 160). E Kara combines the POe prefix *mala- 're-
sembling' (ch.2, §7.1.4) and ukis 'S. cytherea'. The base ukis is the reflex of POe *quRis 'S.
cytherea' that would be expected in Tigak, immediately to the north ofKara. Further south, in
Patpatar, the term for X. americana is ku-kuris, the reduplication implying that X. americana
is an inferior or wild version of S. cytherea (ch.2, §7 .2).

__pre__
      MM:      Kara (E)        mala-ukis       'Ximenia americana' ('false Spondias cytherea')
      MM:      Patpatar        ku-kuris        'Ximenia americana' ('small Spondias cytherea')
      MM:      Tolai           kuri-val        'Ximenia americana' (kuri 'Spondias cytherea') (Record 1945)

    PNCV *usi below appears to be an irregular reflex of POe *quRis. Two possible explana-
tions present themselves. First, *(q)usi is a metathesised reflex of *quRis ( > t*uis > *usi).
Second, although POe final consonants were regularly lost in PNCV, Clark (2008) points to
a dozen or so words in which the expected CVCV form exists alongside an extended form
CVCVCV, representing the full POe form with an added vowel, most often *-i. The extended
forms, for which Clark offers no explanation, are found throughout North Vanuatu and north
Malakula, but without much consistency in any one language. One of these, in the form he
reconstructs, is *quRisi, which with regular deletion of POe *q- and *-R- gives *u(i)si.

    Some of these reflexes are (also) used to denote the pawpaw/papaya, Carica papaya, a
recent introduction; this reflects a perception in Vanuatu that Spondias cytherea and papaya
are similar and somehow related.

<
PNCV *usi 'Spondias cytherea' (from data in Wheatley 1992)
     NCV: Nduindui           uhi                'Spondias cytherea'
                             uhi(gai)           (gai 'tree')
     NCV: NE Ambae           uhi                'Carica papaya'
     NCV: Tangoa             (vi)usi            'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Nokuku        o-usi            'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Tolomako      na-us            'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Kiai          usi              'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Raga          uhi              'Spondias cytherea, Carica papaya'
  NCV:    Uripiv        na-us            'Spondias cytherea, Carica papaya'
  NCV:    Nese          na-us            'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    SWBay         ni-vus( -saruei) 'Spondias cytherea'
>

[27] Despite its name, Ximenia americana has an African origin.

                                                                     Nut and fruit trees   347



   There are two possible external cognates of the PNCV etymon below. The first is Mussau
(Adm) malai 'Spondias cytherea' (Lepofs~v 1992). However, Mussau -ai does not corre-
spond regularly with Paamese, Nguna -i. The second is Wayan (Fij) maoli 'Spondias cyth-
erea', but Wayan -ao- does not correspond regularly with PNCV *-a-. In parts of northern
Vanuatu the term has been reapplied to Dracontomelon vitiense (ch.7, §4.4).

<
PNCV *mali 'Spondias cytherea' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV:    Nokuku        mal            'Dracontomelon vitiense'
  NCV:    Araki         (vi)!Jali      'Dracontomelon '
  NCV:    Port Sandwich mar(kokoc)     'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Lonwolwol     mel            'a large tree with yellow edible fruit'
  NCV:    SEAmbrym      mal            'Dracontomelon vitiense'
  NCV:    Paamese       mali-mali      'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Lewo          (puru )mel-mel 'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Baki          (bur )mel-mel 'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Namakir       mali-mal       'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    Nguna         na-mali        'Spondias cytherea'
  NCV:    S Efate       n-mal          'Spondias cytherea, S. edulis'
>

    Also puzzling is the connection between PNCV *mali and the items for Garuga flori-
bunda listed below. There is reason to think that this is not a chance resemblance, as the PROc
term *mala-usi 'Garuga sp.' literally meant 'like Spondias cytherea' (ch.7, §4.8), i.e. there
was/is a perceived resemblance between Garuga and Spondias species. We cannot simply
include the items below in the cognate set for PNCV *mali above, however, as the Paamese,
Lewo and S Efate reflexes of *mal-mali diff1er from their reflexes of *mali.
PNCV *mal-mali 'Garugafloribunda'

__pre__
  NCV:    Mwotlap       na-mal-mali (ey)
  NCV:    Paamese       e-imoumol
  NCV:    Lewo          (puru )mal-mal
  NCV:    Baki          (buru )mar-maro
  NCV:    S Efate       n(a)-mal-mil

348   Malcolm Ross


11.3.7 Syzygium malaccense (syn. Eugenia malaccensis, E. jambos, jambosa malaccensis), Malay apple, rose apple, TP laulau, P kabarae, Bnakavika (Myrtaceae)

                                             Many Syzygium species which occur in the Pa-
                                             cific have edible fruit. The most important is S.
                                             malaccense, which is distributed from SE Asia
                                             to Polynesia, but Peekel (1984: 408-415) and
                                             Walter & Sam (2002: 251-252) list numerous
                                             species which occur in NW Island Melanesia.

                                                 S. malaccense is an erect tree of medium
                                             height, 5-25 m tall, with spectacular white or
                                             pink flowers that look like small powder puffs
                                             and ellipsoid two-seeded fruit 4--9 em long that
                                             are white, pink or red when they are mature.
                                             The fruit approach a European apple in texture,
                                             but are often more watery in flavour. They are
                                             widely and, to quote Sorensen, 'avidly' con-
                                             sumed throughout the Pacific (Sorensen 1950,
                                             Peekel 1984: 408, Walter & Sam 2002: 250,
                                             Bourke in preparation). They are eaten fresh,
                                             soon after picking. S. malaccense is found
                                             around villages and in coconut groves, in gar-
                                             dens and old fallows, and in open forests, al-
                                             though it is not clear whether it is indigenous
                                             to Melanesia or whether cultivated varieties
Figure 11.10 Syzygium malaccense: A, tree;   have   simply propagated themselves into the
B, shoot; C, branch with opened and unopened wild. Transplantation of better forms to vil-
flowers ; D, edible fruit.                   lage and garden areas is widespread (Paijmans
                                             1976: 123-124, Walter & Sam 2002: 250). The
wood is used for buildings in Vanuatu and Fiji, and for canoes in Vanuatu. Juice extracted
from the leaves is used for abdominal pains, sore throats, toothache and generally for pain
and fever (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 43-44, Walter & Sam 2002: 250).

    The POe term for S. malaccense was *kapika, reflected in all major Oceanic subgroups
except Micronesian. It may also have served as a generic for Syzygium species in general.

<
POe *kapika 'Malay apple, rose apple, Syzygium malaccense' (Milke 1968)
  Adm: Mussau           kaviu           'Syzygium samarangense' (-u fort-a)
  Adm: Seimat           ahi             'Syzygium sp. ' (Sorensen 1950)
  Adm: Lou              keik            'large variety of Malay apple, Syzygium gomata' 28
PWOc *kapika 'Syzygium malaccense'
  NNG: Maenge           gaiva           'rose apple, Syzygium malaccense'
  NNG: Tami             kapig           'rose apple, Syzygium malaccense'
  NNG: Yabem            ai!J            'rose apple'
  PT:    Motu            yavika        'name of tree sp., leaves ofwhich are used as
                                       cigarette wrappers'
  MM: Nakanai           gaiva          'Syzygium malaccense' (Floyd 1954)
  MM: Bola, Bulu        kavika         'Syzygium malaccense'
  MM: Babatana          kapika         'Syzygium malaccense'
PEOc *kapika 'Syzygium malaccense'
  SES: Gel a            yaviya        'Syzygium malaccense'
  SES: Kwara'ae         ?afi?o        'Syzygium malaccense'
  SES: Lau              afio          'Syzygium onesimum'
  NCV: Mota             gaviga        'Syzygium malaccense, wild inedible variety'
  NCV: Araki            haviha        'Syzygium malaccense'
  NCV: Tamambo          haviha        'Malay apple'
  NCV: Raga             yaviya        'Malay apple (Walsh 2004)'
  NCV: Uripiv           n-avi         'Malay apple'
  NCV: Port Sandwich xavik            'Malay apple'
  NCV: Paamese          a hie         'Malay apple'
  NCV: Lewo             kavika        'Malay apple'
  NCV: Namakir          kavik         'Malay apple'
  NCV: Nguna            na-kavika     'Malay apple'
  NCV: S Efate          n-kafik       'Malay apple'
PSV *na-yaviy 'Syzygium malaccense' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Lenakel         na-kavak      'Syzygium malaccense'
  SV:   Anejom          n-yehey       'Syzygium malaccense'
  NCal: Pije            cak           'Syzygium malaccense'
  NCal: Iaai            xaia          'Syzygium malaccense'
  NCal: NyeHlyu         cac           'Syzygium malaccense'
  NCal: Xaracuu         ktti          'Syzygium malaccense'
PCP *kavika 'Syzygium malaccense'
  Fij:  Wayan           kavika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Fij:  Bauan           kavika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Tongan         fekika         'Syzygium malaccense' (metathesis)
  Pn:   Niue an         kafika        'Syzygium sp.'
  Pn:   Anutan          kapika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   E Futunan       kafika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   E Uvean         kafika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Tikopia         kafika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Marque san      kehika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Mangarevan      ke?ika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Tahitian        ?ahi?a        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Hawaiian        ?oohia(?ai)   'Syzygium malaccense'
                        ?oohia(lehua) 'Metrosideros spp.'
  Pn:   Rarotongan      ka?ika        'Syzygium malaccense'
  Pn:   Maori           kahika        'M etrosideros fulgens, Dacrycarpus dacrydioides'
                                      (R. Gardner, pers. comm.)
>

[28] S. gomata is not listed in IPNI or APNI. The species label gomata appears to reflect Tolai gamata 'Syzygium
malaccense', and S. gomata is perhaps a variety thereof.

                                                                Nut and fruit trees    349


350    Malcolm Ross


    The three more narrowly distributed cognate sets below reflect other terms for Syzygium
species. Whether these denoted cultivars of S. malaccense or other species, it is impossible
to say.

<
POe *poka(q) 'variety ofMalay apple'
  Adm: Mussau          oa         'small variety of Malay apple, Syzygium gomata'
  NNG: Bariai         poai        'Syzygium' sp. (Goulden 1996)
  NNG: Kilenge        pokai       'Syzygium' sp. (Goulden 1996)
>

<
POe *mari(a)sapa 'Syzygium sp.
  Adm: Nyindrou          marisah        'Syzygium sp.
  MM: Patpatar           mariasa        'Syzygium acutanulum' (for tmariasaha)
cf. also:
  MM:       Nehan        mariah        Alpinia sp.
>

<
PAdm *cay 'Syzygium sp. with large red fruit'
  Adm:      Baluan       sai            'Syzygium malaccense'
  Adm:      Wuvulu       tae            'Syzygium sp. with large red fruit'
  Adm:      Loniu        cay            'Syzygium sp. with large red fruit'
  Adm:      Titan        cay            'Syzygium sp. with large red fruit'
>


11.4 Other nut and fruit trees

This section is devoted to nut- or fruit-bearing species that are popularly eaten in at least parts
ofNW Island Melanesia but for which there is no evidence of arboriculture.

   In several cases, the literature on plant food production describes species for which we
have been unable to reconstruct a term. These are:
    • Flacourtia rukam is a small tree with a v..visted trunk and red spherical fruits of 2 em
      diameter, distributed from island SE Asia to the Solomons but found cultivated further
      east. The fruit is occasionally eaten (Walter & Sam 2002: 173-174, Bourke n.d.).
    • Pouteria maclayana is a common, self-sown, small, buttressed coastal tree with a bushy
      crown that grows in New Guinea, on offshore islands along its north coast and in the
      southeastern Solomon Islands. Its yellow-fleshed fruit, shaped like a flattened sphere,
      is occasionally eaten raw, in some places as a famine food (Henderson & Hancock
      1988: 142-143, Walter & Sam 2002:233, Bourke n.d. ). Allen et al. (1994) list it among
      previously important foods on Karkar Island.
    • Castanopsis acuminatissima is a tall oak--like tree whose seeds are a traditional forest
      food, eaten after boiling inN ew Guinea, New Britain and perhaps parts of the Solomons
      (Henty 1982, Evans 1999: 19).
    • Omphalea gageana (syn. 0. papuana, 0. queenslandiae) is an uncommon large woody,
      high-climbing forest creeper, 20--30 m. long. Its fruit has three seeds enclosed in a thin
      fleshy mesocarp and a ridged undulating woody shell, which are eaten raw or cooked
                                                                     Nut and fruit trees   3 51


       around the Huon Gulf and in SE Papua (Henty 1982, Peekell984: 317, Henderson &
       Hancock 1988: 76, Evans 1999: 19).
    • Gnetum latifolium is another large woody, high-climbing forest creeper, 5-20 m long,
       with yellow-red fruits, the seeds of which are eaten after roasting (Peekel 1984: 37,
       Henderson & Hancock 1988:78, Evans 1999: 20).
The distributions of some of the above are such that they may have been unknown to speakers
of POe, but it is also possible that our sources are not detailed enough to provide us with the
data needed to support a reconstruction.

    The fruits of several species of Ficus are eaten. Bourke (n.d.) names F. copiosa, F. tinc-
toria and F. wassa. These are treated in ch.lO, §4.


11.4.1 Finschia chloroxantha (syn. F. waterhousiana, F. densiflora, Grevillea densiflora) (Proteaceae)

Finschia chloroxantha is a medium-sized lowland rain forest tree with a blackish trunk and
stilt roots (Figure 11.11 , right). When it blooms it makes a spectacular display of bright
orange or light golden yellow pendulous flowers. Its seeds are edible, eaten raw as snacks in
the Solomons and after cooking in New Guinea. Its red-brown wood is strong and is used for
timber, furniture and drums in the Solomons. Its leaves were used to treat sores and ulcers on
Santa Isabel (Henty 1982, Henderson & Hancock 1988:74--76, Evans 1999: 19, Kwa' ioloa
& Burt 2001: 124).

     The cognate set below allows only a PEOc reconstruction. The one Western Oceanic
item, Maringe ylama, is probably a borrowing from a neighbouring SE Solomonic language,
especially as Maringe yl- typically reflects POe */-, not *g-. The species is not mentioned by
Peekel (1984), a major source of botanical terms from New Ireland.

__pre__
  MM:     Maringe       ylama         'Finschia cloroxantha' (Henderson & Hancock 1988: 74)

<
PEOc *gama 'Finschia cloroxantha'
  SES: Kwara' ae     (a)kama      'Finschia cloroxantha'
  SES: Lau           (a )kame     'Finschia densiflora'
  NCV: Tamambo (vu)kame           'Finschia cloroxantha' (Walter & Sam 2002: 293)
  NCV: Apma          (wa)gam      'Finschia cloroxantha'
PSV *na-(i)gam 'Finschia cloroxantha' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye          ne-i!Jkom    'Finschia cloroxantha'
  SV:   Anejom       n-ikam       'Finschia cloroxantha'
>


11.4.2 Parartocarpus venenosa (syn. Parartocarpus involucrata) (Moraceae)

Parartocarpus venenosa is a large lowland forest tree growing to about 35m, with girths of
over 1.5 m, which resembles the breadfruit (Figure 11.11 , left) (ch.9, §4). Its fruit is brown
or yellow and highly aromatic; it forms an irregularly shaped syncarp about 18 em across, a
compound fruit with many segments about 3 em long arranged around the core, and is eaten
raw. It is especially popular in New Britain, but there is no record of cultivation. Elsewhere
in lowland New Guinea, the Bismarcks and the Solomons it is generally less significant but is
known and consumed (Barrau 1962: 177, Paijmans 1976: 124, Peekel 1984: 132, Bourke in
preparation, French 1986: 259). Henderson & Hancock ( 1988) report that it is not very sweet
and has a powdery texture: it is filling but not succulent. Its timber is generally not regarded
as useful.

352    Malcolm Ross




Figure 11.11 Left Parartocarpus venenosa: A, young tree; B, branch bearing shoot, male flower
and edible fruit; C, seed. Right Finschia chloroxantha: D, tree with stilt roots; E, flowering shoot; F,
fruit cluster.


    Although reflexes of PWOc *lapuka mean 'breadfruit' in some languages, the fact that
there were at least two other POe terms for breadfruit (ch.9, §4) suggests that the reflexes
glossed 'Parartocarpus venenosa' retain the POe denotation. Kwara'ae rakwa-na is irregular,
with initial r- for expected t 1- and suffixed -na (medial -kw- is a regular reflex of *-pw-). Araki
levu is irregular with-e- fort-a-.

<
PWOc *lapuka 'k.o. tree with fruit similar to breadfruit, Parartocarpus venenosa' (?)
  NNG:     Takia          lou             'k.o. breadfruit'
  NNG:     Kaiwa          lavuk           'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis'
  NNG:     Medebur        lapu            'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis'
  PT:      Are            napo            'breadfruit'
  MM:      Notsi          lipua           'breadfruit'
  MM:      Susurunga      lapu            'tree type whose fruit, similiar to a breadfruit, is
                                          yellow and sweet and is eaten raw (possibly
                                          Parartocarpus venenonus)'
  MM:       Patpatar   lapuo      'Parartocarpus venenosa'
  MM:       Tolai      lapua      'Parartocarpus venenosa'
cf. also:
  SES: Kwara'ae        rakwa-na   'Parartocarpus venenosa'
  NCV: Araki           levu       'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis'
>

                                                                 Nut and fruit trees   353




12 The coconut palm


12.1 Introduction

The products of the coconut palm are labelled by a complex terminology whose ancestry
stretches back to Proto Oceanic (POe), a measure of their constant importance in the lives of
Oceanic speakers.


12.2 The coconut palm

Growing to between 20 and 30m in height, coconut palms are found in profusion along coasts
and on lowlands throughout the Oceanic-speaking region. They need well drained, sandy soil,
more than 1000 mm rain per year and plenty of sunlight. Because they tolerate salinity, they
often grow along beaches (French 1986: 31 ). Coconuts appear to have spread from southeast
Asia both naturally (coconuts float) and an1chropogenically (carried in the canoes of early
settlers).[1]

[1] The English word 'coconut' is used here for both the palm and the fruit. The intended referent is, we hope,
obvious from context.

    Just about every part of the palm and the fruit is used in traditional societies, and many of
these parts are named. Because of the salienc1~ of the coconut in Oceanic cultures and because
different uses are made of it at different stages of its growth, it is common for the fruit and
palm to be given different names at different growth stages. These names are reconstructed
in §3. Names for the parts of the fruit are reconstructed in §4 and for the parts of the palm
other than the fruit in §5.


12.2.1 Cocos nucifera, coconut, TP, Bkokonas, P kokonat (Arecaceae)

POe *niuR appears to have been used in at least two senses: the fruit at any stage of growth,
and the palm. A number of the glosses below are simply 'coconut': in all these cases the gloss
almost certainly denotes both the fruit and the palm.

356   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


<
PMP *niuR 'coconut, Cocos nucifera; ripe coconut (growth stage of C. nucifera)'
  (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *niuR 'coconut palm and/or fruit, Cocos nucifera'
  Adm: Loniu           niu            'coconut' (Nevermann 1934)
  Adm: Titan           niw            'coconut, completely ripe'
  NNG: Kove            niu            'coconut'
  NNG: Numb ami        niwila         'coconut'
  NNG: Kaiwa           niuk           'coconut'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) (matuk) niu 'green coconut'
  PT:    Gapapaiwa     niura          'coconut'
  PT:    Iamalele      niula          'coconut (tree, nut, meat)'
  PT:    Taw ala       neula          'coconut'
  PT:    Suau (Saliba) niu            'coconut' (archaic)
  PT:    Motu          niu            'coconut tree and mature fruit '
  MM: Bola             niu            'coconut'
  MM: Nalik            nur            'coconut'
  MM: Tabar            niu            'coconut'
  MM: Mono-Alu         niunu          'coconut'
  TM: Burna            luro           'coconut'
  TM: Nebao            na-na          'coconut'
  TM: Asuboa           u-fiio         'coconut'
  TM: Tanabili         no-fiio        'coconut'
  SES: Gel a           niu            'coconut palm, nut'
  SES: Kwaio           niu            'coconut'
  SES: Sa'a            niu            'coconut'
  NCV: Nokuku          niu            'coconut'
  NCV: Raga            niu            'coconut'
  NCV: Uripiv          ne-ni          'coconut'
  NCV: Paamese         a-nii          'green coconut w. soft flesh '
  NCV: Lewo            niu            'green drinking nut'
  NCV: S Efate         na-niu         'coconut'
  NCal: Nelemwa        nu             'coconut'
  NCal: Iaai           (wa)nu         'coconut'
  NCal: Xaracuu        nu             'coconut'
  Mic: Kiribati        nii            'coconut'
  Mic: Kosraean        nu             'coconut'
  Mic: Mokilese        ni             'coconut'
  Mic: Marshallese niy                'coconut'
  Mic: Ponapean        ni             'coconut'
  Mic: Woleaian        1t1            'coconut'
  Mic: Puluwatese      ni             'coconut'
  Mic: Chuukese        ni             'coconut'
  Fij:   Wayan         niu            'coconut palm, nut'
  Pn:    Tongan        niu            'coconut palm, nut'
  Pn:    Tikopia       niu            'coconut palm, nut'
>

                                                                                             Coconuts      357


12.3 Growth stages of the coconut

Right across Oceania, languages distinguish a number of growth stages of a coconut. These
terminologies are often not cognate, but roughly agree on the semantic categories they dis-
tinguish.2 Sometimes a term for a growth stage becomes the generic term for coconut. For
example, Lukep (Pono) (NNG) matuk and Mota (NCV) matig, both 'coconut (generic)' and
reflexes of POe *matuqu 'ripe coconut', have displaced the reflex of POe *niuR 'coconut
(generic)'.[3]

    The growth stages are distinguished according to the states of the various parts of the
fruit (Figure 12.1, p.369). At and after its drinkable stage, a coconut consists of a hollow
shell (the endocarp) lined with flesh (the endosperm) and filled with coconut water. The shell
is surrounded by a thick husk (the mesocarp) composed of fibres (coir) and enclosed by an
outer skin (the exocarp ). 4 The shell has three germination pores that are visible on the shell
once the husk is removed. It is through one of these that the radicle emerges when the embryo
germinates.

12.3.1 Growth stage terminologies

In the Oceanic view of the coconut's life cycle, the first stage is the formation of the tiny fruit
from the bud. The fruit then acquires liquid, then soft flesh, and becomes a green drinking
coconut. The main reason to pick the nut at this stage is to drink its water: a big nut contains
up to one litre. As it matures, the outer skin turns from green to brown, and the flesh becomes
harder and thereby suitable for scraping as a food ingredient and for wringing to produce co-
conut 'milk' or 'cream' (vol.1, ch.6, §5.8, and ch.9, §2.2 and §7). The liquid becomes less and
less drinkable. At this stage the coconut falls from the tree, the liquid solidifies into a spongy
mass (the 'apple') and finally, given appropriate circumstances, germination occurs and the
coconut sprouts to become a new palm. This contrasts markedly with a botanist's view of the
coconut's life cycle (e.g. M. Foale 2003: 43--50), which begins with germination, describes
the stages of leaf production and culminates in flowering and fruiting. The botanist's view
focusses on the palm, the Oceanic view on the fruit.

     Sample growth stage terminologies from seven well distributed Oceanic languages are
listed below. The Petats terminology is from an ethnography, the others from dictionaries.
The Petats, Mota, Anejom, Wayan and Tikopia stages are given in chronological order by
their sources, whilst the Gumawana and Arosi stages were gleaned from dictionaries one
term at a time and we have ordered them as best we can. The terminologies vary in size from
8 stages to 14, but we should probably not take these differences too seriously, for reasons
discussed in association with Table 12.1. The number of stages seems to be about right:
Glennon & Glennon (2005) list 7 for Nehan, Fox (1955) 7 for Gela, T. Crowley (1992) 11
for Paamese, Thieberger (2006b) 10 for S Efate, Abo et al. (1976) 8-10 for Marshallese,[5]
Churchward (1959) 11 for Tongan. Waterhouse (1949) lists 18 for Roviana, in order but
unfortunately not glossed.

[2] This section represents a re-run of the corresponding research reported in Ross (1996c) based on a larger
range of data.

[3] In Lukep the term matuk niu denotes a green drinking coconut.

[4] The outer skin and husk are removed before export, so that coconuts sold in the shops of non-tropical countries
consist of just the shell and its contents.

[5] Depending on one's interpretation of the dictionary data.

358   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


    The first three terminologies, for Gumawana, Petats and Arosi, have sets of terms that are
distributed across the fairly obviously recognisable growth stages ofthe coconut.

 Gumawana (PT): 9 stages
 asipu      'very small, not drinkable'
 gavi       'a bit bigger, not drinkable '
 mosali     'bigger, not drinkable '
 bosibosi   'large green, drinkable '
 nakulamata 'starts turning brown'
 nugomoyao 'brown but has not fallen yet'
 nadada     'dry and will fall '
 nadaiyada  'dry and fallen '
 tabona     'sprouted'

 Petats (MM): 11 stages (Blackwood 1935: 310)
 teo         'very young nut'
 pesis, peli 'young nut before it contains liquid'
 kakarut     'nut containing liquid before flesh appears'
 irabil      'nut with thin flesh layer at the cn~amy stage (drinking coconut)'
 kuvo        'nut with meat a little firmer, also used for drinking'
 rut         'nut containing a little (bitter) liquid and thick flesh '
 la!J        'nut, the flesh of which has hardened (dry cococut)'
 pitor       'mature nut, the outer skin of which is not yet dry'
 tunun       'nut, the kernel ofwhich has become spongy'
 tus, alaun 'nut which has become dry and fallen to the ground'
 hala        'nut which has sprouted'

 Arosi (SES): 12 stages (Fox 1978)
 ?oraamai       'the first bud of a coconut'
 kopu           'newly formed fruit '
 poku           'young nut'
 poru           'green nut'
 pwaruru        'young green drinking nut'
 ?obu           'drinking nut'
 niu pwaikari   'a nut still containing liquid'
 niu kokoru     'nut with hard flesh already formed ' (lit. 'coconut egg-white ')
 niu saramarai 'dry nut'
 do?o           'ripe, dark nut' (lit. 'black')
 niu matere     'fallen mature nut'
 niu bwa?o      'very young palm'

                                                                                 Coconuts        359


    The order of the Mota items below is that given by Codrington & Palmer (1896: 84),
except that we have added vara, not included among their growth stage terms. However, their
definitions (scattered under the various entries in the dictionary) suggest that their sequencing
may be wrong, as pulutyar and pepeya appear to belong before vusa maremare (see discussion
in association with Table 12.1).

Mota (NCV): 14 stages (Codrington & Palmer 1896)
WOValJ          'bud'
matrnateyapun   'just set, like the eye of a yapun crab'
sutarara        'shell just formed, liquid not yet drinkable ' (sus 'breast' , tarara 'never
                given birth')
mwalu           'young green coconut, liquid not yet drinkable '
yarake pwarat   lit. 'fat of meat'
[vusa] yoryor   'enough meat to scrape aflter drinking' (yor 'scrape ' )
vusa            'green coconut for drinking'
vusa maremare 'nut with hard flesh ' (maremare 'hard')
vusa sisis      'flesh can be scraped with a thumbnail'
pulut-yar       'ripening, flesh sticks to scraper' (lit. 'stick.to scrape' )
pepeya          'outer skin turning yellow ' (pepeya 'yellow')
pane uwa        lit. 'turtle fin ' 6
kor             'ready to fall ' (kor 'become dry, with heat or time' )
vara            'a sprouting coconut'

 The last three terminologies, Anejom, Wayan Fijian and Tikopia, differ from those above in
that they appear to recognise no stages between a newly formed fruit and a drinkable green
coconut, a fact that emerges clearly in Table 12.1 . Whether these stages are less salient than
others for speakers or whether the relevant terms are simply missing from the sources is not
clear.

    Anejom and Tikopia also recognise respectively three and four stages of sprouted co-
conut, but it can be argued that these are growth stages of the palm, not of the fruit. The other
languages may have corresponding terms that are not listed as coconut growth stages.

 Anejofu (SV): 11 stages (Lynch 2001c)
 nacomw                  'flower'
 nohowa-nhuau            'very small coconut' (lit. 'fruit a.boil' )
 inhivaiiereri           'green coconut with very soft flesh '
 inhivaiiwou             'green coconut with drinkable water'
 inhivaii                'green coconut for drinking'
 inhivaiiyai             'green coconut with edible flesh, almost ripe ' (lit. 'fruit tree ' )
 neaii metou             'yellowish coconut' (lit. 'coconut ripe ' )
 inhamesei, neaii mesei 'dry coconut' (lit. 'coconut dry ')
 nelaneaii               'germinated coconut or its pith'
 neaii8el                'sprouting coconut' (lit. 'coconut grows (v)')
 nerenren                'sprouting coconut, longer sprout than neafiBel'


[6] No further information on pane uwa is given by Codrington and Palmer.

360   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


Wayan Fijian (Fij): 7 stages (Pawley & Sayaba 2003)
bu takeri          'very small coconut' (lit. 'fruit a.boil' )
sula               'immature stage, before flesh has formed ; full of liquid '
bu                 'coconut at a stage ideal for drinking and eating; still green but
                   full-sized, flesh well developed and soft'
bu oiOi-vutovuto 'stage between bu and drokai' (lit. 'drinking.coconut
                   flesh.removed-flooded', i.e. a bu which still has liquid but the flesh of
                  which is hardening; A. Pawley, pers. comm.)
drokai             'stage of late maturity; meat is hardening but still good to eat; juice
                   becoming acidic '
sama               'fully mature, old, a stage when no juice is left inside the nut and the
                   flesh is oily and no longer edible but ready to be dried for copra or to
                   be grated and squeezed to obtain coconut cream'
vara               'ripe coconut, germinating; spongy flesh in kernel of ripe coconut'

Tikopia (Pn): 11 stages (Firth 1985)
foi karekare           'very young with soft shell' (joi classifier, karekare 'very young
                      plant' )
niu mata kaere         'young with soft shell and flesh barely formed ' (lit. 'coconut unripe
                      very. young')
niu mata [laui]        'green, with a firm shell and soft flesh ' (lit. 'coconut unripe [good]')
niu motomoto           'fully grown with hard flesh '
niu !Jaruru kiki       'the liquid splashes around inside'
niu matua laui         'mature with fully developed flesh ' (lit. 'coconut mature good ')
niu pakuku             'dry, with darkened husk, last edible stage, fit for storage ' (lit.
                       'coconut parched' )
niu somo               'germinated, beginning 1to sprout' (lit. 'coconut sprouts (v)')
niu matatiri           'germinated, with a short sprout'
niu kapakau maroro 'germinated, with shoots of about 30 em' (lit. 'coconut fins
                      flying.fish ' )
niu raurau             'germinated, with shoots of about 50 em' (lit. 'coconut leafy')

    Table 12.1 attempts a rough comparison of the seven growth stage terminologies above.
A dot indicates that the language has a term corresponding at least roughly to the growth stage
to its left. Two or more dots indicate that number of terms which more or less correspond
to the growth stage. The problem of Mota is discussed above: if we reordered the terms on
the basis of their definitions, the four dots against 'ripe, flesh hardened' would be reduced to
two. The multiple entries on the bottom ('sprouted ') line are also touched on above.

    Two intermediate growth stages are of particular importance to coconut consumers: the
stage when the coconut is maximally drinkable, and the stage when the flesh is hardened
enough to allow scraping for the production of coconut 'milk'. Not surprisingly, terms for
these stages occur in every terminology. Thes1~ are the two stages for which Tok Pisin of
Papua New Guinea has distinct terms: kulau (from Ramoaaina) and drai.

                                                                                                       Coconuts          361


Table 12.1       Rough comparison of coconut growth stage terms in seven Oceanic languages



                                                                       ell                                    .§
                                                                       ~                                      :~
                                                                       ell                                    ~
                                                                       :::
                                                                       ell
                                                                                                       ~s
                                                                                                        0     §
                                                                                                                   ell
                                                                                                                   ·p_
                                                                              f/l
                                                                                    ·;:;;   ....0ell
                                                                       s .... ~      0
                                                                                                       "Q)'
                                                                                                              ~    0
                                                                                                                   ~
                                                                      c
                                                                       ;::!   ll)
                                                                              ~     .<      ~          ~      ~    ~

      1.  coconut fruit bud
      2.  very small newly formed fruit
      3.  young, green, no liquid yet
      4.  young, green, liquid but no flesh yet
      5.  green, drinkable, very soft flesh
      6.  green, drinkable, with thin creamy flesh
      7.  starts turning brown, flesh firmer, still drinkable
      8.  little (bitter) liquid, thick flesh
      9.  ripe, flesh hardened
     10.  dry and ready to fall
     11 . dry, fallen
     12. sprouted



    Interestingly, two other stages have a term in all seven languages and in all terminologies
we have examined: they are a term for the newly formed, tiny fruit and a term for the sprouted
coconut. These are effectively the first and last stages in the life of the coconut (the bud is
not yet a coconut).

    This means that stages 2, 6, 9 and 12, shown in bold in Table 12.1 are the effective land-
marks in any Oceanic coconut growth stage t,erminology and that they are likely to have been
present in the POe terminology. There is no principled means of determining, however, which
intervening terms may have occurred in POe, and the level of cognacy among the seven ter-
minologies above is low. What might be the: reasons for this? One, at least, is that scholars
who elicit ordered growth stage terminologies from Oceanic speakers may, in some cases at
least, be imposing their concept of an ordere:d terminology on a somewhat less ordered col-
lection of terms used for coconuts at various stages of development. Two kinds of fact support
this contention. First, the terminologies above show considerable variation in the regions be-
tween the landmarks, almost as if in some cases the native-speaker informant was thinking of
terms to satisfy the lexicographer. Second, some languages have binomial terms between the
landmarks, where the first word denotes a nearby growth stage, usually a landmark, and the
second is a modifier. For example, Mota vusa denotes a green drinking coconut, and terms
on either side of it in the growth sequence are binomials: vusa yoryor 'drinking coconut [for]
scraping', vusa maremare 'hard drinking coconut', vusa sisis (meaning not known). Eight of
the 11 stages in the Anejom sequence are built around inhivafi 'drinking coconut' or neafi
'ripe coconut' . Three of the 7 Wayan Fijian stages contain bu 'drinking coconut' . The 11-
stage Tongan system7 carries this reliance on landmark categories a step further: two out of
fJOno (meaning unknown), mata 'unripe ' and motomoto 'not quite ripe ' are strung together to
create in-between categories (in bold below). Two other stages also include mata (assuming
that matasili is a chance resemblance, as it does not denote an unripe stage).


[7] Churchward does not supply glosses for some terms. The gloss for niu mata is our inference.

362    Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans



 Tongan (Pn): 11 stages (Churchward 1959)
 po-niu                'newly formed coconut'
 niu IJOno
 niu mata-gono
 niu mata-velivali     'green, unripe'
 niu mata              'green drinking coconut'
 niu mata-hihiloku
 niumata-motomoto
 niu motomoto                'not quite ripe'
 niu motu?u                  'quite ripe'
 niu matasili                'just beginning to sprout'
 niu ?uto                    'with a bigger sprout than niu mata-sili'


    Thus we might expect to be able to reconstruct terms for the four landmark stages. This is
broadly true, except that stage 2 terms are hard 1co reconstruct. Terms between the landmarks
tend to involve descriptive modifiers, as seen in 1che literal translations of a number of Anejom
and Tikopia terms, and these are easily replaced over time. A few are metaphorical, like Mota
matmateyapun 'eye of a yapun crab' and pane uwa 'turtle fin'. New metaphors or descriptions
are readily created by new generations of speakers, and we can be sure of little else than that
some POe terms must also have been metaphorical or descriptive.

    The Gumawana, Petats and Arosi terminologies above include no binomials (setting aside
Arosi niu 'coconut'). If our account is correct, we would expect to find that the terms between
the landmarks in these terminolgoes also reflect earlier descriptive terms, but we lack the
relevant data to test this expectation.

    Reconstructions for the four landmark stages, 2, 6, 9 and 12, are presented first below.


12.3.2 Growth stage 2: very small newly fonned fruit

Two weakly supported etyma, POe *(q)a-bwaji and PEOc *kiripwa, can be offered for stage 2,
'very small newly formed fruit'. 8 The former may contain the root *bwaji, which also occurs
in POe *bwaji-bwaji 'coconut growth stage 4 or 5' (§3.6).

<
POe *(q)a-bwaji 'coconut growth stage 2: very small newly formed fruit'
  MM:      Kara (E)         vabos           'undeveloped coconut'
  SV:      Kwamera          (i)apwas        'small coconut, coconut fruit bud'
>

<
PEOc *kiripwa 'coconut growth stage 2: very small newly formed fruit'
  SES:     'Are'are         kiriwa          'immature coconut'
  Mic:     Mokilese         kiripw          'young coconut up to one inch in diameter'
  Mic:     Ponapean         kurupw          'immature coconut before teaching the growth stage
>                                            called upw'

[8] In Ross ( 1996c) this form was reconstructed with the stage 1 meaning of 'coconut fruit bud' , but the sense
common to the two reflexes implies a stage 2 gloss.

                                                                                          Coconuts   363


12.3.3 Growth stage 6: green, drinkable

Two forms can be reconstructed for landmark stage 6, 'green drinkable coconut with thin
creamy flesh '. The first, POe *karut,9 has the best distributed support, but it is not as widely
reflected as stage 9 terms, a fact that is surprising (and unexplained) in light of the salience
of stage 6 in Oceanic cultures.

<
POe *karut 'coconut growth stage 6: green, drinkable '
  PT:      Hula            kalu             'half ripened coconut'
  PT:      Motu            karu             'young drinking coconut'
  PT:      Lala            alu-?alu         'young drinking coconut'
  MM:      Petats          ka-karut         'nut containing liquid before flesh appears'
                                            (Blackwood 1935)
   SES:    Longgu          ?aru             'a coconut ready to drink and eat'
   SES:    'Are ' are      aru              'green drinking coconut'
>

   The other term, *polo, is less well reflected. Glosses pointing to growth stage 6 occur
only in southern New Ireland, and we cannot be sure what it denoted.

<
POe *polo 'coconut growth stage 6: green, drinkable ' (?)
  Adm:     Lou             pu:Jl            'coconut'
  MM:      Barok           polo             'young drinking coconut'
  MM:      Sursurunga      pol              'young drinking coconut'
  MM:      Label           polo             'coconut water, young drinking coconut'
  MM:      Siar            polo             'coconut water'
>


12.3.4 Growth stage 9: ripe, flesh hardened

Reconstructable terms for stage 9, 'ripe, flesh hardened', are POe *matuqu, POe *kulu and
POe *maRaf)o . Reflexes ofPOc *matuqu have become the generic term for coconut in anum-
ber of languages, suggesting that in the minds of speakers it is this stage that is prototypical
of the coconut. It is clearly the most useful, as the flesh is used for various culinary purposes.

<
PEMP *matu(qu) 'dry coconut' (Blust 1978a)
POe *matuqu 'coconut growth stage 9: ripe, flesh hardened'
  NNG:     Lukep (Pono)        matuk            'coconut (generic)'
  NNG:     Atui                (ka)mutuk        'ripe coconut'
  NNG:     Roinji              mutuyo-na        'ripe coconut'
  NNG:     Matukar             matiwa-n         'ripe coconut'
  PT:      Suau (Saliba)       matuli-na        'ripe coconut, ready to fall ' (-li- < ?)
  PT:      Sudest              matu             'dr:y coconut'
  NCV:     Mwotlap             na-mtiy          'coconut (generic)'
  NCV:     Mota                matiy            'coconut (generic)'
  NCV:     NEAmbae             matui            'coconut (generic)'
  NCV:      Nokuku        metui         'coconut (generic) '
  NCV:      Tape          matiu         'ripe coconut'
  NCV:      BigNambas     !Jatu         'ripe coconut'
  NCV:      Avava         (ani) met-met 'dry coconut but not fallen '
  NCV:      Port Sandwich marue         'ripe coconut'
  NCV:      Paamese       matou         'dry coconut'
  NCV:      Lewo          maru          'coconut (generic) '
  SV:       Ura           na-mda        'green, starting to dry'
  SV:       Sye           na-mte        'ripe coconut'
  SV:       Anejom        (neafi )metou 'drinking coconut with hard flesh '
  NCal:     Iaai          o-mit         'ripe, yellow'
  NCal:     Xaracuu       nu-mMtt       'ripe coconut'
  Mic:      Marshallese   maca(wipw)    'coconut, nearly ripe'
  Fij:      Rotuman       mafu          'mature and hard (ofwood), lumpy (ofpudding),
                                        ripe and hard (of coconuts)'
  Fij:      Bauan         madu          'dry (ofwood and mature coconuts)'
  Pn:       Tongan        (niu) motu?u 'coconut growth stage: ripe'
  Pn:       E Futunan     (niu) mata?u 'very ripe dry coconut'
  Pn:       Takuu         matuu         'coconut growth stage: mature coconut'
>

[9] A possible non-Oceanic cognate is Old Balinese karu ' coconut shell' (Modern Balinese kau) .

364      Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans



     The Fijian gloss below calls into question the gloss of POe *kulu. However, a reflex of
this term has become the Araki generic for 'coconut', and this is something that happens
quite commonly to terms for ripe coconut. The Kuni and Roro terms reflect *-r- or *-R- , not
*-1- .

<
POe *kulu 'coconut growth stage 9: ripe, flesh hardened' (French-Wright 1983)
  MM: Tangga          kulu          'fully grown drinking coconut'
  NNG: Uvol           kul-kuli      'ripe coconut'
  SES: 'Are ' are     ?uru-?uru     'ripe coconut'
  SES: Sa' a          ?ulu-?ulu     'ripe coconut'
  NCV: Araki          holo          'coconut'
  Fij:   Bauan        kulu-kulu     'the youngest stage of the coconut'
cf. also:
  PT:       Kuni        ol-olo        'ripe coconut'
  PT:       Roro        kuro-kuro     'ripe coconut'
>

    The reconstruction of POe *maRmJo'coconut growth stage 9: ripe, flesh hardened (or
stage 10: dry and ready to fall)' entails a phonological problem. I assumed in vol. 2 (ch.7,
§5.6) that reflexes ofthis term were cognate with reflexes of POe *[ma]ra!Jo 'become with-
ered (ofvegetation)' , reconstructed by Osmond in vol. 1 (ch.5, §9.4). I assumed further that
both reflected PMP *(ma)Ra!JaW and that the POe form was *[ma]Ra!Jo, regularly reflecting
the PMP form. As I noted in vol.2, this is problematic, as Southeast Solomonic reflexes of
the form ra!Jo 'be withered' reflect POe *r, not *R.

                                                                                         Coconuts      365


    On balance the data now available suggest that my assumption in vol. 2 was wrong, and
that two POe reconstructions must be made: POe *[ma]ra!Jo 'become withered (of vegeta-
tion)' , as reconstructed by Osmond, and *maRa!Jo 'coconut growth stage . .. ' . Two pieces of
data underlie this decision. The first is Baelelea (SES) male!Ja 'coconut', in which-/- reflects
POe *-R-, contrasting with theSES items of the form ra!Jo 'be withered ' , reflecting POe*-
r- . The second is the Tape pair mea!J 'green coconut', probably reflecting POe *-R- as zero,
and mara!J '(ofwood, leaves) dry', probably reflecting POe *-r-. 10 The data supporting both
etyma are listed below. The Sursurunga item appears in both lists, as it appears to represent
a conflation of the two etyma.

     Other than the items mentioned in the previous paragraph, none of the items below is
diagnostic ofthe difference between POe *-R-and *-r- except for Niuean and Samoan ma!Jo
'dry' , and these reflect *-R- (with a zero reflex), not *-r- as their meaning would lead us to
expect. Also noteworthy is the odd fact that PMP *(ma)Ra!JaW 'dry' contains *-R- whilst the
POe etymon of similar meaning contains *-r-. In both cases speakers seem to have conflated
or confused the two etyma.

<
PMP *(ma)Ra!JaW 'dry' (Blust 1981b)
POe *maRa!Jo 'coconut growth stage 9: ripe , flesh hardened (or stage 10: dry and ready to
  fall)'
  NNG: Medebur       mera!JU-IJ     'ripe coconut'
  NNG: Kairiru       mara!J         'ripe coconut'
  MM: Meramera mala                 'ripe coconut'
  MM: Kara (E)       maya!J         'dry coconut'
  MM: Nalik          mara!J         'ripe coconut'
  MM: Lihir          malan          'ripe coconut'
  MM: Barok          ma!Ja          'ripe coconut'
  MM: Susurunga mara!J              '(be) old, dry; (old) coconut with lots of meat and
                                    little milk'
  MM: Patpatar       mara!Ja        'dry coconut'
  SES: Baelelea      male!Ja        'coconut'
  NCV: Naman         ( neni) mera!J 'ripe coconut'
  NCV: Neve ' ei     ( nani) mera!J 'ripe coconut'
  NCV: Larevat       (nan) mera!J 'ripe coconut'
  NCV: Nese          ( nani) nara!J 'ripe coconut'
  NCV: Tape          mea!J          'green coconut with flesh that has become hard and
                                    water that has begun to go fizzy ' (J. Lynch, pers.
                                    comm.)
>

<
POe *[ma-]ra!Jo 'become withered (ofvegetation)' (vol. 1, ch.5 , §9.4)
     Adm: Mussau            mala!Jo          'dry'
     NNG: Manam             mara!Jo          'dry, arid '
     MM: Susurunga          mara!J           '(be) old, dry; (old) coconut with lots of meat and
                                             little milk'
     MM:   Tolai         ma-ra!Ja            'withered, dry (leaves, husk, tree)'
     MM:   Halia (Selau) ra!Jo               'dry'
  SES:      Bugotu        raf}o            'wither (leaves, yam vines)'
  SES:      Sa' a         raf}o            'be withered, dry (esp. yams when vine withers)'
  SES:      Arosi         raf}o            'withered, dead (of grass, green boughs + )'
  NCV:      Mota          raf}o            'become dried up in the course of nature '
  NCV:      Tape          miJrafJ          '(ofwood, leaves) dry ' (J. Lynch, pers. comm.)
  SV:       Kwamera       (kahi )maref}i   'turning brown'
cf. also:
  Pn:       Niuean        maf}o            'dry (of wood, trees)'
  Pn:       Samoan        maf}o            'dry up; be dry (of wood, clothes)'
>

[10] In NCV languages *R is sometimes reflected as zero, sometimes as a liquid. I am grateful to John Lynch for
pointing out the Tape contrast and providing the data.

366     Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans



12.3.5 Growth stage 12: sprouting

Growth stage 12, the sprouted coconut, is evidently strongly associated in Oceanic minds
with the spongy mass (the 'apple ') inside it-the coagulated remains of the coconut water,
eaten as a delicacy in many parts of Oceania (Peekel 1984: 65). Terms for the spongy mass
inside the sprouting nut are given in §4.3.

    The cognate set below apparently reflects POe *tubuq 'grow, swell' (vol.l , ch.5, §9.2),
with the added meaning '(plant) sprout'. Probably, as in Taboro niu tubu-na , the verb was
used attributively with the term for coconut to denote growth stage 12.

__pre__
   PT:      Taboro       (niu) tubu-na     'sprouted coconut'
   PT:      Motu         tubu              'sprouted coconut'
   PT:      Roro         kupu              'coconut sprouted '
   NCV:     NE Arnbae    tubu              'germinated coconut or its pith'

    POe *tabwa 'coconut growth stage 12: sprouted' is formally similar to but almost certainly
distinct from the set above. There are two difficulties with this set. First, the NNG and NCV
glosses denote a later growth stage. Second, the Polynesian items reflect a form with POe
*-p-rather than -bw-.

<
POe *tabwa 'coconut growth stage 12: sprouted '
  NNG:      Ulau-Suain   tabu-fi           'young drinking coconut'
  NNG:      Ali          tapu-f}           'young drinking coconut'
  PT:       Dobu         tabwa(-anuwa)     'coconut sprouted '
  PT:       Gumawana     tabo              'a shoot; flesh inside a coconut that has sprouted'
                         tabo-na           'coconut growth stage: coconut that has sprouted'
  NCV: Raga              tabwe(-laha)      'coconut shell drinking cup '
  SV:  Anejom            na-tpwa(-neafi)   'spongy mass formed in a coconut that has started to
                                           shoot'
cf. also:
  Pn:       WFutunan     tafa              'coconut when meat has jellied and milk is still
                                           sweet'
  Pn:       E Uvean      tafa              'unripe coconut'
  Pn:       Emae         tafa              'very young coconut'
  Pn:       Tikopia      tafa              'coconut in developing stage with only water inside'
>

                                                                                     Coconuts     367


12.3.6 Other growth stages

Reconstructing the meanings of growth stage terms which fall between the landmarks is dif-
ficult, both because these meanings tend not to match precisely across languages and because
the meanings tend to shift along the growth stage taxonomy over time. This is reflected in
the vagueness of the glosses of the reconstructions in this section.

    Three terms, POe *kubu, POe *bwaji-bwaji and PWOc *pwiga, denoted a stage when the
coconut is young and green, somewhere among stages 3, 4 and 5. In the set supporting POe
*kubu the meanings of the Oceanic glosses vary from stage 2, 'newly formed fruit ' (Arosi),
to stage 9, 'mature coconut with meat' (Wuvulu). However, they point in the direction of a
young coconut, and one that is younger than a typical drinking coconut.

<
PEMP *kupu 'very young coconut' (Acn: *upu: 'germinating coconut?' ) 11
POe *kubu 'coconut growth stage 3, 4 or 5: young and green' (Acn: *umpu: 'young
  coconut?')
  Adm: Wuvulu        upu            'mature coconut with meat' (ACD)
  Adm: Au a          upu            'young coconut' (Blust 1978b: 131)
  Adm: Seimat        up             'coconut' (Acn)
  MM: Solos          kubo           'young   drinking coconut'
  MM: Petats         kuvo           'nut with meat a little firmer than the prototypical
                                    drinking coconut' (see Petats terminology above)
  MM: Tinputz        (oe) kupu      'green coconut with meat'
  MM: Roviana        kubo(lokuhu) 'very young coconut'
  SES: Longgu        kobu           'young coconut that has no meat, only water
  SES: Arosi         kopu           'newly formed fruit' (see Arosi terminology above ;
                                    probably a borrowing from another SES language)
  SES: Arosi         ?obu           'drinking nut' (see Arosi terminology above)
  Mic: Kosraean      uf             'young coconut' (ACD)
  Mic: Ponapean      upw            'drinking coconut' (Acn)
  Mic: Mokilese      upw            'coconut stage, unripe, younger than a drinking
                                    coconut'
>

    POe *bwaji-bwaji appears to have denoted either stage 4 (young, green, liquid but no flesh
yet) or stage 5 (green, drinkable, very soft flesh) , but it is not widely enough reflected for us
to be sure.

<
POe *bwaji-bwaji 'coconut growth stage 4 or 5'
  Adm: Mussau                 pasi-pasi-na 'young drinking coconut'
  PT:    Gumawana             bosi-bosi     'large green drinkable coconut still on the tree '
  PT:    Kilivila             bwai-bwai     'young drinking coconut'
  PT:    Misima               bwaz-bwaz     'young coconut with water but no meat'
  PT:    Sudest (Varavarae) bwadi-bwadi 'coconut'
>

[11] PEMP *kupu is supported by a single non-Oceanic reflex, Numfor uf 'round, yellow germination in a coconut'.

368   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


    Ross (1996c) suggested that the cognate set reflecting PWOc *pwiga implied a stage
5 meaning 'just drinkable ' because in both PT languages and Roviana we find the appar-
ently independent semantic development in meaning to 'drinking vessel' . The element ku-
in Ramoaaina ku-bika occurs in coconut terms in a number of Meso-Melanesian languages,
and it is evidently cognate with Nehan ku 'coconut oil'. The prefixed element in the Muyuw
and Dobu terms may or may not be cognate.

<
PWOc *pwiga 'coconut growth stage 3, 4 or 5: young and green'
  PT:     Suau (Daui) biga-biga-na       'young drinking coconut'
  PT:     Kilivila    viga               'cup, drinking vessel'
  PT:     Muyuw       (kwa)vig           'half coconut shell used as cup'
  PT:     Dobu        (ke)iga            'cup'
  PT:     Maisin      vuga               'cup'
  MM:     Ramoaaina (ku)bika             'coconut growth stage before a green drinking
                                         coconut'
  MM:     Nduke          bika            'small green coconut'
  MM:     Roviana        piga            'coconut shell used as a bottle '
>

    In vol. 2 ( ch. 7, §5.6) POe *goRu 'dry, of vegetation; coconut growth stage: dry and ready
to fall ' was reconstructed. This gloss places a lot of weight on the Mota gloss: taken to-
gether the glosses suggest a stage 9 or 10 meaning, i.e. either 'ripe ' or 'dry and ready to fall ' .
Lavukaleve, the non-Austronesian language of the Russell Islands (central Solomons) has
!Jgolus 'old dry coconut' (Angela Terrill, pers . comm.), apparently borrowed from a NW
Solomonic language that regularly retained POe final consonants. For this reason, we tenta-
tively reconstruct POe final *-s here.

<
POe *[ma-]goRu(s) 'dry, ofvegetation; coconut growth stage 9 or 10: ripe, perhaps dry and
  ready to fall ' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Malai             gor-gori    'ripe coconut'
  NNG: Kakuna            kolu-!Jana  'ripe coconut'
  MM: Nakanai            ma-golu     'dried up, withered; of a coconut, dry enough to
                                     fall ' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  SES: Lengo             golu        'coconut flesh'
  NCV: Mota              kor         'coconut in its last condition before it falls from the
                                     tree; dry (of other things too) '
  NCV: Atchin            kor         'dry coconut'
  NCV: Uripiv            (na-ni) kur 'mature coconut (with firm meat and dry husk)'
>


12.4 Parts of the coconut fruit

Terms for coconut parts are divided here into parts of the fruit (this section) and parts of
the palm (§5). As we noted earlier *niuR denoted both the palm and the fruit. POe speakers
evidently distinguished between them by calling the palm *puqun ni niuR, literally 'trunk of
coconut') and the fruit *puaq ni niuR 'fruit of coconut', reflected in Bauan and Wayan Fijian
as vu ni niu and vua ni niu and in Tongan asfu?u ni niu andfo?i niu (ch.2, §7.1.3).

                                                                                          Coconuts      369


     Outer skin                                        In traditional times a palm bore be-
     (exocarp)
                                                   tween 5 and 30 coconuts a year, depending
                                                   on the palm's age. 12 The usable parts of a
                                                   coconut are related to its growth stages. At
                                                   the green drinkable stage, the main usable

             ~~~~~~~~
                                                   product is the coconut water, although the
   Flesh
(endosperm)                                        thin flesh is sometimes eaten as a snack. At
                            Coconut                the ripe stage, when the flesh has thickened
                              water
                                                   and hardened, the flesh is scraped and the
                                                   scrapings are wrung out to give coconut
            Figure 12.1 Parts of a coconut         milk, which is used in food, especially in
stews. The husk of the ripe coconut is removed with a husking stick. Its mesocarp consists
of densely matted dry fibres which have a variety of uses. Clean half-shells, with the flesh
removed, are used as cups. At the sprouting stage, apart from use for planting a new palm,
the main product is the 'apple', the edible sweet spongy mass that fills the shell cavity.
    The fruit parts for which reconstructions are provided here are thus:
    • coconut water (§4.1)
    • hardened flesh and its products (§4.2)
    • the 'apple ' (§4.3)
    • the husk (§4.4)
    • the shell (§4.5)


12.4.1 Coconut water

POe *suRuq appears to have denoted drinkable liquids in general, including soups, but per-
haps excluding plain water: its range clearly included coconut water. No more specialised
designation for coconut water has been reconstructed, and it seems likely that the terms for
a green drinking coconut (§3.3) were also us:ed for the water inside it. 13

<
POe *suRuq 'sap, soup, drinkable liquid derived from plants, fruits or trees' (Milke 1961:
  *suRu(q))
  Adm: Loniu           cuy           'soup'
  Adm: Titan           sui           'half-ripe coconut'
  NNG: Kove            suhu          'drinkable liquids; also tears, saliva' (A. Chowning,
                                     pers. comm.)
  NNG: Gitua           suru          'coconut water, soup '
                       suru-suru     'saliva'
  NNG: Bing            sur           'coconut water, soup '
  NNG: Manam           suru          'soup'
  NNG: Yabem           sulu          'soup'
                       (awa)sulu     'saliva', i.e. 'sap of mouth' (awa- 'mouth')
     NNG: Kaiwa         ro-ruk                  'soup'
                        (avo)rulu-              'saliva', i.e. 'sap of mouth' (avo- 'mouth' )
     PT:  Dobu          sulu                    'coconut water'
     PT:  Molima        sulu                    'coconut water'
     MM: Bali           zuruka                  'coconut water'
     MM: Halia (Haku) siru                      'soup'
     MM: Tinputz        hun                     'coconut water'
     MM: Mono-Alu       lulu                    'soup'
     SES: To ' aba' ita sulu                    'juice, liquid of fruit; broth, sauce, gravy
     SES: Arosi         suru                    'coconut water; k.o. yam soup '
     NCV: Raga          hu-                     'oil, liquid, juice, semen'
     NCV: Paamese       sii-                    'juice '
     NCV: Nguna         na-su(a)                'coconut water, juice, soup'
     Pn:  Samoan        su                      'be moist; (taro) be watery'
                        su(a)                   'liquid, fluid ; jouice; coconut milk; soup
>

[12] Under plantation conditions a palm may bear up to 60 nuts a year. Palms may live up to 100 years, but their
bearing capacity decreases towards zero in later life .

[13] In Ross (1996c) POe *polo was glossed 'coconut water' , but the glosses of its reflexes make it more likely
that it was a term for a drinking coconut, and so it is included here in §3 .3.

370     Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


   The weakly attested etymon POe *namo may have denoted 'coconut water' or a drinkable
growth stage.

<
POe *namo 'coconut water' or 'coconut growth stage: 3, 4 or 5: young and green'
  MM: Bulu          namo          'coconut water'
  MM: Bola          namo          'coconut water'
  NCV: S Efate      namw          'coconut growth stage: young, green, liquid but no
                                  flesh yet'
>


12.4.2 Coconut flesh and its products

When the coconut is ripe, the hardened flesh is either removed from the shell and cut up, or
scraped from the shell using a coconut scraper. Scraping produces parings which are then
squeezed to produce coconut milk.[14]

    The best candidate for 'coconut flesh ' is POe *kano!J, a fossilised reflex ofPMP *kan-en
'something to be eaten, food ', itself a nominalisation ofthe PMP verb 'eat', *ka?en, or *kan
in the context of certain affixes. POe *kano!J had evidently lost its expected sense and denoted
'flesh, inner substance, coconut flesh '. The morphology of POe nominalisations is discussed
in vol.l (ch.2, §3.2.1).[15]

[14] Verbs for removing the flesh from the shell are reconstructed in vol.l , ch.9, §3 .7, for scraping in vol.l , ch.9, §2.2.

[15] Productive nominalisations of reflexes of POe *kani ' eat' in Oceanic languages usually mean ' staple food'
and by extension ' food in general' (ch.2, §6.1).

<
PMP *kan-en 'something to be eaten, food '
POe *kano!J 'flesh, inner substance, coconut flesh '
  NNG: Tuam               ano!Ja       'seed, fruit '
  NNG: Malalamai          anu!Ja       'coconut flesh '
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) kano-             'fruit (of, e.g., breadfruit), inner substance '
  NNG: Sio               kana!Jo       'coconut flesh '
  MM: Tangga             kono          'coconut flesh '
  SES: Arosi             ?ano          'bulb , tuber, part oftree below ground'
PPn *[ka-]kano 'flesh, seed ' (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan          kano          'flesh, substance'
                         ka-kano       'flesh, contents or substance'
  Pn:    Pukapukan       kano          'the real or essential part of something'
  Pn:    Rennellese      kano          'flesh or meat of anything; substance '
  Pn:    Samoan          ?a-?ano       'flesh; kernel, meat, including meat of coconut'
  Pn:    Hawaiian        ?ano          'kind , nature, character, color, meaning'
>

                                                                              Coconuts    371


   PWOc *lamati seems to have designated dry coconut flesh, but has undergone a two-step
semantic shift, first a metonymic shift to 'dry coconut', then genericisation to 'coconut'.

<
PWOc *lamati 'dry coconut flesh '
  NNG:    Maenge        lamasi            'coconut'
  NNG:    Sissano       (new- )lamat      'coconut meat'
  MM:     Tigak         lamas             'dried coconut meat for copra'
  MM:     Kara (E)      lamas             'coconut meat, dried coconut meat for copra'
  PT:     Gumawana      (naku- )lamata    'coconut growth stage: starts turning brown'
  MM:     Lihir         lames             'coconut'
  MM:     Sursurunga    lamas             'coconut, coconut palm'
  MM:     Patpatar      lamas             'dry coconut'
  MM:     Tolai (Nodup) lamai             'coconut'
  MM:     Kandas        lamas             'coconut'
>

    The reconstructions below relate to the process of squeezing coconut flesh to produce co-
conut cream, and of boiling it to make coconut oil. The data point to a POe verb *puro, either
'scrape coconut' or 'squeeze coconut milk onto food ' and a corresponding nominalisation
*puro-IJ denoting the products of this activi~y. The Admiralties reflexes support reconstruc-
tion of *-r- rather than *-R- .

<
POe *puro 'squeeze coconut milk onto food'
POe *puro-IJ 'coconut pulp; pudding made by squeezing'; perhaps 'grind'
  Adm:    Lou          p:Jr            'coconut cream'
  Adm:    Drehet       puro!J          'coconut pulp '
  NNG:    Lukep (Pono) poro!J          'taro cake '
  NNG:    Takia        furo!J          'pudding made of banana/taro and canarium nuts'
  NNG:    Atui         pur             'scrape coconut'
  NNG:    Akolet       puru            'scrape coconut'
  MM:     Nakanai      pulo            'squeeze coconut cream onto food before cooking'
                                       (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  MM:     Kara (E)       pur           'mah: coconut milk'
  MM:     Patpatar       polon         'coconut milk'
  MM:     Ramoaaina      pur           'squeeze coconut milk onto food '
>

372   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


     The distinction between 'coconut cream' and 'coconut milk' is fuzzy. The cream is the
first product of squeezing, whereas the milk is the product of further squeezing after water
has been added (M. Foale 2003: 87). The POe term for coconut milk and coconut cream
was *g(o,u)re!J 'coconut milk, coconut cream', also apparently a nominalisation, but one for
which no corresponding verb is known.

<
POe *g(o,u)re!J 'coconut milk, coconut cream'
 NNG: Bariai                gore!Ja       'coconut milk (from dry coconuts, not for drinking)'
 NNG: Tuam                  gore!J        'coconut milk'
 NNG: Kapin                 (ma)gole!J    'coconut'
 PT:     Ubir               uren          'coconut oil'
 PT:     Tawala             gulena        'coconut milk'
PMic *ar( e,o )!J, *ar(e,o )!JU- 'coconut cream, scraped coconut meat' (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Kiribati              (te)ao!J      'scraped coconut mixed with other food '
 Mic: Marshallese yaZU'                   'coconut milk'
 Mic: Ponapean              cri!J         'ripe coconut'
 Mic: Mokilese              :Jri!J        'brown stage of coconut'
 Mic: Chuukese              ari!J         'coconut cream'
 Mic: Carolinian ari!J                    'coconut cream'
 Mic: Woleaian              yaz;e!Ji      'coconut cream, bone marrow, coconut milk'
 Mic: Sonsorolese yaliJfJt                'coconut cream'
 Mic: Pulo-Annan yala!Ji                  'coconut milk'
>

   Coconut oil, produced by boiling the milk, was apparently regarded as a form of POe
*mofiak, which denoted fatty, creamy or oily substances which tasted good.

<
PMP *mefiak 'fat, grease ' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *mofiak 'fat, oil, cream, coconut cream; tasty' (Blust 1978b)
  Adm:    Mussau        mona             'fat, tas~y '
  NNG:    Manam         mona-mona        'tasty'
  NNG:    Kairiru       mofieq           'food'
  PT:     Suau (Saliba) mo-mona-         'coconut oil, grease, pig fat'
  MM:     Tabar         monaki           'fat'
  MM:     Lihir         maniok           'fat'
  MM:     Lamasong      monok            'coconut cream'
  MM:     Madak         monouk           'fat'
  MM:     Barok         manok            'fat'
  MM:     Tolai         monoi            'fat'
  SES:    Gel a         mona             'coconut cream'
>


12.4.3 The embcyo and the 'apple'

Distinguishing growth stage 12, the sprouted coconut, from the 'apple' inside it is difficult,
but the terms reconstructed below all appear to have denoted the apple rather than the coconut.
The most widely reflected of these terms is POe *paraq 'coconut embryo, spongy mass inside
sprouting nut; brain': non-Oceanic cognates indicate that 'coconut embryo ' was the earlier
sense. Its Titan, Bariai, and Sinaugoro reflexes indicate that POe *paraq could also denote
'brain', presumably because ofthe latter' s spongy appearance and texture.

                                                                            Coconuts    373


    The reconstruction of POe *paraq entaills a small phonological puzzle. For PMP Blust
(AcD) reconstructs *para 'coconut embryo ' without *-q because it is not reflected in non-
Oceanic cognates. However, Iduna and Kilivila (PT), Tolai (MM) and Southern Vanuatu
reflexes all point to its presence in POe *paraq.

<
PMP *para 'coconut embryo ' (AcD)
POe *paraq 'spongy mass inside sprouting nut; brain'
  Adm: Titan           pare-n       'brain, sprout'
  NNG: Bariai          para         (v) 'sprout'
                       pata-!Ja     'brain'
  PT:    Iduna         valaga       'seed inside coconut; old yam'
  PT:    Kilivila      valiga       'coconut sprout, coconut sponge ' (Malinowski
                                    1935b: 112)
  PT:    Hula          vala         'spongy ball inside sprouting coconut'
  PT:    Sinaugoro vara             'inner part, brain, inner part of coconut'
  MM: Tolai            varai        'sprouted coconut'
  MM: Siar             arai         'young soft coconut'
  MM: Nehan            uara         'coconut shoot; edible growth inside mature
                                    coconut/coconut with shoot, used for planting'
  MM: Petats           hala         'sprouted coconut (see Petats terminology above)
  MM: Halia-Haku hala               'sprouted coconut'
  SES: Gel a           vara         'a fallen coconut beginning to grow and showing
                                    leaf
  SES: Longgu          vara         'a coconut seedling ready for planting; the solid,
                                    sweet part of an old coconut (where the liquid has
                                    become solid)'
  NCV: Mota            vara         'the shoot, plumule, ofthe coconut, as it forms first
                                    within the nut, afterwards when it shoots outside,
                                    and finally as growing up from the radicle '
  NCV: Raga            vara         'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: N Ambrym var                 'spongy kernel of a mature coconut'
  NCV: Lonwolwol vaa                'the spongy kernel of a mature coconut'
  NCV: Paamese         a-hai        'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: Lewo            (puru)ve     'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: Nguna           na-vare      'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: Namakir         var          'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: Nguna           na-vare      'sprouting coconut'
  NCV: S Efate         n-far        'spongy mass in sprouting coconut'
PSV *na-viJraq 'sprouting coconut and/or its pith' (Lynch 200lc: 232)
  SV:    Lenakel       (nien-u)via 'sprouting coconut'
  SV:    Kwamera       nu-vera      'sprouting coconut'
  SV:    Sye           ne-vre       'sprouting coconut'
  SV:    Ura           ne-vla       'sprouting coconut'
 NCal: Fwai             (do)vala     'sprouting coconut'
 NCal: Nemi             (doo)vala    'sprouting coconut'
 NCal: Jawe             (sep) vala   'sprouting coconut'
PMic *fara 'core (of breadfruit, coconut, pandanus)' (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Chuukese faar                  'core of a breadfruit'
                       fara-n        'core of'
 Mic: Puluwatese faar                'core of breadfruit, sponge of coconut'
                       ferce-n       'core of'
 Mic: Woleaian         faare         'core of a breadfruit'
                       fera-li       'core of'
 Mic: Ponapean         paar          'spongy c1~ntre of sprouting coconut'
                       par           'to sprout (of coconuts)'
 Mic: Mokilese         par           'sprouting coconut'
 Fij:    Bauan          vara         'spongy flesh in the kernel of a coconut before it
                                     shoots; a coconut in this stage or just shooting'
 Fij:    Wayan          vara         'ripe coconut, germinating; spongy flesh in kernel
                                     of ripe coconut'
>

374   Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


     We observed above that POe *paraq 'coconut embryo' was also used to refer to the brain.
POe *qutok 'brain, pith, marrow' had a similar, but not identical, span of meanings, denoting
the soft inner contents of a tree or palm trunk, canes, bones, and sprouting coconuts, as well
as the contents of the human head. Glosses with meanings other than brain or head are shown
in italics.

<
PMP *hutek 'brain, marrow' (ACD)
POe *qutok 'brain, pith, marrow'
  NNG: Mapos Buang yuto                 'brain'
  NNG: Bariai            (i)uto-uto     'brain'
  NNG: Gitua             uto            'pith, centre of tree (particularly sago)'
  NNG: Lukep             kuto(na)       'head'
  NNG: Malasanga         koto(na)       'head'
  NNG: Mangseng          ut             'brain'
  NNG: Kis               ut             'brain'
  NNG: Kaiep             UtO(f})        'brain'
  PT:    Suau (Saliba) uto              'brain'
  PT:    Iduna           uto-na         'flesh ofcoconut'
  PT:    Misima          utu(waul)      'brain'
  PT:    Motu            (au) uto-na    'pith' (au 'tree' )
  SES: 'Are ' are        uo(-woi)       'pith, heart (of tree)'
  SES: Sa'a              uo             'the inner skin of rattan cane, pith'
  SES: Arosi             uo             'the flesh, edible part of a yam'
  NCV: Mota              uto-i          'pith, the inner part, if hard, within the bark'
  Fij:   Bauan           uto            'heart; pith of a tree'
  NCV: Mota              uto-i          'pith'
  Mic: Chuukese          5t             'coconut sprout, the soft spongy centre of a coconut'
PPn *quto 'brain; pith of a tree; inner part of something; spongy mass in sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    Tongan           ?uto           ' (of a coconut) beginning to sprout; soft kernel or
                                         "apple" of a sprouting nut; brain'
  Pn:    E Futunan        ?uto           'brains; sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    E Uvean          ?uto           'brains; spongy mass in sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    Emae             uto            'sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    Rennellese       ?uto           'sponge, as of coconut, ivory nut'
                          ?uto (?ugu) 'brains' ( = 'head sponge')
  Pn:    Samoan           uto            'spongy substance in old coconut'
  Pn:    Luangiua         ?uko           'sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    Nukuria          udo            'soft wood around the centre of a tree trunk'
  Pn:    Marque san       (?ehi)uto      'sprouting coconut'
  Pn:    Mangarevan uto                  'marrow; spongy mass in old coconuts'
  Pn:    Rarotongan       uto            'germinated coconut; kernel or white spongy
                                         substance found inside a germinated coconut'
>

                                                                                           Coconuts      375


    The less widely reflected terms PAdm *puto-, POe *pwiras and PWOc *gawa also seem
to have had 'coconut apple' as their principal denotation. Despite its formal similarity to POe
*qutok above, PAdm *puto- 'spongy mass inside sprouting nut' appears to be a separate item,
the reflexes of which denote only the inside ofthe sprouted coconut.[16]

<
PAdm *puto- 'spongy mass inside sprouting nut'
  Adm: Loniu        put:J         'core, especially of coconut'
  Adm: Titan        suto-n        'coconut sprout, the soft spongy center of a coconut'
>

<
POe *pwiras 'pithy ball inside sprouted coconut' (Acn: *pirV)
  NNG: Gitua              pir           'white pithy ball inside sprouted coconut'
  NNG: Tuam               pir           'germinating nut' (Freedman 1967: 335)
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) pir                 'coconut sprout'
  MM: Roviana             piraha        'sprouting coconut'
  SES: Gela               pira          'coconut on ground showing leaf
PMic *pir, *piri- 'growth or lump under the skin, spongy core of mature coconut' (Bender
  et al. 2003)
  Mic: Marshallese par                  'small sprouted coconut; swelling, tumour'
  Mic: Puluwatese         pir           'coconut sponge beginning to form; growth or lump
                                       under the skin'
     Mic:     Chuukese           piir, piri-n  'hard lump or growth under the skin'
                                 piri-(n taka) 'spore of the ripe coconut when beginning to form'
>

[16] Lynch (2001c) reconstructs PSV *n<J-vutoy 'brain' with an unexpected initial *v- reflected in Anejom h-. Its
resemblance to PAdm *puto- is probably accidental, as its reflexes only denote 'brain' and it is probably a
reflex of POe *qutok in which PSV *v- (normally < POe *p-) is an idiosyncratic innovation.
PSV *n<J-vutoy 'brain' (Lynch 200lc)
     SV:   Anejom     n-hutu(ma)    'brains'
     SV:   N Tanna    no-uta        'brains'
     SV    Lenakel    neno-ur<Jk    'brain'

376       Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans



<
PWOc *gawa 'spongy mass inside sprouting nut; sprouted coconut'
     PT:      Gapapaiwa go-go-na               'spongy centre of a sprouting coconut'
     PT:      Tawala    ko-ko                  'coconut sprouted'
     PT:      Sudest    yaya                   'spongy centre of a sprouting coconut'
     MM:      Ramoaaina gawa-ina               'spongy centre of a sprouting coconut'
>


12.4.4 Coconut husk

Fibre from coconut husks ('coir' < Malay kayar 'rope') is used for floor matting, brushes,
ropes and strainers. Husks and shells are used for fuel. 17 Most Oceanic languages have dis-
tinct terms for the husk of coconuts, probably reflecting its importance for cordage and for
fuel (Firth 1985: 369). For example, in Kiribati there are names for all the operations involved
in making string from benu 'coconut husk (for making string)', namely tao-benu 'soaking the
benu'; tae-benu 'taking it out of the soaking pit'; tiri-benu 'beating the benu to clean it'; ake-
ake or ake-a te benu 'to hackle it'; bo-binoka 'to arrange benu ready for twisting'; kakano
'twist the benu on thigh to make string' (Sabatier 1971: 63).

     Doublet forms, POe *punut and *pwenu(t), both 'coconut husk', appear to be reconstructable.
Blust (ACD) also reconstructs the PMP doublets *bunut and *benut. PMP *bunut is clearly
the source of POe *punut, but PMP *benut is just as clearly not the source of *pwenu(t), as
its expected POe reflex would be t*ponut. Inst1~ad, *pwenu(t) reflects a shift of the rounding
feature of *-u- forward to *p-. The change is not regular, and perhaps the result of vowel dis-
similation. The Nduke, Bugotu, Gela, Longgu and Puluwatese point to an initiallabiovelar.

<
PMP *bunut 'coconut husk' (Zorc & Charles 1971, Blust 1989)
POe *punut 'coconut husk, fibres on coconut husk' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Tuam            pun-pun        'coconut husk'
  NNG: Bing            fun-fUn        'coconut husk fibre; husk a coconut'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) pun-pun          'coconut husk'
  NNG: Bing            fun-fUn        'the coconut fibre from the husk'
  NNG: Takia           funu(dan)      'coconut husk'
  NNG: Maeng           putu-n         'coconut husk' (metathesis)
  MM: Vitu              vinuta
  PT:   Motu           bunu           'coconut husk' 18
  PT:   Roro           punu           'coconut husk'
  MM: Ramoaaina        punut          'beard'
  MM: Nehan            pitunu         'coconut husk' (metathesis)
  MM: Halia            putunu         'coconut husk' (metathesis)
     MM:      Nduke              punutu            'fibrous epidermis round the base of a coconut
                                                   frond; looks like an open-weave cloth, and used for
                                                   straining milk from squeezed coconut flesh '
     SES:     Bugotu             vunu-             'outer skin of canarium almond '
     NCV:     Nokuku             wun               'coconut husk'
     NCV:     Kiai               vunu-             'husk, threads, fibre '
     NCV:     Atchin             no-un             'plait,ed string of coconut fibre '
     NCV:     S Efate            na-un             'husk'
     Pn:      Tuvalu             funu              'pubic hair'
>

[17] Terms for husking and breaking open a coconut are reconstructed in vol.l, ch.6, §5.5.

[18] The initial consonant of this form is irregular, as POe *p > p or h in Motu.

                                                                                       Coconuts    377



    Evidence for the word-final *t of POe *pwenu(t) is indirect. The Nduke and Bugotu forms
below both support the reconstruction of a final consonant for POe, but neither is a regular
reflex of *pwenut.

<
POe *pwenu(t) 'coconut husk' (Ross 1996c)
  MM: Meramera ven-venu            'coconut husk'
  MM: Tangga          pinu-IJ      'coconut husk'
  MM: Nduke           pe-penete- 'husk of a mature coconut; thick coir or fibre that
                                   makes up the inside of the husk' (for tpenutu)
  MM: Maringe         pwetu        'coconut husk' (metathesis, followed by loss of final
                                   consonant)
  SES: Bugotu         penutu       'coconut husk' (borrowed from a NW Solomonic
                                   language)
  SES: Gel a          penu         'coconut, outer husk, wound around foot as
                                   protection'
  SES: Longgu         penu         'the outside husked part of the coconut, when it has
                                   rotted'
  SES: Arosi          henu-        'husk; bark; mollusc shell'
  Mic: Puluwatese (ese) pan        'shell, peel, husk'
  Fij:   Rotuman      henu         'husk of coconut or large pandanus nut'
  Fij:   Bauan        venu(ki)     'fibres of coconut husk beaten ready for twisting
                                   into sinnet' 19
  Pn:    Samoan       fenu         'make a join in plaiting etc '
  Pn:    Maori        fenu         'twist, spin a cord, strand of a garment, warp (in
                                   weaving); a single element in basketry'
>


12.4.5 Coconut shell

There was apparently no dedicated POe term for a coconut shell, but there were a number
of terms for the utensils made from them. The following utensil terms are reconstructed in
vol.l (ch.4, §2.2)
    • POe *b(wJilo 'coconut shell used as liquid container'
    • POe *lasa 'coconut half-shell cup'

[19] It is not clear what the final-ki ofBauan venuki reflects.

378       Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


       • POe *ubil *ibu 'half coconut shell used as a drinking cup '
       • POe *kabu 'cup, ladle '


12.5 Parts of the coconut palm

The growing period of a coconut palm from the germination of a nut to the production of
new coconuts is 4--10 years. Generally, no use is made of the palm during its growing period,
but once the palm is productive, its various parts, like the coconut itself, have a large variety
of uses. Understanding the parts of the palm entails understanding how its fronds grow (see
Figure 12.2):

         The crown of the palm is made up of 20--35 fronds , depending on how favourable the
         growing environment is. The fronds emerging in sequence from the central bud of the
         palm conform to a set geometrical pattern of angular separation around the circumfer-
         ence of the palm trunk . ... If frond 1 ina series is given the azimuth angle of zero degrees,
         frond 2 will be located at plus or minus 140 degrees, frond 3 at 280 degrees, frond 4 past
         the starting angle at 60 degrees on the second circuit ... (M. Foale 2003: 48).

A new frond is supported at its base by a netlike brown fibrous epidermis so thick, tough and
regular that it looks almost machine-made. It protects the tender growing area from physical
injury, supporting the new leaf until it is mature, after which it drops to the ground and is
collected for a number of uses. Arber ( 1922) labelled it the 'coiffe' or 'pellicule ' 20 -but these
terms have not caught on and it is often omitted from western descriptions of the coconut
palm-yet its POe names are among the most easily reconstructed terms for a part of the
coconut palm. We will call this material 'frond netting' in order to distinguish it clearly from
the better known source of fibre , the coir ofthe coconut husk (§4.4).

     A new flower bunch (inflorescence), from which coconuts eventually emerge, appears
at the base of the frond that has reached the 1Oth to 12th position down from the youngest
emerging frond . The flower bunch is encased in a spear-like sheath (the spathe) which pro-
trudes as much as a metre from the inner side of the base of its accompanying frond . The
tough skin of the spathe splits and shrinks back somewhat, exposing the inflorescence (M.
Foale 2003: 47).21 The multi-branch flower stalk (spadix) becomes the stalk of a new bunch
of coconuts.

     Table 4.1 of Chapter 4 shows part of the coconut terminology ofTikopia, which is typical
of Oceanic languages in its coverage. The parts of the coconut palm that are typically named
are:
       • the frond and its parts (§5 .1)
       • frond netting (§5.2)
       • the spathe and the infloresence (§5.3)

[20] I am grateful to Jean Kennedy for this reference.

[21] The spathe is quite woody, and in parts of Asia fallen spathes are boiled, dried and waxed to produce boat-
shaped bowls.

                                                                                Coconuts     3 79


                                                                                leaflets

                                                             flower sheath
                                                                (spathe)

                                      frond netting
                                     (frond sheath)
                              Figure 12.2   Parts of a coconut palm



   Some parts of the palm are labelled with terms that are used for parts of plants in general.
For example, Oceanic languages do not have a distinct name for the trunk of a coconut palm
and nor presumably did POe. Instead, POe *puqu(n) 'base of tree, source, origin' (ch.4, §2.1)
was apparently used, and the trunk of a coconut palm-and by metonymy the palm as a
whole-was probably *puqun ni niuR (ch.2 , §7.1.3). The coconut trunk is sometimes used
for flooring and bearers, but it is difficult to trim and by no means the best material for these
purposes (O'Collins & Lamothe 1989, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 192). The young leaf shoots
of the coconut palm, which are sometimes eaten (French 1986: 31 ), have a distinct name
only in Central Pacific languages (PCP *to-rem, where the second element reflects POe *raun
'leaf; ch.4, §2.5, cf. Table 4.7), but are otherwise labelled with whatever term is used for
leaf-shoots (ch.4, §2.6).

12.5.1 The frond and its parts

Coconut fronds are 4--6 m long and have a thick stalk (petiole) which narrows into a central
spine or midrib (rachis) from which grow leaflets (pinnae) 60-90 em in length. Fronds serve
as roofing material for shelters. Their leaflets are used to make baskets, and the dried ribs of
the leaflets are bound together to make brooms.
    As noted in ch.4, §2.5, Oceanic languages tend to have more than one term for the coconut
frond, distinguishing between the green frond on the palm and the fallen, dried brown frond.

12.5.1.1 Green fronds

Whether there was a single POe word denoting a green frond is debatable. Scattered lan-
guages use compounds meaning 'leaf of coconut' (Titan lau-niw, Anejom neri-neafi , Ni-
uean lau-niu, each literally 'leaf-coconut' ) or 'branch of coconut' (Nehan ra!J-kuen, literally
'branch-coconut'). There is thus some evidence for reconstructing *raun ni niuR 'leaf of
coconut' and/or *raqan ni niuR 'branch of coconut'.

380     Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


    Possible candidates for this meaning are POe *usiri and PWOc *pagal. However, the
Tuam and Ramoaaina glosses of reflexes of *pagal suggest that it may have denoted the
midrib of the frond or the broad base of the midrib. The Lihir reflex suggests that the deno-
tation may have included palm fronds other than the coconut. The Vaghua, Varisi and Ririo
reflexes are irregular in reflecting -r- for expect,ed t -/- and in their denotation: 'branch'. The
meaning of POe *usiri is just as problematic.

<
POe *usiri 'palm frond or midrib of a frond' (?)
  MM:       Nehan        usiri          'backbone; backbone ofthe small leaves of the
                                        coconut frond, sago palm, all palms'
  NCV: Paamese           o-usil         'frond'
  NCV: S Efate           ser            'frond'
cf. also:
  PT:       Iduna        didi-na        'coconut frond'
>

<
PWOc *pagal 'palm frond'(?)
  NNG:      Kove         paya-paya                      'coconut frond' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
  NNG:      Tuam         pele!Jga-n                     'base of a coconut frond' (metathesis)
  NNG:      Mangap       (pal )paa!Jga, (sui )paa!Jga   'palm frond'
  MM:       Bulu         pagal(i)                       'frond'
  MM:       Lihir        pala!J                         'sago leaf
  MM:       Ramoaaina    pagal                          'coconut leaf stem'
cf. also:
  MM:       Vaghua       pagar(a)                       'branch'
  MM:       Varisi       pagar(a)                       'branch'
  MM:       Ririo        pagar(eve)                     'branch'
>

    Ross (1996c: 204) reconstructed POe *[pa]paq[a-], apparently denoting the frond of any
palm. It reflects PMP *pa(q)paq 'frond of a palm' (Blust 1989). There is reasonable evidence
that POe *[pa]paq[a-] occurred, but its meaning is unclear. Only the Arosi and Ellicean
reflexes mean 'palm frond'. Its Meso-Melanesian reflexes simply mean 'leaf, whilst its Po-
lynesian reflexes imply that PPnfa?a meant the stalk of large leaves of various plants.

<
PMP *pa(q)paq 'frond of a palm' (Blust 1989)
POe *[pa]paq[a-] 'frond ofapalm' (?)(Ross 1996c)
  MM:       Bola         paga           'leaf
  MM:       Lavongai     pa             'leaf
  MM:       Kara (E)     paka           'leaf
  MM:       Kara (W)     faka           'leaf
  MM:       Nalik        fiJkiJ         'leaf
  MM:       Tabar         (paka)paka    'leaf
  MM:       Sursurunga   piJkd          'leaf
  MM:      Patpatar     paka           'leaf
  MM:      Label        paka           'leaf
  MM:      Siar         paka           'leaf
  MM:      Teop         paka           'leaf
  SES:     Arosi        haha-na        'palm frond, branch of a palm or tree that has no
                                       branches, as sago palms, coconut, cycad, screw
                                       palm'
  Pn:      Tongan       fa? a          'lower portion of leaf stalk of banana, taro, or giant
                                       taro (Alocasia macrorrhiza)'
  Pn:      Niuean       fa             '(plant) stalk'
  Pn:      Tikopia      fa             'leaf stem of fleshy plant'
  Pn:      Rennellese   ha?a           '(taro, banana, papaya) stalk'
  Pn:      Samoan       fa             'stalk, stem oftaro, banana and certain other plants'
  Pn:      Tuvalu       fa             'base end of a coconut midrib '
  Pn:      Nukuoro      ha             'coconut palm frond '
  Pn:      Hawaiian     ha             'stalk that supports the leaf and enfolds the stem of
                                       certain plants, as taro, sugarcane, layers in a banana
                                       stump'
>

                                                                                Coconuts     381



12.5.1.2 Driedfronds

One of the main uses of dry coconut fronds is as torches, and in a number of languages there
is a polysemous term meaning 'dry coconut leaf and '(coconut leaf) torch' (e.g. Misima wita
'(go) fishing with a lamp; dry coconut leaves ; light made by burning dry coconut leaves ' and
NE Arnbae here 'dry coconut leaf; dry coconut leaf lit and used as a torch' ). Milke (1961)
reconstructs *sulu(q) 'dry coconut leaf torch' for POe (see also vol.1, ch.6, §2.3). On the basis
of the reflexes of this form it seems likely that as in the case ofNE Ambae here, 'dry coconut
leaf was a secondary meaning. Thus, languages like Lukep, Ramoaaina, Uripiv, Mokilese
and Tongan have reflexes with both meanings, and in other languages such as Longgu and
Southeast Ambrym it is only the coconut leaf meaning which has been retained.

<
PMP *suluq 'torch' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *sulu(q) 'dry coconut leaftorch; dry coconut leaf (Milke 1961)
  Adm: Lou              sula-n         'dry coconut leaf
  Adm: Titan            cui            'torch made from coconut fronds for scorching
                                       canoes or for fishing at night'
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) sui               'dry coconut leaf; torch, traditionally made of dry
                                       coconut leaves'
  NNG: Takia            sui            'a torch made from dried coconut fronds '
  MM: Ramoaaina         ulu            'leaf of a coconut palm; coconut leaf or torch'
  SES: Longgu           sulu           'leaf, especially of coconut'
  NCV: Uripiv           na-sul         'coconut frond (especially a dry one) ; a light (the
                                       traditional use for dry coconut fronds) '
  NCV: SE Arnbrym o-sil                'coconut frond '
  NCV: Paamese          (ou-i-)situ    'coconut frond ' (ou 'leaf)
  NCV: Nguna            na-sulu        'torch, flashlight, lamp, light'
     SV:       Lenakel         (na-kou-i- )sal    'coconut frond stalk'
     SV:       Anejom          ni-sei             'coconut leaf midrib'
     Mic:      Kiribati        rin                'dry coconut leaves used for torches'
     Mic:      Mokilese        til                'dry coconut frond, torch'
     Fij:      Rotuman         sulu               'coconut spathe; coconut spathe torch; fish by light
                                                  of burning coconut spathe'
     Pn:       Tongan          hulu               'dry coconut or banana leaves ; show a light or give
                                                  a light, with lantern or torch'
     Pn:       Niuean          hulu               'torch (traditionally made of wooden fibres) ; to
                                                  shine, give off light'
cf. also:
     Fij:      Bauan           suluka             'dry leaves, generally of bananas for rolling
                                                  cigaret1tes'
     Pn:       Samoan          sului              'dry banana leaf (used as wrapper for a Samoan
                                                  cheroolt); cheroot'
>

382         Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


      PWOc *daki had a similar meaning.

<
PWOc *daki 'dry coconut leaf torch'
 PT:   Iduna        daki            'dry coconut leaftorch'
 MM: Susurunga dak                  'dry coconut leaftorch'
>

    POe *ramaR 'coconut leafused as a torch when fishing ', reflecting PMP *damaR 'resin,
torch, light' , is also reconstructable (Ross 1996c: 205; vol.l , ch. 8, § 8). 22 All reflexes indicate
that this term denoted a torch-and specifically a torch used for fishing-rather just a coconut
frond . The Lou and Tongan reflexes suggest that the *ramaR may also have been used as a
verb.

<
PMP *damaR 'torch, light' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *ramaR 'coconut leafused as a torch when fishing ' (Capelll943)
  Adm: Lou           (ka)ram       'torch'
                     ram-ram      (v) 'fish at night by torchlight'
  MM: Kara (E)       lamak         'coconut leafused as a torch'
  Fij:  Bauan        ram a         'cast light on'
                     rama-rama 'lamp of coconut shell filled with oil'
  Pn:   Tongan       ama          (v) 'fish at night by torch-light; torch made of
                                  coconut spathes bound together'
  Pn:   Niue an      ama           'search for crabs, etc. with a torch'
  Pn:   Tikopia      ram a        (N) 'torch of dry coconut frond '; (v) 'fish with
                                  torches'
  Pn:   Samoan       lama          'torch (made of dry coconut leaflets +); fishing
                                  with torches '
  Pn:       Maori           ram a      'torch; eeling with torches'
cf. also:
  PT:       Misima          dam        'coconut leafused as a torch'
>

[22] In vol.l , ch.S, §8, the reconstructed form is *(d)rama(R) , but initial *dr- (as opposed to *r-) is not required
by the data. Final-R is apparently reflected in Kara -k. The usual Kara reflex of *-R is -i; -k is the normal reflex
in neighbouring Tigak.

                                                                                Coconuts       383



    PWOc *bita appears to have the same range of meaning. Although there are only two
known reflexes, the probability of a chance correspondence in form and meaning is so low
that we can have reasonable confidence in the reconstruction.

<
PWOc *bita 'dry coconut frond , dry coconut frond torch; fish at night'
 PT:   Misima        wita           'dry coconut leaves ; light made by burning dry
                                    coconut leaves; (go) fishing with a lamp'
 MM: Nehan           bita           'dry coconut frond, dry coconut frond torch; fish at
                                    night'
>


12.5.1.3 Midrib of the frond

Modem languages tend to have a distinctive term for the midrib or spine of a coconut frond,
e.g. Iduna domoluluna '(main) stalk of coconut leaf , Nduke kilikava- 'stem of coconut frond,
especially at thick end ', Wayan Fijian balotu 'a coconut frond stalk stripped of its leaflets;
the stem of the coconut frond, used for firewood and torches'. There are two candidate terms
for this meaning, POe *bala(p,b )a(q) and POe *sasaRi. Both may have denoted both the palm
frond and the midrib-unsurprisingly, as a midrib is accompanied by its leaflets until they
are stripped off.

<
PMP *p<al>a(q)paq 'midrib of coconut frond ' (Dempwolff 1925)
POe *bala(p,b )a(q) 'palm branch; midrib of palm frond ' (Ross 1996c: *palapa(q))
  Adm: Loniu            palapa       'branch, especially of palm tree ' (for tpalaha)
PPn *palalafa 'stalk and midrib of a coconut frond ' (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan         palalafa     'stalk (or stalk and midrib) of a coconut leaf
  Pn:    Emae           pararafa     'base of fallen coconut frond , still attached to tree'
  Pn:    Pukapukan palelawa          'midrib of coconut leaf
  Pn:    Tikopia        pararafa     'stem of coconut frond , used as small stirrer for
                                     liquids, tiny mallet in tattooing'
cf. also:
  Fij:      Roruman         parafa     'midrib of coconut leaf (loan from Polynesian)
>

    The Fijian reflex of *sasaRi makes the reconstruction of its meaning somewhat unsure.

<
POe *sasaRi 'midrib of coconut frond '
  NNG: Kove           sasali        'midrib'
  NNG: Bariai         sasal         'midrib'
  NNG: Mangap         sasar         'midrib of a coconut leaf
  SES: Longgu         sali-sali     'rip a leaf along its midrib'
cf. also:
     Fij:      Wayan           sasa           'dry coconut frond '
>

384         Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


12.5.1.4 Spine/stalk of leaflet

Our sources often do not distinguish clearly between the frond and the leaflet (both are la-
belled 'leaf). The main use of coconut leaflets is that their dried spines are very commonly
bound together to make brooms, and terms for lthe spine or stalk of leaflet typically relate to
this use. Thus Manam sinoka 'spine of coconut leaves, used for making brooms', Ramoaa-
ina noko 'broom, coconut leaf spine ' and Carolinian sow 'spine of the coconut leaf (used in
weaving, making brooms)' . POe *no(k,g)o evidently denoted both the spines and the broom.

<
POe *no(k,g)o 'midrib or spine of coconut leaflet; broom made therefrom' (Bender et al.
  2003: 61)
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) nolJ-nOIJ         'spine of a coconut leaflet'
  NNG: Sio              no!Jgo        'centre strip of coconut leaf (used in brooms)'
  MM: Ramoaaina         noko          'midrib, small leaf stem; coconut leaf spine; broom'
  MM: Tolai             noko          'midrib of the leaflets of a coconut branch; broom,
                                      especiallly one made from these leaflets'
PMic *noko 'midrib of a coconut frond or leaf
  Mic: Kiribati         noko          'midrib of side leaves of coconut palm'
  Mic: Marshallese      nUI:Jkw       'midrib of a coconut leaf
  Mic: Kosraean         nnk           'midrib'
  Mic: Mokilese         nok           'coconult leaf midrib'
>


12.5.2 The frond netting

The protective netting at the base of the new coconut frond has the appearance of an open-
weave cloth and is used in Oceanic societies for straining liquids, and particularly for wring-
ing coconut 'milk' out of coconut flesh.

    Two POe terms are reconstructable. The first, *kaka seems to have denoted the netting
material itself, or perhaps the young frond within it. The second, *Runut, perhaps denoted
the material in its function as a strainer.23 In vol.l (ch.6, §5.6) a metathesised form *nuRut is
also reconstructed on the basis of the Motu, Tolai and Mota reflexes. It is possible that this
form did indeed occur, but it is also possible that metathesis occurred independently in two
or three locations. Misima lulusi and Tawala luluhi are borrowings from a Suauic language
like Saliba: the addition of -i after final consonants is unique to Suauic. These two forms and
Saliba lulusi all display consonant assimilation (the expected Saliba form is tlunusi) and it
is impossible to tell whether they reflect *Runut or *nuRut.

<
POe *kaka 'young coconut frond ; coconut frond netting protecting young frond '
     MM:       Patpatar        kaka           'new coconut frond that has not opened yet'
  NCV: NEfate          kak           'coconut mat, mesh formed by the coconut palm,
                                     used for straining liquids'
  NCV: S Efate          kak          'coconut mesh'
PPn *kaka 'clothlike fibre surrounding base of coconut fronds' (POLLEX)
  Pn:    Tongan         kaka         'fibrous integument at the top of coconut palms'
  Pn:    Niuean         (lau)kaka    'the fibrous wrapping round the base of a young
                                     coconut frond'
  Pn:    Tikopia        kaka         'fibre of base of coconut palm (not sago palm) used
                                     traditionally to make filter sheet in turmeric
                                     extraction etc'
  Pn:    E Futunan kaka              'brown fibrous material that grows on coconut tree'
  Pn:    Samoan         ?a?a         'coarse fibrous material found at the base of coconut
                                     leaves and used for strainers etc'
  Pn:    Nukuoro        gaga         'fibrous sheathing (at the base ofthe petiole sheath
                                     ofthe fllower) ofthe coconut tree'
  Pn:    Tahitian       ?a?a         'brown fibrous membrane at base of coconut fronds;
                                     similar substance at base of leaves of sugarcane,
                                     bamboo and reeds'
  Pn:    Hawaiian       ?a-?a?a      'coconut cloth, vascular bundles in taro corm, chaff;
                                     fibrous"
>

[23] vol.l , ch.6, §5.6, refers to the frond netting as the ' spathe' of the frond. Technically this is correct, but we
prefer not to use the term here in order to avoid confusion with the spathe of the coconut flower (§5 .3).

                                                                            Coconuts    385


<
PMP *Runut 'plant fibres' (Blust 1984)
POe *Runut 'sheath around base of coconut frond, used as strainer' (Ross 1996c: 203)
  NNG: Gitua             run          'sheath around base of coconut frond, used as
                                      strainer'
  PT:     Misima         lulusi       'fine matting growing around base of coconut
                                      leaves, used as a sieve' (Suauic borrowing)
  PT:     Taw ala        luluhi       (N) 'sheath around base of coconut frond'; (v)
                                      'strain, purify, improve' (Suauic borrowing)
  PT:     Suau (Saliba) lulusi        'coconut tissue, used as a strainer'
  PT:     Motu          nuru          'fibrous substance that grows around base of
                                      coconut frond; the stipule; coarse cloth; a sack'
                                      (metathesis)
  MM:     Tolai          nirut        'leaf-root mesh of coconut tree' (metathesis and
                                      vowell dissimilation)
  NCV: Mota              nir          'fibrous spathe of coconut frond, used to strain
                                      sago' (metathesis and vowel dissimilation)
  NCV: Paamese           (ii)un       'cloth-like material at top of coconut tree'
  NCal: Pije             ufi          'fibrous spathe of coconut frond; husk of coconut'
  Mic: Kiribati          i!J          'fibre enveloping base of palm leaf and attaching it
                                      to the trunk, used as a filter'
  Mic:    Puluwatese     (ese) win    'coconut cloth'
  Mic:    Ulithian       il           'coconut cloth'
  Fij:    Wayan          unu          'strainer for kava, in earlier times made of bark
                                      cloth, now usually muslin or any fine cloth'
  Pn:      E Futunan      unu           'kava strainer made of bourao fibres '
  Pn:      Samoan         unu           'woven wringer, used to extract dye from shreds of
                                        Bischofia tree bark etc '
>


386     Malcolm Ross and Bethwyn Evans


12.5.3 The spathe, the inflorescence and the spadix

                                            There was perhaps no separate term in most
                                            Oceanic languages for the inflorescence of the
 Flower bunch                               coconut. Some languages do have separate non-
(inflorescence)                             cognate terms for coconut blossoms, e.g. Gapa-
                                            paiwa sisina, Gumawana niyola, Misima ldmun ,
                                            Paamese voha, Anejom nacomw, but far fewer
                                            than have a term for 'spathe' . Perhaps they were
                                            simply 'flowers' , labelled by the general term
                                            POe *pu!Ja 'flower, blossom' (ch.4, §2.7).
                                                Terms for the boat-shaped spathe, shown in
                                            Figure 12.3, and for the spadix (the branching
Figure 12.3 Coconut blossom and spathe)
                                            flower stalk which becomes the stalk of a bunch
                                            of coconuts) are more common, although some
languages do not distinguish between the two, whilst others have more than one term. The
spathe is used for firewood and as a bowl or tray. Sugary sap can be tapped from the flower
stalk (French 1986: 31). Sample terms are listed below. PPn had a term *loso-loso 'coconut
spadix; coconut spathe ' (POLLEx), reflected in most Polynesian languages.

__pre__
   Adm: Titan            pd"rol        'sheath of flower of the coconut palm, when dry;
                                       used as firewood '
   NNG: Numbami          wawanzi!Ja    'sheath over coconut blossoms (used as tray)'
   PT:  Iduna            lelewaka      '(split) pod of coconut; covers kakaiyona
                         kakaiyo-na    'twigs, hand on which coconuts grow'
   PT:      Taw ala      ken a         'sheath covering new coconut flowers '
   MM:      Nduke        rereto-       'spathe ofthe coconut, the 'boat' that accompanies
                                       the flowers and baby coconuts'
                         bayutu-       'stem that supports the flowers, and later the fruit,
                                       of the coconut'
   SES:     Gel a        mbagona       'spathe of coconut flowers '
                         tu            'spathe of coconut flowers'
                         liliki        'flower case of coconut'
   Fij:     Wayan        samoa         'hard sheath or calyx enclosing flower of coconut
                                       (used as torch); coconut flower before sheath bursts '
   Pn:      Tikopia      taume         'coconut spathe, when dry used for fuel '

   The Wayan and Tikopia terms above reflect POe *jamu((q)a) which, however, evidently
had the more general sense 'cluster of flowers or fruit, usually palms' (ch.4, §2. 8). If there
was a dedicated POe term for the coconut spathe and/or spadix, we have been unable to
reconstruct it.

                                                                                   Coconuts     387


12.6 Conclusion

The importance of the coconut in POe culture is attested-as we might expect- by a sub-
stantial collection of terms for its growth stages, especially for those that are salient to its
consumers (green drinking coconut, ripe coconut with hardened flesh), for its parts (its wa-
ter, its flesh and coconut cream/milk, the 'apple ', the husk) and for certain parts of the palm
(the frond and its midrib, the spines of the frond ' s leaflets and the frond netting). Not surpris-
ingly, some of these terms are inseparable from the functions for which they are used (shells
and cups made from them; dried fronds , frond torches and torch fishing; leaflet spines and
brooms; frond netting and strainers).




13 Other cultivateliplants

13.1 Introduction

In his study of the uses of plants in central Pacific societies, Thaman (1994) shows that a
number of plants are cultivated for purposes other than food production, an observation that
equally applies to NW Island Melanesia. There are a number of such plants that have probably
been cultivated in the Bismarcks since Proto Oceanic (POe) times. The evidence of longtime
cultivation lies in the domesticated varieties of certain plants that only occur under cultiva-
tion (sugarcane, Morinda citrifolia, Codiaeum variegatum, Cordyline fruticosa , Dracaena
angustifolia and Heliconia indica) and in the fact that some plants (sugarcane, some bamboo
species, kava and Broussonetia papyrifera) only reproduce through the planting of cuttings
and have no immediate wild relatives. Evidence that they have quite possibly been cultivated
continuously since POe times is provided by the POe reconstructions in this chapter.

    The plants treated in this chapter are used in a variety of ways. First there are those which
are consumed by human beings but do not readily fall under the headings of earlier chapters:
sugarcane is sucked to extract the sugar, betelnut is used as a stimulant, kava as a narcotic
(§2). Then come plants which provide materials for making things: bamboo, the candlenut
for illumination and black dyes, the paper mulberry for making bark cloth, and the Indian
mulberry for yellow and red dyes (§3). Fish poisons are treated in §4, turmeric and ginger,
which have various uses, in §5, plants with large colourful leaves used for decoration and
for magic in §6 and cucurbits in §7. The pumpkin and the cucumber are of course foods, but
cucurbits are discussed here, at the end of the volume, because (i) there is a question regarding
the dating of the pumpkin' s introduction(s) into Oceania and (ii) they do not readily belong
in any of chapters 9 to 12.


13.2 Plants grown for human consumption

13.2.1 Saccharum officinarum, sugarcane, TP suga (Poaceae)

Sugarcane, Saccharum officinarum belongs to the family Poaceae, i.e., it is a grass, and is
closely related to the wild species S. spontaneum (ch.8, §3.4).


390   Malcolm Ross


    Sugarcane is a domesticate, only planted from cuttings, and numerous varieties are found
in gardens all over lowland and highland areas ofNW Melanesia. Sugarcane prospers espe-
cially where the soil is moist and rich (Paijmans 1976: 125-126, Kwa' ioloa & Burt2001: 204,
Hviding 2005: 148). The jointed, fibrous stalks contain sucrose, obtained by cutting off a stem
and chopping it into convenient lengths which are sucked and chewed as a refreshing snack.
When the sugar has been sucked out, the rubbish is spat out.

    The POe term *topu 'sugarcane, Saccharum officinarum' continues PAn *tebuS and is
continued throughout Oceanic except in Polynesian, where reflexes attest to PPn *to 'sugar-
cane' rather than expected t*tofu .

<
PAn *tebuS 'sugarcane' (Blust 1969)
POe *topu 'sugarcane, Saccharum officinarum' (Capel11943)
  Adm: Mussau            tou          'sugarcane '
  Adm: Seimat            topu         'sugarcane '
  Adm: Pak               tuo          'sugarcane '
  NNG: Maenge            tau          'sugarcane '
  NNG: Tuam              tov          'sugarcane '
  NNG: Lukep (Po no) to               'sugarcane '
  NNG: Gedaged           tou          'sugarcane '
  NNG: Man am            tou          'sugarcane '
  PT:    Wedau           tom          'sugarcane '
  PT:    Bwaidoga        tovu         'sugarcane '
  PT:    Duau            tohu         'sugarcane '
  PT:    Suau (Saliba) tou            'sugarcane '
  PT:    Motu            tohu         'sugarcane '
  MM: Vitu               tovu         'sugarcane '
  MM: Nakanai            tovu         'sugarcane '
  MM: Tangga             tuf          'sugarcane '
  MM: Siar               tu           'sugarcane '
  MM: Mono-Alu           tohu         'sugarcane '
  MM: Marovo             tovu         'sugarcane '
  TM: Burna              luro         'coconut'
  TM: Nebao              na-na        'coconut'
  TM: Asuboa             u-fiio       'coconut'
  TM: Tanabili           no-fiio      'coconut'
  SES: Gel a             tovu         'sugarcane '
  SES: Kwara' ae         ufu          'sugarcane '
  SES: Arosi            ohu           'sugarcane '
  NCV: Mota              tou          'sugarcane '
  NCV: Mwotlap           tow          'sugarcane '
  NCV: NEAmbae           tovu         'sugarcane '
  NCV: Araki             rovu         'sugarcane '
  NCV: Tamambo           tovu         'sugarcane '
  NCV: Nokuku            tov[u]       'sugarcane '
  NCV: Kiai              tovo         'sugarcane '
  NCV:      Raga          toi                   'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Naman         ni-cav                'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Neve'ei       netev                 'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Larevat       n-sev                 'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Uripiv        na-tiv                'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Port Sandwich na-roev               'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Paamese       a-tehi                'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Lewo          (puru)tevi            'sugarcane'
  NCV:      Namakir       tov                   'sugarcane'
  SV:       N Tanna       na-tap                'sugarcane'
  SV:       Lenakel       na-ruw                'sugarcane'
  SV:       SWTanna       na-tukw               'sugarcane'
  SV:       Anejom        ne-to                 'sugarcane'
  NCal:     Iaai          (aa)kii               'sugarcane'
  NCal:     Xaracuu       de                    'sugarcane'
  Mic:      Kiribati      tou                   'fruit ofthe pandanus, chewed like sugarcane '
  Mic:      Kosraean      tl1.                  'sugarcane'
  Mic:      Po nape an    sew                   'sugarcane'
  Mic:      Woleaian      wow                   'sugarcane'
  Mic:      Puluwatese    wow                   'sugarcane'
  Mic:      Chuukese      wow                   'sugarcane'
  Fij:      Wayan         tovu                  'sugarcane'
  Fij:      Bauan         dovu                  'sugarcane'
cf. also:
  Mic:      Marshallese        taw              'sugarcane' (probably a loan, according to Bender
                                                et aL 2003)
>


                                                                            Other cultivated plants   391


13.2.2 Stimulants and narcotics

One traditional stimulant, the betelnut, Areca catechu (§2.2.1 ), and one traditional narcotic,
kava, Piper methysticum (§2.2.3) are in more or less complementary distribution in Ocea-
nia. Betelnut is chewed throughout New Guinea and NW Island Melanesia, whilst kava is
consumed in Vanuatu, Fiji, Tonga and Samoa. The one point where the betelnut and kava
domains overlapped was Vanikoro, to the east of the main Solomons archipelago (Darrell
Tryon, pers. comm.). There were also locations in the small islands of the Admiralties and
along the coast of the Madang Province of Papua New Guinea, i.e. in the betelnut domain,
where kava was also used, having apparently found its way there from its place of domesti-
cation in Vanuatu.

13.2.2.1 Areca catechu, betel palm, betelnut, TP buai, P bilnat, natnat (Arecaceae)

Areca catechu is a slender palm which grows up to 30 m. Its crown is smaller relative to its
height than that of a coconut, and leaflets are less densely spaced. A many-branched flower
cluster develops below the leaf spathe, and the fruit develop from the flowers. The resulting
branched cluster of fruit is a familiar sight in markets in lowland Papua New Guinea. The
fruit consists of a seed enclosed in a thin green skin and a hard fibrous pericarp, i.e. husk
(Figure 13.1, left).

392    Malcolm Ross


                                                D


Figure 13.1 Left: Areca catechu, betelnut: A, tree; B, portion of inflorescence; C, portion of fruit
cluster; D, fruit: longitudinal section showing fibrous exocarp and inner chewed 'nut' . Right: Piper
betle: E, plant; F, G, H, flowering shoots of three varieties.


    Chewing betelnut as a stimulant is widespread in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon
Islands, but not in other parts of the Pacific. Palms are grown in village groves or singly near
houses. The seed may be chewed alone, but usually people chew a quid consisting of the seed,
lime and a catkin or leaf of Piper bette (§2.2.2) (Paijmans 1976: 135). 1 Chewing the seed
induces salivation, and if lime is present it turns the chewed mass bright red. Some people
swallow all but the initial burst of saliva, whilst others spit out the red masticate. Initially,
chewing leads to a very short-lived dizziness, folllowed by a sense of renewed wakefulness. In
Papua New Guinea and parts of the Solomons chewing betelnut is a social ritual when people
meet. Convention requires that the host offer betelnut to visitors (Henderson & Hancock
1988: 146). The husk of the fruit is sometimes used to clean the teeth after chewing, as the
quid causes uncleaned teeth to tum dark brown.

    Like other palms, the trunk of the betel pallm can be split and the outer wood used for
walling or flooring. In the western Solomons, liquid is squeezed from the husk into the eyes
of conjunctivitis sufferers.

[1] Lime is made by crushing coral or shells, burning them to produce calcium oxide, then slaking this to produce
calcium hydroxide (R.M. Bourke, pers. comm.).

                                                                           Other cultivated plants        393


    POe *buaq 'Areca catechu' is unusual, as both it and POe *puaq 'fruit' evidently reflect
a single etymon, PMP *buaq, which had many meanings. Blust (ACD) gives the following
glosses:

      fruit; areca palm and nut; grain; berry; s1~ed; nut; endosperm of a sprouting coconut;
      kidney; heart; finger; calf of the leg; testicle; various insects; scar tissue; roe; bud; flower;
      blossom; bear fruit; words, speech, or songs; meaning, contents of discussion; numeral
      classifier for roundish objects.

He makes the following observations:

         1. PMP *buaq formed the head of many head-attribute constructions which
            functioned as the names of particular fruits (*buaq kuluR 'breadfruit', *buaq
            niuR 'coconut', *buaq pahuq 'mango ', *buaq punti 'banana', etc.) .. ..
         2. PMP *buaq almost certainly functioned in addition as a numeral classifier
            which applied to roundish or fruit like objects . ...
         3. Most WMP and CMP reflexes support an inference that the meanings 'fruit'
            and 'areca nut' were associated with the same morpheme, but the Oc[eanic]
            evidence suggests that there were two homophonous morphemes. I assume
            that one morpheme expressed both meanings, but that in POe these mean-
            ings become disassociated and connected respectively with oral and nasal
            grade reflexes ofPMP *buaq (POe *puaq 'fruit', *mpuaq [our POe *buaq]
            'betel [areca] nut') . ..

Quite how this disassociation occurred is not clear, as no other similar cases are known. In
vol. 1 (ch.2, §2.4), I explained that PMP *band *p merged then split again into POe *band
*p. As a result, one cannot predict whether a PMP etymon with initial *b- will begin with
POe *b- or with POe *p--but PMP *buaq is the only etymon known to have both outcomes,
in POe *buaq 'betel [areca] nut' and POe *puaq 'fruit' .

    Frantisek Lichtenberk (1998) examines the question of whether POe speakers chewed
betelnut, concluding that they did, since a suite of terms associated with betel chewing can
be reconstructed. Certainly there are no grounds in the set below for thinking that POe *buaq
was diffused across Oceanic languages rather than continued from POe. The easternmost
limit of betelnut-chewing is in the Temotu Province ofthe Solomons, but *buaq is reflected
in Southern Vanuatu, where it is applied to palms of other kinds (John Lynch, pers. comm.).

<
PAn *buaq 'fruit' (AcD)
PMP *buaq 'roundish or fruit-like object, including betelnut, Areca catechu' (see above for
  the full ACD gloss)
POe *buaq 'betelnut, areca nut, palm, Areca catechu' (Capell1943: *pua(q))
  Adm: Mussau             (ai) bua      'Areca catechu'
  Adm: Loniu              hue           'Areca catechu' (Nevermann 1934)
  Adm: Nyindrou           puii          'Areca catechu'
  SJ:      Sobei          pue           'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Tami               bu            'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Kove               vua           'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Bariai             bua           'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Lukep              bu            'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Yabem              bu?           'Areca catechu'
  NNG: Man am        bua                           'Areca catechu'
  PT:  Gabadi        bua(kau)                      'Areca catechu'
  PT:  Motu          bua(tau)                      'Areca catechu'
  PT:  Kilivila      bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Vitu           bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Bola           bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Nakanai        bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Tolai          bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Notsi          bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Tabar          bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Tangga         bu                            'Areca catechu'
  MM: Tomoip         bu                            'Areca catechu'
  MM: Halia (Selau)  boko                          'Areca catechu'
  MM: Taiof          bok                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Tinputz        poe                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Banoni         buyava                        'Areca catechu' (metathesis of *bu(v )aya)
  MM: Uruava         bua                           'Areca catechu'
  MM: Torau          buka                          'Areca catechu' (metathesis of *buak)
  TM: Burna          buioe                         'Areca catechu'
  TM: Tanema         boie                          'Areca catechu'
  SES: Gel a         bua                           'Areca catechu'
  SES: Arosi         bua                           'Areca catechu'
  SES: W Guadalcanal bua                           'Areca catechu'
  SES: Talise        bua                           'Areca catechu'
  SES: Kwaio         bua                           'Areca catechu'
  SES: 'Are ' are    pua                           'Areca catechu'
  SV:  Lenakel       na-pwo(k)                     'palm sp.'
  SV:  Kwamera       na-puei                       'coconut'
>

394    Malcolm Ross


13.2.2.2 Piper bette (syn. Chavica bette) , betel pepper, TP daka (Piperaceae)

The betel pepper vine, Piper bette, is a woody climber with catkins, pendulous spikes of
berries in a crowded mass forming a cylindrical syncarp (a composite fruit) (Figure 13.1 ,
right). It climbs on Erythrina indica and Artocarpus incisa. The catkins and/or leaves are
chewed with betelnut, Areca catechu (§2.2.1), and lime throughout the Bismarck Archipelago
and the Solomons (Peekel1984: 124, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001:226, Hviding 2005: 115).

    The reconstruction of POe *[pu- ]pulu 'betel pepper, Piper bette' is taken from Lichten-
berk' s (1998) discussion of whether POe speakers chewed betelnut. His reconstruction of
POe *pulu is based partly on data assembled for the present project, with the addition of
Chamorro pu-pulu 'Piper bette', supporting the: PMP reconstruction, and a Manam reflex. I
add Mussau ulo.

<
PMP *pu-pulu 'Piper bette' (Frantisek Lichtenberk 1998)
POe *[pu- ]pulu 'betel pepper, Piper bette' (Frantisek Lichtenberk 1998: *pulu)
  Adm: Mussau            ulo           'betel pepper, Piper bette'
  Adm: Loniu             pun           'betel pepper, Piper bette'
  Adm: Bipi               pun                  'betel leaf
                          (pue)pun             'betel pepper'
  NNG:      Lukep (Po no) ul                   'betel pepper, Piper bette'
  NNG:      Takia         ful                  'betel pepper, Piper bette'
  NNG:      Gedaged       fu                   'betel pepper, Piper bette' (expected final-/ missing)
  NNG:      Manam         ulu(salaga)          'big variety of betel vine' (salaga 'be long')
                                               (Frantisek Lichtenberk 1998)
  SES:      Bugotu           vu-vulu           'betel pepper, Piper bette' (Henderson & Hancock
                                               1988)
>

                                                                       Other cultivated plants   395


<
PMM *siqa(r,R)(a) 'betel pepper, Piper bette'
 MM: Kara (E)         sie           'Piper bette'
 MM: Tabar            sia           'Piper bette'
 MM: Lihir            sie           'Piper bette'
 MM: Patpatar         sier          'Piper bette'
 MM: Tolai            ier           'Piper bette'
 MM: Nehan            hiara         'Piper bette'
 MM: Petats           sit           'Piper bette'
 MM: Teop             hia(kuru)     'Piper erectum'
 MM: Tinputz          (ta)sian      'Piper bette'
 MM: Banoni           siyana        'betel pepper catkin'
cf. also:
  MM:       Marovo         hirata            'Piper bette'
>


13.2.2.3 Piper methysticum, kava (Piperaceae)

                                             The kava plant, Piper methysticum, is a many
                                             branching plant with rounded green leaves. The
                                             plant is grown, usually near houses, exclusively
                                             from cuttings, and a narcotic is made from it
                                             in parts of Remote Oceania. Traditionally kava
                                             is consumed as a drink. The root is first re-
                                             duced to small fragments by chewing, grinding
                                             or pounding. The fragments are deposited in a
                                             bowl, mixed with water and strained through
                                             the cloth-like fibre of a coconut spathe (ch.12,
                                             §5.3) to give a cloudy grey liquid (Paijmans
                                             1976: 135). In Fiji, Tonga and Samoa the liquid
                                             is made from mature roots, is of low strength
Figure 13.2 Leaves, stem and plant habit of and plays a part in various ceremonies. In Van-
kava, Piper methysticum                      uatu it is made from the roots of green plants
and often has a much greater narcotic effect. Initially it causes the blood vessels in the lips
and tongue to contract with a certain numbing effect. The drinker then senses some degree of
euphoria, followed by a sense of calm well-being and clear thinking and a general relaxation
of the muscles.

396       Malcolm Ross



     Kava is also consumed in scattered areas of New Guinea and the Bismarcks. In fact the
only Oceanic-speaking areas in this region where it is or was drunk are the small southeast-
em islands of the Admiralties (Lou, Pam and Baluan; Brunton 1988) and among the Takia
ofKarkar Island, where in the 1980s some older men told me that it had been drunk within
their lifetimes. The Takia were traditionally in contact with Papuan-speaking villages on
the Rai Coast (the north coast of the mainland east of Madang) where Mikloucho-Maclay
(Mikloucho-Maclay 1886, 1975) reported that the kava root was chewed by some inhab-
itants of just a few villages. Bourke ( 1990) considers that the limited distribution of kava
indicates recent introduction, and Miklouho-Maclay noted in 1886 that it had only recently
been introduced to the Rai Coast.

     Paw ley & Green ( 1973) proposed a POe reconstruction *kawa 'Piper methysticum'. How-
ever, the facts that Piper methysticum only occurs in domesticated form and that it is not
generally consumed in Oceanic-speaking communities in the Bismarcks imply that it was
not present there in POe times, and that we should not expect to be able to reconstruct a POe
term for it. The origin of kava has attracted a good deal of debate, both botanical and linguis-
tic, over the past 35 years, partly because of its presence at New Guinea locations (Brunton
1988, Lebot 1989, Lebot et al. 1992, T. Crowley 1994, Lynch 2002a).

     The best supported hypothesis appears to be that Piper methysticum is a domesticated va-
riety of Piper subbullatum (syn. P. wichmannii),2 a plant of similar appearance which grows
wild in the Solomons (Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 206), and that this domestication took place
in northern Vanuatu. The linguistic evidence for this position is presented by Lynch (2002a) .
He reconstructs a POe term *kawaRi, which he glosses as 'root with special properties: one or
more of Zingiber zerumbet, Piper subbullatum, fish-poison plants' , i.e. as a generic term for
what in the title of his article he calls 'potent roots '. He points out that none of the apparently
directly inherited reflexes of *kawaRi outside Vanuatu, Fiji and Polynesia means 'kava' or
'Piper methysticum'. Only reflexes with a form that suggests borrowing have this meaning.
The evidence suggests that POe *kawaRi is reconstructable, but only with the 'potent roots '
meaning. Only in northern Vanuatu and regions settled from it (the rest of Vanuatu, Fiji and
Polynesia) do we find directly inherited reflexes denoting 'kava' or' Piper methysticum'. The
reconstructions and directly inherited reflexes below are from (Lynch 2002a), except where
shown.[3]

<
POe *kawaRi 'root(s) with special properties: one or more of Zingiber zerumbet, Piper
  subbullatum, and various fish-poison plants' (Lynch 2002a)4
  Adm: Baluan             kau               'Piper subbullatum' (Ambrose 1991)
  NNG: Sissano            (una)kaw          'k.o. ginger'
  PT:    Muyuw            ka-kawowa         'Piper sp.'
  PT:   Gapapaiwa         kaware            'k.o. ginger'
  PT:   Tubetube          kalava            'Piper subbullatum (?)' (metathesis)
  MM: Maringe             khori             '(use) fish poison'
PROc *kawa 'kava'; presumably also 'ginger, fish-poison plants'
PNCV *kea 'kava; sour, bitter' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Lehali             n-ya              'kava'
  NCV: Mota               yea               'kava'
  NCV: Mwotlap            na-ya             'kava'
  NCV: Vera' a            yie               'kava'
  NCV: Mwesen             ye                'kava'
  NCV: Vera' a            yie               'kava; sour, bitter'
  NCV: Vures              ye                'kava; sour, bitter'
  NCV: Araki              hae               'kava; sour, bitter'
  NCV: Lewo               (wi)kawa          'brackish water' (wi 'water')'
PCP *kawa 'kava, Piper sp., fish-poison plants; sour, bitter'; probably also 'Zingiber spp.'
  Fij:  Bauan             (wa)gawa-gawa 'Piper bette'
  Fij:  Nadroga           kawa              'fish-poison tree, Euphorbia sp. (?)'
  Fij:  Lautoka           kawa              'fish-poison vine, Derris sp.'
  Fij:  (many dialects) kawa                'k.o. round fish-trap with mouth on top, made from
                                            Derris vines'
PPn *kawa 'kava; sour, bitter'
  Pn:   Tongan            kava              'kava'
  Pn:   W Futunan         kava              'kava'
  Pn:   Samoan            ?ava              'kava'
                          ?a-?ava           'pungent, acrid'
  Pn:   Hawaiian          ?ava              'kava; sour, bitter'
  Pn:   Rarotongan        kava              'kava; sour'
  Pn:   Maori             kawa              'sour, bitter; perform certain kinds of ceremony'
  Pn:   Maori             kawa-kawa         'Macropiper excelsum'
>

[2] Anthropological and linguistic literature on the origins of kava usually retains the species name wichmannii,
but the accepted botanical name is subbullatum (R. Gardiner, pers. comm.).

[3] This summary by no means does justice to Lynch's (2002) article, to which the reader is referred for further
detail.

[4] The term 'kava' in the glosses here probably means both the plant and the drink: sources use it without further
specification.

                                                              Other cultivated plants     397


   The denotations ofPCP *kawa as 'Piper sp.', 'Zingiber spp.' and 'fish-poison plant' are
continued as compounds in PPn:

<
Proto Nuclear Polynesian *kawa-kawa qatua 'a shrub or vine, Piper sp.'
  Pn:    E Futunan kava-kava atua 'a climbing vine, Piper vaupelii'
  Pn:    Marquesan kava-kava atua 'Piper latifolium, Piper tristachyon'
  Pn:    Rarotongan kava-kava atua 'a shrub, Piper latifolium'
>

<
PPn *kawa-sasa 'a creeper used to poison fish'
  Pn:   Tongan        kava-haha 'Derris trifoliata, used as a fish poison'
  Pn:   E Futunan kava-sasa         'a vine'
  Pn:   Samoan        ?ava-sa       'shrub sp., T ephrosia purpurea sp., used to poison
                                    fish'
PPn *kawa-susu 'shrub sp., Tephrosia sp., used to poison fish '
  Pn:      Niuean          kau-huhu        'a plant used to stupefy fish'
  Pn:      E Uvean         kava-huhu       'shrub sp., Tephrosia piscatoria'
  Pn:      E Futunan       kava-susu       'shrub sp., the leaves of which are used to poison
                                           fish '
  Pn:      Nukuoro         gava-usu        'Barringtonia asiatica, used to poison fish '
>

398     Malcolm Ross

<
Proto Nuclear Polynesian *kawa-pui 'a plant, Zingiber sp. '
  Pn:      Tikopia         kava-pui        'plant of the ginger family '
  Pn:      E Uvean         kava-pui        'Zingiber sp.; white ginger, H edychium
                                           coronarium' 5
  Pn:      Anutan          kava-pui        'Alpinia sp. '
  Pn:      Samoan          ?ava-pui        'a herb, Zingiber zerumbet'
  Pn:      Hawaiian        ?awa-puhi       'wild ginger, Zingiber zerumbet'
  Pn:      Tahitian        ava-puhi        'an odiferous plant'
>


13.3 Plants which provide materials for making things

13.3.1 Bambusa, Schizostachyum andNastus spp., bamboo, TP mambu, Bbambu (Poaceae)

Three genera of bamboos are represented in NW Island Melanesia: Bambusa, Schizostachyum
and N astus. They are treated together here, since only one of the reconstructable terms can
be related to a particular species. A number of species are often cultivated.

     Three species of Bambusa, all thick-walled, are reported from the region. The most com-
mon in the Bismarcks and the largest in the Solomons is B. vulgaris, with a culm (walled stem)
about 5-10 m high and 10--15 em in diameter and a short internode distance around 30-50 em.
However, B. vulgaris was introduced after European contact (Rhys Gardner, pers. comm.)
and was not among the denotata of the POe terms below. B. blumeana is very similar and
apparently important only in Malaita. B. forbesii , reported from the Bismarcks, is smaller,
with a culm 2-4 m high and 1-4 em diameter,, and has broad leaves (Peekel 1984: 55-56,
Henderson & Hancock 1988: 203-205).

     Bambusa bamboos are used in housing construction for beams and rafters, as well as
to make containers for lime and water and tongs for lifting the hot stones of a stone oven
(Henderson & Hancock 1988: 204--205). At Marovo they are used to make large traditional
tuna-fishing rods and a whole stem serves as a 'ladder' to climb sago palms in order to cut
its fronds (Hviding 2005: 117).

     Two species of the thin-walled genus Schizostachyum are reported from the region. No
comparative account is available, but the two appear similar. S. lima, found in the Bismarcks,
has a culm about 4--8 m high and 4--10 em in diameter, with internode lengths of 50-80 em
(Peekel 1984: 55). S. tessellatum, found in the Solomons, is described as tall and very thin,
growing wild in many habitats in clumps 10 m tall. It is the only bamboo amongst the three
genera that is observed to flower regularly

5 H. coronarium has apparently arrived since European c:ontact.

                                                                                Other cultivated plants         3 99


     Schizostachyum species are a source of very straight, lightweight poles with many pur-
poses: as battens from which to hang sago leaf thatch, as yam poles, as small fishing rods and
as spears. Pieces of Schizostachyum are used to make traditional panpipes and coconut scrap-
ers. They are also used as fencing material (Henderson & Hancock 1988:202-203, Hviding
2005: 107, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 202).

     Three species of the thin-walled genus
N astus are reported from the region. One is
N. productus, a small, often drooping bamboo.
A second is N. obtusus, a very slender bam-
boo which is almost always cultivated and at-
tains heights of over 20 m with stem diame-
ters of 8-11 em and internode lengths of 50
em to a metre. A third N astus species is not
given a scientific name,6 but sources describe
it as pliant and behaving as a tree or ground
creeper. It has very short internode lengths and
small, narrow leaves (Peekel 1984: 55, Hen-
derson & Hancock 1988: 177, Kwa' ioloa &
Burt 2001: 200--201).

     The first two N astus species, and espe-
cially N. obtusus, have similar uses to those of
Schizostachyum , but the third N astus species
is considered by the Kwara'ae to be useless
(Henderson & Hancock 1988: 176, 199-201,
Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001:200--202, Hviding
2005: 112).

     The term reconstructed as *qauR 'bamboo
spp. ' below was probably the generic term for            Figure 13.3 N astus obtusus
bamboos of the three genera mentioned above,
as it still is in some modem languages. In Tolai,
for example, we find the following:

__pre__
   MM:      Tolai            kaur                 'Bambusa vulgaris'
   MM:      Tolai            kaurluba!J           'Bambusa vulgaris, larger variety'
   MM:      Tolai            kaur goragoro        'Schizostachyum lima'
   MM:      Tolai            kaurlaur             'thin·-walled bamboo species'

    PAn *qauR 'bamboo' is attested in Fom1osan languages, PMP *qauR 'bamboo' in lan-
guages across Indonesia (Blust, ACD ), and a number of Oceanic languages have reflexes in-
dicating POe *qauR . However, there are als:o a number of languages that reflect initial *k-
rather than *q- , and I show below the POe segments seemingly reflected by the consonant(s)
of each form in order to illuminate the discussion here. In those Remote Oceanic languages
which reflect POe *k- and *q- differently from one another the form indeed reflects initial
*q-. However, in Meso-Melanesian languages which reflect POe *k- and *q- differently and
in Temotu languages the form reflects *k-, not *q-.

[6] Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001 : 202) label it N . productus, but this does not coincide with others ' descriptions of the
latter.

400       Malcolm Ross


    On the basis ofMeso-Melanesian reflexes POe *kauR 'bamboo' was reconstructed as in
vol.l (ch.4, §6.2). However, non-Oceanic and Remote Oceanic data support *qauR. 7

    Among languages which retain a reflex of the final consonant, Mussau and Petats reflect
*d or *dr, rather than *R, and Nakanai reflects *s or *c. [8] The Bilibil, Gedaged and Sio forms
reflect final *-R where the final consonant is normally lost.

    Blust (1984) reconstructed POe *kaudru [9] 'bamboo sp.' to account for the Mussau, Petats
and Selau forms. [10] However, it does not account for the other irregularities below, and its
putative reflexes are here treated as (albeit irregular) reflexes of POe *qauR. Instead, the sim-
plest linguistic explanation of these irregularities is that the forms reflect borrowings among
neighbouring Oceanic languages. Indeed, it is possible that some of the forms with regular
reflexes also result from borrowings, but happen to have regular reflexes of the consonants.
However, it is not easy to see why such borrowings might have occurred, unless much of
Near Oceania lacked useful bamboo species, and new species were imported by Oceanic
speakers. Hviding (2005: 107, 112, 117) hints at this when he writes that old people say that
B. vulgaris, B. blumeana, N. obtusus and a Schizostachyum species were all long ago in-
troduced to Marovo from elsewhere. It is just possible that some of these borrowings were
associated with the introduction of B. vulgaris after contact with Europeans.

[7] I am grateful to Fran~oise Ozanne-Rivierre and John Lynch for drawing my attention to this.

[8] POe *R is reflected as Mussau, Nakanai and Petats l.

[9] In Blust's orthography *kaundu.

[10] This reconstruction is maintained in the ACD in the notes to the entry for *qauR.

<
PAn *qauR 'bamboo sp.' (AcD)
PMP *qauR 'type of large bamboo' (AcD)
POe *qauR 'bamboo spp.'
 Adm: Mussau              kauru    *krvq                   *drvdr             'large bamboo from which
                                                                              combs are made'
     NNG:     Mangap                kau-kau      *krvq                        'bamboo (big)'
     NNG:     Bilibil               aur          *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo'
     NNG:     Gedaged               aui          *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo, tall with thick
                                                                              walls'
     NNG:     Sio                   kaul(a)      *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo'
     NNG:     Lukep (Po no)         kau-kau      *krvq                        'bamboo'
     NNG:     Atui                  kaur         *krvq     *rrvRrvdrvdr       'bamboo'
     NNG:     Akolet                e-kaur       *krvq     *rrvRrvdrvdr       'bamboo'
     MM:      Bali                  kaura        *k        *rrvR              'bamboo'
     MM:      Nakanai               kauru        *k        *srvc              'large bamboo'
     MM:      Ramoaaina             kauru        *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo'
     MM:      Tolai                 kaur         *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo, generic'
     MM:      Patpatar              kor          *krvq     *rrvR              'bamboo, generic'
     MM:      Petats                kahur        *k        *drvdr             'bamboo'
     MM:      Selau                 kawur        *k        *rrvRrvdrvdr       'bamboo'
 MM:     Mono-Alu         aulu       *k      *rrvRrvl      'bamboo sp.'
 SES:    Gel a            yau        *krvq                 'a bamboo, bamboo knife'
 SES:    Bugotu           yau        *krvq                 'bamboo; bamboo sliver
                                                           used as a knife'
 SES:    W Guadalcanal    yau-yau    *krvq                 'bamboo'
 SES:    Lau              ?au        *krvq                 'bamboo'
 SES:    Kwara'ae         ka?o       *krvq                 'bamboo (generic)'
 SES:    Kwaio            ?au        *krvq                 'bamboo (generic)'
 SES:    Sa'a             au         *krvq                 'bamboo'
 SES:    Arosi            ?au        *krvq                 'a bamboo'
 NCV:    Mota             au         *krvq                 'the bamboo, generic'
 NCV:    SEAmbrym         eou        *krvq                 'bamboo'
 NCV:    Paamese          eau        *krvq                 'bamboo'
 NCV:    Lewo             (pla)yu    *krvq                 'bamboo, as knife'
 NCV:    Port Sandwich    n-au       *krvq                 'arrow'
 NCV:    Namakir          ?o         *q                    'bamboo'
 NCV:    Nguna            na-au      *krvq                 'wild cane, reed; flute,
                                                           mouth organ'
 SV:     Sye              n-au       *q                    'bamboo'
 SV:     Ura              n-au       *q                    'spear'
 SV:     N Tanna          n-ao       *q                    'bamboo'
 SV:     White sands      n-au       *q                    'bamboo'
 SV:     Lenakel          n-au       *q                    'bamboo'
 SV:     Kwamera          n-au       *q                    'bamboo'
 SV:     Anejom           n-au       *q                    'bamboo'
 NCal:   Nelemwa          IJ-ga      *q                    'bamboo'
 NCal:   NyeHlyu          IJ-gao     *q                    'bamboo'
 NCal:   Jawe             IJ-go      *q                    'bamboo'
 NCal:   Pije             (du)ko     *q                    'bamboo'
>

                                                            Other cultivated plants   401




   Reflexes of POe *bwau 'bamboo' are largely complementary to those of *qauR above,
with overlaps on the mainland coast of the Vitiaz Strait and in New Caledonia. The Manam
and Kaiep reflexes provide a weak indication that *bwau may have denoted bamboo as a
construction material.

<
POe *bwau 'bamboo'
  SJ:    Ormu          bau          'bow'
  NNG:   Tami          bwai         'bamboo'
  NNG:   Malasanga     boa          'bamboo' (irregular loss of *u)
  NNG:   Bing          buau         'bamboo'
  NNG:   Manam         buau-buau    '(house) wall'
  NNG:   Kaiep         ba-boi       '(house) wall'
  PT:    Molima        bau-bau      'bamboo tube, smoking pipe made therefrom' (A.
                                    Chowning, pers. comm.)
  PT:    Dobu          bau-bau      'bamboo'
  PT:    Duau          bau-bau      'bamboo'
  PT:       Wedau       hau-hau         'bamboo'
  PT:       Taw ala     hau-hau         'bamboo'
  PT:       Tubetube    hau-hau         'bamboo'
  PT:       Motu        hau             'bamboo'
  Mic:      Marshallese hwae            'bamboo'
  Mic:      Woleaian    pwai            'bamboo'
  Mic:      Chuukese    pwaw            'bamboo'
  Mic:      Puluwatese pway             'bamboo'
  NCal:     NyeHlyu     gao             'bamboo'
>

402      Malcolm Ross


    Five more reconstructions are listed below: POe *hitu(!J) 'bamboo sp., probably Schizo-
stachyum glaucifolium', POe *hotu(!J), POe *kopu, POe *hwele, POe *hue '(made of) bam-
boo'. Except for the first and last, the glosses of the supporting data do little to help elucidate
their denotata, some of which were presumably taxa made up of one or more of the species
discussed above. The gloss of Nakanai hele 'small cultivated bamboo used for thatching
rods' suggests that it denotes a Schizostachyum species, but this is insufficient information
on which to base a gloss of POe *hwele.

    The two reconstructions below are better supported by non-Oceanic than by Oceanic
reflexes. Since Bamhusa vulgaris is a recent import, the Fijian and Polynesian glosses indicate
that PCP *hitu probably denoted Schizostachyum glaucifolium. This may also be true of the
POe reflex, but this is uncertain.

<
PMP *hitu!J or *pitu!J 'bamboo sp.' (AcD)
POe *hitu(!J) 'bamboo sp.' (AcD)
PCP *hitu 'bamboo sp., probably Schizostachyum glaucifolium' (AcD)
  Fij:      Wayan        hitu          'generic for two bamboo species, Schizostachyum
                                       glaucifolium and Bamhusa vulgaris'
  Fij:      Bauan        hitu          'bamboo, Bamhusa sp. or Schizostachyum
                                       glaucifolium'
  Pn:       Tongan       pitu          'bamboo, Bamhusa vulgaris, variety with yellow
                                       stems'
>

<
PAn *hetu!J 'bamboo of very large diameter, probably Dendrocalamus sp.' (ACD)
POe *hotu(!J) 'large bamboo, presumably Bamhusa sp.' (AcD: *potu!J)
  Adm: Lou               pot            'large thick bamboo variety'
>

<
POe *kopu 'bamboo sp.'
  Adm:      Drehet       :JP            'bamboo sp.'
  Adm:      Nyindrou     op             'bamboo sp.'
  MM:       Tinputz      kop            'bamboo sp.'
  MM:       Teop         kopu           'bamboo sp.'
>

                                                                 Other cultivated plants    403


   The only non-WOe evidence for POe *hwele 'bamboo' is from Lonwolwol (NCV), where
hwele-ho consists of hwele- 'hollow vessel' and ho, apparently reflecting PNCV *hue 'made
of bamboo' (see below). A possible inference is that *hwele denoted bamboo as a household
utensil, e.g. a container for water.

<
POe *hwele 'bamboo sp.'
  NNG: Mapos Buang      a-pel               'bamboo sp. '
  NNG: Mumeng (Patep) pel                   'bamboo sp. '
  MM: Bulu              hele                'bamboo sp. '
  MM: Nakanai           hele                'small cultivated bamboo used for thatching rods '
                                            (Goodenough 1997)
  MM: Tiang                  hele           'bamboo sp. '
  NCV: Lonwolwol             hwele(ho)      'bamboo' (b'vele- 'hollow vessel'; -ho <POe *hue
                                            '(made of) bamboo' )
>

    Hus (Adm) au 'bamboo ' corresponds regularly with the NCV items below, implying that
it and PNCV *hue both reflect a POe *hue '(made of) bamboo '.

<
POe *hue '(made of) bamboo '
  Adm: Hus             au           'bamboo' (Nevermann 1934)
PNCV *hue '(made of) bamboo' (Clark 1996a)
  NCV: Mota            pue          'bamboo water-carrier'
  NCV: Raga            hua          'bamboo (generic); knife'
  NCV: Nokuku          pue          'water-pot'
  NCV: Kiai            pue          'bamboo'
  NCV: Araki           (vi)pue      'bamboo tree '
  NCV: Tamambo         (vu)hue      'bamboo tree '
  NCV: Uripiv          na-au        'bamboo'
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-mhu         'bamboo; bamboo water container; bamboo knife '
                       mhwe(var)    'hard bamboo' (na-var 'stone' )
  NCV: Labo            (na-na)mhuo 'bamboo'
  NCV: Lonwolwol       w vele)ho    'bamboo' (b'vele- 'hollow vessel, empty shell of)
  NCV: Lewo            (pila)pwe    'bamboo (used for walls of house); length ofthatch
                                    woven on bamboo '
>


13.3.2 Aleurites moluccana (syn.A. triloba), candlenut, P kandoltri, Bkandeltri (Euphorbiaceae)

Aleurites moluccana is a tree which grows to between 10 and 35 m in height, depending on
its location. Its young leaves and inflorescence are dusted with grey to rust-brown scurf, and
the mature fruit is chestnut brown, 3-7 em in diameter. It has little pulp and a thick rind
that encloses one or two very large seeds, the candlenuts. There appears to be considerable
intra-species variation across its range, from India to eastern Polynesia, as well as a striking
variety of uses. The seeds of some varieties are toxic, but others can be eaten without a
problem. Even toxic seeds can often be eaten in small quantities, and the toxicity is reduced
by roasting (Henty 1982, Walter & Sam 2002: 87).

404   Malcolm Ross


    In Vanuatu A. moluccana is not cultivated, as planted seeds do not germinate well, but
people protect new seedlings (Walter & Sam 2002: 88). In Fiji the tree occurs close to villages
but not in the wild, implying that it is planted.

                                                  The candlenut owes its name to the fact that
                                             in earlier times the nuts were threaded onto the
                                             midrib of a coconut palm leaf and lit, burning
                                             slowly one after another and giving a feeble light.
                                             The smoke given off is also a good insect repellant
                                             (Sperlich 1997). Charred seeds are used in New
                                             Ireland to make a sooty paint for blackening the
                                             face in mourning (Peekel1984: 313) and by Pon-
                                             apeans for making a black or brown dye. The oil
                                             extracted from them is also used as a paint base in
                                             New Britain (Powell 1976) and to polish wood in
                                             Fiji, where an extract of the seed is also used to
                                             scent the oil (Gardner & Pawley 2006). The prod-
                                             ucts of A. moluccana have numerous medicinal
                                             uses !(Walter & Sam 2002: 89).

                                                  POe *tuRi-tuRi 'A. moluccana' is recon-
Figure 13.4 Aleurites moluccana: A, tree;
B, leaves and inflorescence; C, whole fruit; structed below. It is quite widely supported, but
D, kernel (candlenut).                       it is by no means certain that its denotatum was A.
                                             moluccana. Blust (ACD) reconstructs PEMP *tuRi-
tuRi 'A. moluccana' on the basis ofBiak kuker 'tree with edible nut' and Central Pacific re-
flexes. However, Geraghty (2004: 72) believes that PPn *tuitui 'A. moluccana' was identical
with *tuitui 'strung together', reflecting the fact that candlenuts are strung together for use
as torches or sources of dye. He does not discuss Blust's reconstruction, but if Geraghty is
right, the Biak, Motu and Roro terms must be dismissed as chance resemblances (none has
the specific gloss A. muluccana).

<
PEMP *tuRi-tuRi 'candlenut tree, Aleurites mol'uccana' (?) (AcD)
POe *tuRi-tuRi 'candlenut tree, Aleurites moluccana' (?)
  PT:    Motu          turi-turi      'Cordia subcordata'
  PT:    Roro          curi-curi      'tree sp., with wood used for making drums'
PCP *tui-tui 'candlenut tree, Aleurites moluccana'
  Fij:   Bauan         tui-tui        'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Tongan        tui-tui        'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Niue an       tui-tui        'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    E Uvean       tui-tui        'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    E Futunan tui-tui            'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    WFutunan tu-tui              'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Emae          tui-tui        'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Tahitian      tu-tui         'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Tuamotuan tui-tui            'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Hawaiian      ku-kui         'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
  Pn:    Rarotongan tui-tui           'candlenut, Aleurites moluccana'
>

                                                                     Other cultivated plants     405


13.3.3 Broussonetia papyrifera, paper mulberry, TP burua (Moraceae)

B. papyrifera is native to Japan and Taiwan and
is an ancient introduction into the rest of the Pa-
cific. A shrub or small tree 3-5, and sometimes up
to 12, metres high, it is fertile in its native range,
but the plants found throughout the Pacific are all
male clones, transported and planted as rootstock.
It is thus subject to deliberate propagation by hu-
man agency (Whistler & Elevitch 2006a ).

     As Osmond & Ross noted in vol.1 (ch.4,
§5.1), Kooijman (1972:446--453) believes from
descriptions of manufacture and an examination
of museum pieces that bark cloth in New Guinea
was made from Ficus and Artocarpus species
rather than from Broussonetia papyrifera, from
which bark cloth is made in other parts of the Pa-
cific, e.g. Fiji (Gardner & Pawley 2006). How-
ever, the glosses of the items listed below suggest
fairly strongly that speakers of Oceanic languages
in widely separated New Guinea locations were
using B. papyrifera to make bark cloth at Euro- Figure 13.5 Broussonetia papyrifera,
                                                       paper mulberry
pean contact.

     POe *malo probably denoted B. papyrifera, the tree which throughout much of the Pacific
provides the bast from which barkcloth is made. If this is so, then B. papyrifera must have been
introduced into the Pacific islands by early Oceanic speakers. Matthews (1996), however,
notes its absence from the Philippines and Borneo, and thinks it possible that it did not arrive
in Polynesia with the earliest colonisers. POe *malo also denoted the cloth and the male
genital covering made from it, and it is just possible that these were its primary meanings.
It is also possible that some of the reflexes below reflect early Pacific Pidgin malo or maro
'loincloth'. PMP *mal(u,aw) apparently denoted a species of tree which provided bast for
clothmaking, but it is unclear which species this was, as it is reconstructed on the basis of
POe *malo and Kaili (WMP, Sulawesi: Parigi dialect) malo 'old term for Trema amboinensis,
the tree whose bast is most commonly used for barkcloth in Sulawesi' (Adriani & Kruijt
1901: 140, note 5, cited by R. Kennedy 1934: 242).

<
PMP *mal(u,aw) 'tree whose bast is used for barkcloth'[11]
POe *malo 'paper mulberry, Broussonetia papyrifera; barkcloth, loincloth' (Milke 1968)
     NNG: Kove           malo            'male genital covering' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
     NNG: Gedaged        mal             'tree, bark used for G-strings and blankets ; loincloth
                                         made from this '
     NNG: Takia          malu            'tree sp., loin cloth made from pounded bark'
     NNG: Manam          malo            'barkcloth belt from dodoli tree, given to a boy at
                                         first initiation' (Bohm 1983: 81)
  MM:     Patpatar      mal           'cloth, clothing'
  MM:     Tolai         mal           'Broussonetia papyrifera; native cloth made from
                                      bark of this tree'
  MM:     Teop          maro          'cloth, clothing'
  SES:    Arosi         maro          'Broussonetia papyrifera; beaten cloth ofthe maro
                                      tree'
  NCV: Raga             malo          'men's loincloth'
  Fij: Bauan            malo          'Broussonetia papyrifera; hence the native cloth
                                      made from it and the former native male dress,
                                      passed between the thighs and fastened with a
                                      girdle'
PPn *malo 'barkcloth loin garment' (POLLEX)
  Pn:   Emae          maro          'barkcloth'
  Pn:    Samoan       malo          'loincloth"
  Pn:   Hawaiian      malo          'loin garment'
>

[11] Blust (1970) reconstructs *maru on the basis of Buru (CMP) maru and Oceanic reflexes, but the second
syllables of the two forms do not correspond (as Blust notes).

406   Malcolm Ross


<
POe *m(w)ase 'wild mulberry, paper mulberry, Broussonetia papyrifera' (Ross 1996c)
  NNG: Mapos Buang fits              'Broussonetia papyrifera'
  MM: Tolai             mae          'Broussonetia papyrifera'
  Fij:   Wayan          masi         'Broussonetia papyrifera'
  Fij:   Rotuman        m:Jsi        'tree sp. used to make bark cloth'
>


13.3.4 Morinda citrifolia, Indian mulberry, yellow wood, P ialotri, Byelotri, noni (Rubiaceae)

A small tree, 5-6 min height, and occasionally more, up to 15m, Morinda citrifolia (Figure
13.6, left) grows throughout Oceania behind the beach and in dry soils exposed to the sun.
Barrau (1962: 188) comments on the large shiny elliptical leaves about 20 em in length and
10 em broad. Peekel (1984: 539) recognises two varieties, one with green, yellow, white or
variegated leaves, the other (var. bracteata) with enlarged calyx lobes. The small white flow-
ers grow on an oval or cone-shaped structure, the syncarpium, which later swells to become
the syncarp, 'a heavy, pungent smelling-sometimes repulsive-succulent fruit' (Hender-
son & Hancock 1988: 52). The fruits of wild varieties are spherical or elongated syncarps
of 3-6 em and are soft and straw yellow at maturity, with numerous protuberances (French
1986:272 describes them as 'warty looking lumps'). Cultivated forms have paler, larger fruit
with no protuberances, but are rarely found within village areas because of the strong smell
when their fruit fall and rot (Walter & Sam 2002: 204-205).

    M. citrifolia is a tree with many uses in Oceanic speaking societies. Wild young trees are
well known as a source of dyes, red and yellow, extracted by boiling the root-bark (Floyd
1954, Gowers 1976: 99). InMarovo the dyes are applied to cocount-frond baskets, in Vanuatu
to vegetable fibres used in items of apparel. S. Foale (2001) describes it as an all-purpose
medicine on Lihir, and Walter & Sam (2002: 206--207) refer to research indicating that the
Indian mulberry contains immuno-stimulant substances. This would explain its numerous
medicinal uses. In Marovo, Manus and Tonga young leaves softened over the fire are applied
to infected wounds and boils to draw out pus (O'Collins & Lamothe 1989, Hviding 2005: 133,
Walter & Sam 2002: 207). In Vanuatu the raw fruit is crunched and eaten to treat an enlarged
spleen. However, the plant is also cultivated and the fruit of the cultivated variety eaten, raw
or cooked, on small islands scattered across Papua New Guinea, on the Temotu islands of the
Solomons and in the Banks and Torres Islands of Vanuatu. Elsewhere the fruit of the wild
variety is a famine food (Walter & Sam 2002: 205-207). In parts of Papua New Guinea and
the Solomons the young leaves, which are a rich source of carotene, are cooked as a vegetable
or consumed for medicinal reasons (Henderson & Hancock 1988:54, French 1986: 272).

                                                                     Other cultivated plants    407




Figure 13.6 Left Morinda citrifolia, Indian mUtlberry: A, mature tree; B, shoot bearing leaves, fruit
and flowers. Right Derris species: A, climbing plant; B, base of mature vine; C, woody vine stem; D,
vine with leaves and pods; E, stem with inflorescence; F, immature leaf.

    There were apparently two POe labels for M . citrifolia, *fiofiu and *kurat. If Verheijen
( 1990: 86) has correctly identified the referent ofBima (CMP) nonu as M . citrifolia (he marks
it with a question mark), then *fiofiu is reconstructable for PCEMP and was inherited into
POe. If Tagalog, Bisayan, Tausug nino M. citrifolia (Madulid 2001a: 527) are also cognate
with POe *fiofiu, then PMP *fiefiu is reconstructable. Milke reconstructed this etymon as
POe *fiofium with final *-m , but the only reflexes with this segment are Gedaged nonom
and Takia nom . Both languages lose POe final *- VC, and it is more likely that -m in both
languages irregularly reflects medial POe *-fi- , with reduplication in Gedaged.
    Geraghty (1993) speculates that *fiofiu (his *fiofium) was the name of the plant and *ku-
rat the name of the dye produced from it. In Geraghty (2004: 91) he finds support for this
speculation in evidence provided by Mahdi (1994: 192-193). Papuan languages ofthe North
Halmahera family show forms such as Temate guraci 'turmeric', Tidore guraci 'gold', gu-
raci 'yellow'. These are the source of loans in Malaya-Polynesian languages of the South
Halmahera family such as Buli *guraci 'gold'. Geraghty suggests that such a form could also
have been borrowed into languages of the New Guinea region and thence into early Oceanic.
This proposal seems very plausible and leads to a speculation of my own. As Geraghty points
out, the formal correspondence of the Halmahe:ra and Oceanic forms is perfect. In the light
of this, it is possible that POe *kurat reflects a PEMP form *gurati meaning 'yellow dye'.

408       Malcolm Ross


    The distributions of POe *fiofiu and *kurat are complementary: *kurat is reflected solidly
through Melanesia from New Ireland (Lihir, Tangga) through NW Solomonic (Nehan, Ro-
viana), SE Solomonic, North/Central and Southern Vanuatu, New Caledonia and Fiji, while
*fiofiu occurs in the Admiralties, North New Guinea, Papuan Tip, Micronesian and Poly-
nesian. These distributions suggest that POe *flofiu was in some sense the default term for
M. citrifolia and that it was then replaced by *kurat in a solid Melanesian block from New
Ireland to New Caledonia and Fiji. However, the reflexes of *kurat are generally regular,
suggesting that replacement took place very early in the history of Oceanic. 12

<
POe *fiofiu 'Morinda citrifolia' (Milke 1965: *nonum; Blust 1978b)
     Adm: Seimat               naun              'Morinda citrifolia' (Sorensen 1950) (*-o- >
                                                 Seimat -au-)
     Adm:     Leipon      fiofi                  'Morinda citrifolia'
     Adm:     Bipi        fioy                   'Morinda citrifolia'
     NNG:     Gitua       nono                   'Morinda citrifolia'
     NNG:     Gedaged     no-nom                 'Morinda citrifolia'
     NNG:     Takia       nom                    'Morinda citrifolia'
     NNG:     Man am      no!J                   'tree sp.'
     NNG:     Wogeo       fiofi                  'Morinda citrifolia'
     PT:      Bwaidoga nono                      'Morinda citrifolia'
     PT:      Motu        nonu                   'Morinda citrifolia'
     Mic:     Kiribati    non                    'Morinda citrifolia'
     Mic:     Marshallese nen                    'Morinda citrifolia'
     Mic:     Puluwatese nen                     'Morinda citrifolia'
     Mic:     Woleaian    !eli                   'Morinda citrifolia'
     Pn:      Tongan      nonu                   'Morinda citrifolia'
     Pn:      Tikopia     nonu                   'Morinda citrifolia'
>

<
POe *kurat 'the dye produced from Morinda citrifolia' (Geraghty 2004)
  MM: Lihir          ulet                       'Morinda sp.'
  MM: Tangga         urat                       'Morinda citrifolia'
  MM: Nehan          rata                       'Morinda citrifolia'
  MM: Mono-Alu urati                            'Morinda citrifolia' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Varisi         ku-kure                    'Morinda citrifolia' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Roviana        yurata                     'Morinda citrifolia'
PEOc *kurat 'M orinda citrifolia'
  SES: Longgu        ?ura                       'M orinda citrifolia'
  SES: Santa Ana yura                           'M orinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Mwotlap        wuy           'M orinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Mota           wura          'M orinda citrifolia'
  NCV: NEAmbae hure                 'M orinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Araki          hura          'M orinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Raga           yuresi        'Morinda citrifolia' (Walsh 2004) 13
  NCV: Uripiv         na-ur         'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Paamese        o-ulo         'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Lewo           (pur)kula     'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCV: Nguna          na-kura        'tree sp.'
  NCV: S Efate        na-kur        'Morinda citrifolia'
PSV *na-yura(t,c) 'Morinda citrifolia' (Lynch 200lc)
  SV:   Sye           noyrat        'Morinda citrifolia'
  SV:   Lenakel       nauias        'Morinda citrifolia'
  SV:                               'Morinda citrifolia'
  SV:                               'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCal:                             'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCal:                             'Morinda citrifolia'
  NCal:                             'Morinda citrifolia'
  Fij:                              'Morinda citrifolia'
  Fij:                              'Morinda citrifolia'
>

[12] Cf. ch.9, §4, where a similar but not identical situation is described with regard to breadfruit.

                                                                                Other cultivated plants        409




13.4 Fish poisons

One method of catching fish was to put a toxic plant substance into an area of water sur-
rounded by rocks or reef so that fish were stunned or killed and could then simply be collected
by hand. As well as the plants described bellow, the seeds of the tree Barringtonia asiatica
(ch.5, §5.2) were also used for this purpose.

13.4.1 Derris spp., derris root, fish poison plant, TP vut (Fabaceae)

The use of climbing shrubs of the genus Derris to stun fish for an easy catch is known from
the Bismarcks to Fiji (see vol.l, ch.8, §7). However, of fifteen Derris species that Verdcourt
(1979: 314--331) identifies in Papua New Guinea, only three are said to be used for fishing:
D. elliptica, D. elegans (syn. D. rufula, D. sal'omonensis and perhaps D. heterophylla) and D.
malaccensis. We can evidently add a fourth, as Peekel mentions the use of D. trifoliata (syn.
D. uliginosa) to stun fish, a claim confirmed by Hviding (2005: 105).

    In its wild form Derris elliptica is a climbing shrub up to 10m high which grows in coastal
locations (Figure 13.6, right). Cultivated plants are mostly low and tangled, and produce thick
fleshy roots which are scraped or crushed, then stirred into shallow water to benumb fish so
that they can be easily caught.

    Chewing derris root and then swallowing copious amounts of water was the traditional
means of suicide in NW Island Melanesia.

[13] Raga yuresi reflects the irregular retention of the POe final consonant and addition of -i discussed in §3.6.

410   Malcolm Ross


    D. trifoliata is a smaller species but has a thicker stem, larger leaves and a weaker fish-
stunning effect than D. elliptica (Peekel1984: 243). Hviding (2005: 105) reports that in Marovo
D. trifoliata is indigenous, and D. elliptica has been introduced from New Guinea.

    It seems likely that POe *tupa referred to Derris creepers in general, or at least to those
used in fishing, and perhaps also to D. elliptica in particular, as this was the source of the
strongest poison. Also reconstructable are
    • POe *puna(t) 'vine used for fish poison, probably Derris elliptica'
    • PWOc *m (w)ali 'Derris sp. '
    • PROc *vuba 'k.o. vine, probably Derris elliptica'
but I am unable to determine how they differed in meaning from each other or from *tupa.

<
PMP *tuba 'Derris fish poison' (Dempwolff 1938)
POe *tupa 'climbing shrubs, Derris spp. ' (Capell1943)
  Adm: Seimat           tu[hi]         'Derris sp.' (Sorensen 1950)
  NNG: Aria             tuva           'derris root'
  NNG: Kove             tuva           'derris root'
  PT:     Molima        tuva           'derris root'
  PT:     Kilivila      tuva           'poisonous root used for fishing'
  PT:     Motu          tuha           'derris root'
  MM: Vitu              tuva           'derris root'
  MM: Tigak             tua            'derris root'
  MM: Teop              suva           'derris root'
  MM: Mono-Alu tuha                    'Derris heterophylla' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                       comm.)
  MM: Marovo            tuva           'Pongamia pinnata'
  SES: Gela             tuva           'derris root'
  SES: Sa' a            uha, uhe       'derris root'
  NCV: Mota             tua            'a creeping plant used to poison fish '
  NCV: Uripiv           na-tuv         'fish poison vine '
PSV *(i)tuv 'Derris sp. usually trifoliata' (Lynch 2004a)
  SV:     Sye           (nos)(i)tup 'Derris sp. usually trifoliata' (nos 'vine ')
  NCal: NyeHlyu         (fiale)jep     'derris root'
  NCal: Xaracuu         (kwa)di        'derris root'
  Mic: Woleaian         supe           'fish poison (root)' (-p- fort-f-)
  Fij:    Wayan         tuva           'generic for Derris spp.'
  Fij:    Rotuman       fuha           'Derris spp., used to stun fish '
>

   PMP *bunat is reconstructed on the basis of the Oceanic data here and Botolan Sambal
bunat 'Derris elliptica' .

<
PMP *bunat 'Derris elliptica'
POe *puna(t) 'vine used for fish poison, probably Derris elliptica'
  Adm: Lou            pun            'vine used for fish poison'
  PT:   Sudest        vun            'poison fish with derris'
  MM:     Tolai         vun           'Derris elliptica, root with which fish are poisoned;
                                      to kill or benumb fish with poison ofthis name '
  MM:     Nduke         bun a         'Derris heterophylla, a poison-leaf vine, crushed
                                      and thrown into rock-holes to stun reef fish '
  MM:     Roviana       bun a         'littoral vine (macerated and thrown into rock pools,
                                      it stupefies fish)'
  MM:     Marovo        bun a         'climbe:r with poisonous leaves, fish poison'
  SV:     Lenakel       no-un         'fish poison'
>

                                                                 Other cultivated plants   411



   PWOc *m (wJali (incorrectly given as *maRi in vol. 1, ch.8, §7) is reconstructed on the
basis of North New Guinea and Meso-Melanesian languages:

<
PWOc *m (w)ali 'Derris sp. '
  NNG:    Gitua         (waro)mali(!J)   'Derris root'
  MM:     Nalik         mal-mal          'Derris root'
  MM:     Kara (E)      mal
  MM:     Sursurunga    mel              'a vine used to poison fish or humans'
  MM:     Marovo        moli             'a coastal creeping vine '
>

    Bender et al. (2003) offer two Proto Micronesian reconstructions with the gloss 'fish
poison' or 'Derris sp.' . One is PMic *(t,T)upa, continuing POe *tupa and reflected only in
Woleaian supe 'fish poison (root)' . Since supe has-p- for t-f and PMic *(t,T)upa is recon-
structed for expected t*tufa, the reconstruction is suspect. The other PMic reconstruction is
*upa 'derris vine ', which is well supported in Micronesian languages and appears to have
cognates in Southern Vanuatu, permitting reconstruction of PROc *vuba .

<
PROc *vuba 'k.o. vine, probably Derris elliptica'
PSV *na-vup 'k.o. vine' (Lynch 200lc: 236)
  SV:   Sye           na-vup
  SV:   Anejom        no-hop(yev)
PMic *upa 'Derris vine ' (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Kosraean        op             'plant used as fish poison'
 Mic: Marshallese wep                'a tree, Barringtonia asiatica, seeds used for fish
                                     poison'
 Mic: Ponapean        up             'Derris elliptica'
                      upa-wp         'to poison fish '
 Mic: Chuukese        wip, wipe(n) 'Derris elliptica'
>


13.5 Multi-purpose roots

Turmeric and ginger are both cultivated for their roots, which have a variety of uses. Among
these are magical applications, shared with the first three plants in §6. Like the candlenut
(§3 .2) and Indian mulberry (§3.4) turmeric also produces a dye.

412      Malcolm Ross



13.5.1 Curcuma tonga (syn. C. domestica), turmeric (Zingiberaceae)

                                           The turmeric: plant, Curcuma tonga , is much smaller than
                                           Alpinia species, being only 50-120 em tall, but it is treated
                                           by at least speakers of Marovo and Kwara' ae as belong-
                                           ing to the same taxon as Alpinia (Kwa'ioloa & Burt
                                           2001:193-194, Hviding 2005: 131). 14 It has long green
                                           leaves and pale yellow flowers. The rhizome is lumpy and
                                           an intense yellow (Peekel1984: 109).

                                               Although it grows readily in the wild in locations
                                           where there is light, the Marovo and Kwara' ae sources
                                           also report that it is often cultivated. The rhizome provides
                                           spice. It is also a source of yellow dye, but the colour fades
                                           easily (Floyd 1954, Peekel1984: 109). AtMarovo the aro-
                                           matic leaves are used for parcelling fish for the stone oven.

                                               Turmeric: also has ritual significance. At Marovo it is
                                           planted to keep evil spirits away from gardens, and in both
                                           Marovo and Kwara' ae the roots are chewed and spat out
                                           of the door or window of the house to fend off evil spirits
                                           (Hviding 2005: 131). The Kwara'ae also chew it both with
                                           betelnut and alone, the latter both as a snack and medici-
     Figure 13.7     Curcuma longa         nally.
    There are two reconstructions, POe *yaf}o and PEOc *refJ (wJa. There is some evidence in
the glosses of reflexes that the latter meant yellow material, including prepared turmeric and
perhaps the yolk of an egg.

<
POe *yaf}o 'turmeric, Curcuma tonga ' (Milke 1968)
  NNG: Mangap          (n)af}go-f}go(f}ana) 'a plant, ginger type, yellow when crushed' (-f}ana
                                            'nominaliser')
  NNG: Adzera          yaf}a(n)             'ginger'
  MM: Kara (E)         iof}                 'turmeric '
  MM: Patpatar         iaf}                 'turmeric'
  MM: Kubukota         af}O                 'plant similar to ginger, of various colours (white
                                            and yellow) ; it has various medicinal and magical
                                            uses in healing and cursing'
  MM: Nduke            af}O                 'turmeric '
  MM: Roviana          af}O                 'turmeric '
  NCV: Mota            af}O                 'turmeric '
  Mic: Ponapean        5fj                  'turmeric'
  Mic: Mokilese        :Jf}                 'turmeric'
  Mic: Woleaian        ytif}a               'ginger'
  Fij:   Bauan         oaf}o(laya)          'wilid ginger, Zingiber zerumbet'
                       Oaf)O                'turmeric '
  Pn:    Tongan        af}O                 'turmeric '
                       af}O-af)O            'shampoo ginger, Zingiber zerumbet'
  Pn:     Samoan       af}O                 'turmeric'
>

[14] No reconstruction for Alpinia is made in this volume.

                                                                            Other cultivated plants   413


      The root above was the source of the POe term for 'yellow', *yaf}o-yaf}o:

<
POe *yaf}o-yaf}o 'yellow' (Grace 1969)
  NNG: Kove            eaf}-eaf}o      'yellow'
  NNG: Tami            yaf}o-yaf}o     'yellow'
  NNG: Kairiru         yaf}-yaf}       'yellow'
  NNG: Manam           af}O-af}o       'yellow'
  PT:    Molima        yawo-yawo(na) 'yellow'
  MM: Nakanai          ial-alo         'yellow'
  SES: Gel a           af}O-af}o       'yellow'
  NCV: Mota            af}O-af}o       'yellow'
  Mic: Woleaian        yaf}o-yaf}o     'yellow colour of ginger'
  Fij:   Wayan         af}O-af}o       'yellow'
  Fij:   Bauan         oaf}o-oaf}o(a)  'reddish or orange like the turmeric plant'
>

<
PEOc *[re]ref}wa 'yellow material, prepared turmeric(?)' (Biggs 1965: *ref}a)
  SES: Sa' a           ref}a         'decorate with black, white and red designs;
                                     beautiful'
  NCV: Loh             ef}           'turmeric '
  NCV: Mota            re-ref}a      'yolk of an egg; yellow colour'
  Mic: Kiribati        ref} a        'Curcuma    tonga ' 15
  Fij:   Wayan         re-ref}wa     'Curcuma tonga, turmeric '
  Fij:   Bauan         re-ref}a      'turmeric '
  Pn:    Tongan        ef}a          'turmeric '
  Pn:    Rennellese f}ef}a           'prepared turmeric '
  Pn:    Samoan        lef}a         'yellow dye from turmeric ' (Whistler 2000: 177)
  Pn:    Tokelauan lef}a             'yolk of egg, turmeric '
  Pn:    Tahitian      re?a          'ginger, turmeric '
  Pn:    Hawaiian      lena          'yellow'
  Pn:    Maori         ref}a-ref}a   'a large: herb with curcuma-like leaves and short
                                     rhizome, Arthropodium cirratum ' (R. Gardner,
                                     pers. comm.)
>


13.5.2 Zingiber spp., ginger, TP kawawar (Zingiberaceae)

Zingiber officinale (common ginger), 50-12<0 em tall, cultivated and wild, serves as a spice
plant, medicine and magic (Peekel1984:100). It appears to have arrived in Near Oceania a
long time ago (R.M. Bourke, pers. comm.), but does not seem to have been carried into (at
least parts of) Remote Oceania until European contact, where the only species of ginger was
Z. zerumbet ('wild ginger' , 'shampoo ginger' , 'pinecone ginger' ), a woody shrub, 80-120 em
high with long narrow green leaves and magnificent red flowers which resemble a pinecone
in shape. It is widely cultivated, with numerous cultivars.

[15] According to Geraghty (2004: 67) Kiribati reYJa is borrowed from a Polynesian language.

414    Malcolm Ross


    If it is true that Z. oificinale did not find its way into Remote Oceania with Oceanic speak-
ers, then one must ask whether it had in fact arrived in NW Island Melanesia by POe times.
This is a matter which seems to require further research.

    In Marovo wild ginger was associated with magic and sorcery. The leaves of particular
varieties were important in calling on ancestor spirits, and the roots were chewed for magi-
cal purposes. In earlier times, one was planted at each comer of a garden to protect it against
destructive magic. The roots of some varieties are chewed for their healing properties. Be-
cause ofthese associations, ginger is rarely used in ordinary cooking (Hviding 2005: 130). 16
Peekel (1984: 101) in any case reports that the rhizome of Z. zerumbet is less tasty than those
of other Zingiber species.

    Two POe terms are reconstructed below. The gloss of the first, *laqia, remains a little
doubtful because of the difficulty in dating the arrival of Z. oificinale in NW Island Melanesia.
POe *para(k) evidently referred to Zingiberaceae species but just how large a taxon it denoted
is currently unknown.

<
PMP *laqia 'ginger, Zingiber oificinale' (Headlland & Healey 1974)
POe *laqia 'ginger, Zingiber oificinale (?)' (French-Wright 1983)
  Adm: Mussau          laia           'ginger'
  Adm: Titan           lei            'ginger'
  Adm: Lou             lei            'ginger'
  NNG: Kove            haia           'ginger'
  NNG: Tami            lagi           'ginger'
  NNG: Adzera          rakia          'ginger'
  NNG: Mumeng          lcha?          'ginger'
  NNG: Kairiru         lake a        'Curcuma spp.' (Borrell1989: 42)
  PT:    Wedau         naia           'ginger'
  PT:    Iduna         naiya          'ginger'
  PT:    Motu          ayi            'ginger'
  MM: Bulu             layia          'ginger'
  MM: Bola             lahia          'ginger'
  MM: Nakanai          lahia          'ginger'
  MM: Tangga           lae            'ginger'
  MM: Nehan            laia           'ginger'
  NCV: Tape            lay-lay        'wild ginger'
  SV:    Kwamera       na-re          'ginger'
  Fij:   Bauan         (oalJO )laya 'ginger, Z. zerumbet'
>

    PSES *ria 'ginger' (Gela ria 'ginger', W Guadalcanal, Arosi ria 'turmeric', Kwaio lia
'turmeric') is evidently derived from POe *laqia by borrowing rather than by direct inheri-
tance, as the expected PSES form is t*layia.

    PMP *badak is tentatively reconstructed below on the basis of the Tolai and Wayan Fi-
jian items and of Tagalog barak 'Curcuma zedoaria, Zingiber zerumbet', Kuyunon barak
'Curcuma domestica, Globba marantina' (Madulid 2001a).


[16] Unfortunately, Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001: 193-194) describe wild ginger and turmeric together, and it is im-
possible to work out which uses are attributed to which plant.

                                                                  Other cultivated plants   415




                              Figure 13.8   Codiaeum variegatum


<
PMP *badak 'Zingiberaceae spp. with edible rhizomes'
POe *para(k) 'Zingiberaceae spp. with edible rhizomes'
  MM:     Tolai         va-var        'Curcuma tonga'
  MM:     Tolai         (ka)va-var    'Zingiber officinale'
  Fij:    Wayan         va-va         'Alpinia boia'
>


13.6 Plants with large colourful leaves

Here four plants are discussed. The first three, Codiaeum variegatum, Cordyline fruticosa
and Dracaena angustifolia, are described separately but the reconstructions are presented to-
gether in §6.4 because there is evidence of a POe taxon, *jiRi, which included 'Cordyline
fruticosa and Dracaena angustifolia and of a PWOc taxon, *mwa(r,R)e, which included Codi-
aeum variegatum and Cordyline fruticosa. All three species are cultivated for their brightly
coloured glossy leaves and are used decoratively, ceremonially and ritually.


13.6.1 Codiaeum variegatum, croton, TP purpur, Bkala lif (Euphorbiaceae)

Codiaeum variegatum usually takes the form of a non-woody shrub a metre or more in height,
consisting of a clump of large leathery leaves, at their largest 30 em by 9 em. In the wild the
leaves are green and the plant may grow into a small tree up to 5 m tall. Under cultivation
the leaves vary greatly in shape and colour, and traditionally, C. variegatum was cultivated
for its brilliant colours, although it grows in the wild in open locations with access to sun-
light (Peekel 1984: 313,Wheatley 1992:89, 91). Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001: 175) names five
cultivars, four ofthem distinguished by colour (green, yellow, red and dark red).


416   Malcolm Ross


    C. variegatum shrubs were cultivated around the edges of villages for their decorativeness
and as boundary markers and markers of taboo sites like graves. They also provided a source
ofleaves to decorate men's bodies during dances (Floyd 1954, Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 175,
Wheatley 1992: 91, Hviding 2005: 117, Gardner & Pawley 2006).[17]

    On New Britain the bark or the leaves were rubbed on the skin to cure skin diseases
(Powell 1976). On Waya Island the leaves are used in the treatment of high blood pressure
(Gardner & Pawley 2006).


13.6.2 Cordyline fruticosa (syn. C. terminalis, Taetsia fruticosa), cordyline, victory leaf, ti plant, TP tangget, Bnanggaria (Agavaceae)

Cordyline fruticosa has a woody stem usually
1-2m high with no branches; the leaves issue from
the top of the stem. There is a great variety of leaf
shapes from long and narrow to broadly oval and
a great variety of leaf colours: green with white: or
red stripes, white with green or red stripes, rose-
red, rose-red and dark-red stripes, and dark-redl to
blackish purple (Peekel1984: 81-83).

    The cordyline has a tuber which is edible
and occasionally eaten in Papua New Guinea, al-
though it may have been used more extensively
for food in the past. Its young leaf shoots are
sometimes cooked and eaten (Barrau 1965, Bourke
1982: 60, French 1986: 335). The Saliba eat the             -'= ~_._..____
flowers, cooked with leaves of Gnetum gnemon                                                    ""•
(ch.10, §2.3) (Margetts 2005b). The Molima sim-
ply add them to the cooking pot (A. Chowning, Figure 13.9 Cordyline fruticosa: plant
pers. comm.). C.fruticosa is used for plot markers, and tuberous root
as an item of clothing, and as a warning to thieves
(Bourke 1982).

    Leaves of C.fruticosa are worn by dancers in New Britain (Arentz et al. 1989: 94). Bourke
comments on the spiritual significance of C.fruticosa in some Papua New Guinea societies.
The Marovo believe that cordyline holds spiritual power, and different cultivars of cordyline
are used for different kinds of magic, often exercised by holding the leaf itself (Hviding
2005: 118). It also functions as a charm against magic among the Kwaio and the Kwara'ae,
and the latter is the one place where a non-decorative, non-ritual use is mentioned: it is used to
wrap lizards for cooking (Kwa'ioloa & Burt 2001: 180). On Waya Island it is usually planted
in villages and at taboo sites, and today often at graves. Different varieties were used for
different kinds of magic (Gardner & Pawley 2006).


13.6.3 Dracaena angustifolia (Liliaceae)


[17] According to Wheatley, the other leaves used as dance decoration were from Euodia hortensis (ch.7, §5 .6)
and from Polyscias species (ch.lO, §2.4).

                                                                             Other cultivated plants    417


In its mature form Dracaena angustifolia is a woody shrub growing to 3-6 m high. It has
no bole and splits into many branches at ground level. Each branch splits again recursively,
and at the end of each branch, issuing directly from it, is a plume of long narrow leaves.
In cultivated varieties these leaves are often brightly striped. D. angustifolia receives far
fewer mentions in the literature than croton or cordyline: Hviding, for example, does not
mention it. This may be because non-botanist observers have confused the species or because
D. angustifolia has less magical and taboo significance. Kwa'ioloa & Burt (2001: 181) say
that it is used for living fences. However, the Arosi dictionary describes it as a very sacred
plant which is planted on burial grounds and on gardens to protect crops, is used in divination,
and is waved at the annual harvest ceremony (Fox 1978). Sa'a speakers use the leaves in
incantations, in bonito ceremonials and in malevolent magic (Ivens 1929). On Ulawa the
priest uses a Dracaena branch bound with a climbing fern to draw out the yam beetles when
a garden is dedicated for planting. Such a branch is then planted at the entrance stile to keep
out disease (Ivens 1927:360, 362).

13.6.4 Reconstructions

Cordyline and Dracaena varieties are both used as decorative plants and for making leaf
skirts, and many Oceanic languages treat them as a single taxon. In E Kara (MM), for ex-
ample, si denotes Cordyline fruticosa, and the binomial si tavul is Dracaena angustifolia.
In Kwara'ae Cordyline fruticosa is dili and Dracaena angustifolia is mala-dili 'resembling
cordyline' (see ch.2, §7 .1.4 ). Each of the cognate sets below spans plants of both genera, and
it is probable that many more of the glosses should refer to both Cordyline and Dracaena:
the full span ofthe denotation was missed when the data were recorded.

     Chowning (1963, 2001: 81) suggests that the 'Prato-Melanesian' terms *babaka, 18 *dili
(my POe *jiRi 'Cordyline sp., Dracaena sp.") and *male (my PWOc *mwa(r,R)e 'Codiaeum
variegatum; Cordyline fruticosa') were each used collectively for three species. Her first
two species are Codiaeum variegatum and Cordyline fruticosa. Her third, however, is not
Dracaena angustifolia, but Cycas rumphii. She writes that all three are 'used primarily for
decorative and magico-religious purposes' (Chowning 1963).[19]

     It is quite possible that PWOc *mwa(r,R)e indeed denoted a taxon including Codiaeum
variegatum and Cordylinefruticosa, and perhaps other decorative plants (note Nakanai rna-
male 'Cananga odorata'), but I have found no evidence of a term that denoted plants of
all three species. Possibly Chowning considered some of the items collected together under
PEOc *mwa(q)ele 'cycad' (ch.9, §5.2) to belong to the same cognate set as the items un-
der PWOc *mwa(r,R)e below. Despite the formal similarity between the two reconstructions,
however, the two cannot be reconciled: reflexes of the former agree in reflecting *-1-, the lat-
ter in reflecting *-(r,R)-. The two sets can be united only by positing irregular sound change
or borrowing.[20]

     Three other etyma are reconstructed below: POe *jiRi, *kaRi(q)a and *jajal. POe *jiRi
indeed introduces a third species into the discussion, but it is Dracaena angustifolia, not

[18] I do not have access to the data on the basis of which *babaka was reconstructed.

[19] In her 2001 discussion ofPWOc *m"a(r,R)e as presented by Ross (1996c), she corrects the gloss ofNakanai
male from 'Codiaeum' to 'Cordyline' and adds the Kove etymon.

[20] I initially thought that Anejom na-mra8 'Croton insularis' was cognate with the items under POe *m"a(r,R)e.
However, members of the genus Croton are substantial trees which have little in common with Codiaeum
variegatum, popularly called 'croton' (although both belong to the family Euphorbiaceae).

418      Malcolm Ross


Cycas rumphii. The distribution of the reflexes of POe *kaRi(q)a 'taxon of decorative plants'
leaves us unable to determine which of the three species it denoted. POe *jajal probably
denoted a particular variety of Codiaeum variegatum.

<
PWOc *mwa(r,R)e 'taxon including Codiaeum variegatum and Cordylinefruticosa' (Ross
  1996c; Chowning 1963: *male)
 NNG: Kove           mohe            'Cordyline sp.' (Chowning 1996: 17)
 NNG: Yabem          (ka)ma?         'Cordyline sp.'
 NNG: Takia          mra-mor         'Cordyline fruticosa'
 NNG: Kairiru        (moe!) morie(p) 'thin-leaved, green variety of Codiaeum
                                     variegatum'
 PT:     Roro        mare            'plant with yellow leaves'
 MM: Vitu            mare            'Cordyline sp.'
 MM: Bulu            mara            'Cordyline sp.'
 MM: Nakanai         male-male       'Cordyline sp.' (Chowning 1996: 17)
                     ma-male         'Cananga odorata (like Cordyline used for personal
                                     adornment)' (Floyd 1954)
 MM: Kara (E)        ma-mara         'Codiaeum variegatum'
 MM: Patpatar        mora-mora       'Codiaeum variegatum'
 MM: Kandas          muro            'Codiaeum variegatum'
 MM: Roviana         mar-mar         'Codiaeum variegatum'
cf. also:
  SV:       Anejom      na-mra8          'Codiaeum variegatum'
  Fij:      Wayan       1j'"ali          'croton, Codiaeum variegatum'
>

<
PMP *siRi 'Cordy line sp., Dracaena sp.' (Blust 1989)
POe *jiRi 'taxon consisting of Cordylinefruticosa and Dracaena angustifolia' (Milke
  1968: *diRi; Ross 1988)
  Adm: Mussau            sii          'banyan, Ficus sp.'
  Adm: Kurti             siy          'Dracaena sp.'
  Adm: Wuvulu            ti           'Dracaena sp.'
  Adm: Aua               ti           'Dracaena sp.'
  Adm: Ere               siy          'Dracaena sp.'
  NNG: Malasanga         sir          'grass skirt'
  NNG: Mindiri           (da)dir      'grass skirt'
  NNG: Mapos Buang Sl                 'tree sp., Euphorbeaceae'
  NNG: Wampur            rici?        'cordyline'
  NNG: Adzera            ji-ji        'cordyline'
  NNG: Kairiru           jir          'small pandanus sp.'
  PT:    Wedau           diri         'Dracaena sp.'
  PT:    Tawala          diri         'Dracaena sp.'
  PT:    Molima          dili         'red cordyline'
  MM: Tiang              si           'cordyline'
  MM: Kara (E)           si           'Cordyline fruticosa'
                         si(-tavul)   'Dracaena angustifolia'
  MM:    Nalik           sir          'cordyline'
  MM:    Tabar           cir          'cordyline'
  MM:    Lihir           cir          'Cordyline terminalis/fruticosa'
  MM:    Notsi           cit          'cordyline'
  MM:    Konomala        si           'cordyline'
  MM:    Patpatar        suri(ah)     'Dracaena angustifolia'
  MM:    Tolai           ir           'leafofthe croton' (Acn)
  MM:    Ramoaaina       ir-ira       'croton leaf, Dracaena'
  MM:    Petats          rin          'cordyline'
  MM:    Taiof           rir          'cordyline'
  MM:    Varisi          zili(para)   'Cordyline fruticosa' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                      comm.)
  MM: Marovo             ji(polo)     'Cordyline fruticosa'
  MM: Roviana            zi(polo)     'shrub, Dracaena sp.'
  SES: Gel a             dili         'Dracaena'
  SES: Lau               dili         'Dracaena with thin green leaves'
  SES: Kwara'ae          dili         'Cordyline fruticosa'
  SES: Kwaio             dili         'Cordyline fruticosa'
  SES: 'Are'are          siri         'herb with red stem and leaves, used for magical
                                      purposes'
  SES: Sa'a              dili         'Draecena'
  SES: Arosi             diri         'Draecena'
  NCal: NyeHlyu          di           'Cordylinefruticosa'
  Mic: Chuukese          tl-n         'Cordyline fruticosa'
PCP *jz 'taxon consisting of Cordylinefruticosa and Dracaena angustifolia'
  Fij:    Rotuman        jz           'plant with ornamental leaves and a sweet root:
                                      Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Tongan         Sl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     E Futunan      tl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Rennellese     tl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     WUvean         tl           'Draecena'
  Pn:     Emae           tl           'Cordyline sp.'
  Pn:     Samoan         tl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Tikopia        tl           'Cordyline sp.'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan      tl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Hawaiian       ki           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Marque san     tl           'Cordyline sp.'
  Pn:     Tahitian       tl           'Cordyline fruticosa'
  Pn:     Maori          tl           'Cordyline sp.'
>

                                                              Other cultivated plants    419


    Medial parenthesised *-q- is reconstructed in POe *kaRi(q)a on the assumption that Vitu
kariya 'rattan' is cognate, but the difference in denotation calls this into doubt.

<
POe *kaRi(q)a 'taxon of decorative plants' (Geraghty 1990: PEOc *gaRi(a))
  NNG: Tami               kali-kali    'Codiaeum variegatum' (Dempwolff 1902)
  SES: Kwara'ae           ka-kali      'Hornstedtia lycostoma'
  NCV:      Mota          karia          'Dracaena sp.'
  NCV:      NEAmbae       karie          'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Raga          yaria          'generic for Cordyline spp.'
  NCV:      Atchin        kari           'Dracaena sp.'
  NCV:      Uripiv        gari           'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Naman         na-yari        'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Neve'ei       na-?ari        'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Larevat       na-yri         'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Port Sandwich xari           'crotons'
  NCV:      Lewo          (puru )katie   'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Namakir       kari           'Cordyline sp.'
  NCV:      Nguna         na-karie       'palm-lily plant, Dracaena sp.'
  SV:       Sye           (tana)!Jklai   'Cordyline sp.'
  Fij:      Bauan         gai            'Cordyline sp.'
cf. also:
  MM:       Vitu           kariya        'rattan'
>

420    Malcolm Ross

<
POe *jajal 'croton, Codiaeum variegatum'
  NNG: Yabem           (ka)dada      'a grassland shrub, the sap ofwhich is used to
                                     blacken teeth' (probably Rhus taitensis-MDR)
  MM: Nehan            dedel(am)     'Codiaeum variegatum, yellow and green variety'
  MM: Varisi           zazala (piru) 'Codiaeum sp.' (W. McClatchey, pers. comm.)
  MM: Babatana        jajala         'Codiaeum variegatum' (W. McClatchey, pers.
                                     comm.)
  MM: Nduke            zazala        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  MM: Roviana          zazala        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  MM: Marovo          jajala         'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Mwotlap         na-sas        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Mota            sasa          'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: NEAmbae sasa                  'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Lonwolwol ha                  'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Raga            hahali        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Apma            sasli         'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Uripiv          na-jej        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Rerep           ne-jaj        'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Neve'ei         ne-nsah       'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Tape            cec           'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Avava           a-sah         'Codiaeum variegatum'
  NCV: Lonwolwol ha                  'Codiaeum variegatum'
  Fij:   Bauan         oaoa          'Codiaeum variegatum' (Geraghty 2004: 79)
  Fij:   Rotuman       sasa          'Codiaeum variegatum' (Geraghty 2004: 79)
>

                                                                           Other cultivated plants       421


13.6.5 Heliconia indica, heliconia, Blif laplap (Heliconiaceae)

Two species of Heliconia grow in NW Island Melanesia, H. indica in eastern mainland New
Guinea and the Bismarcks and H. salomonensis in Bougainville and the Solomons (R. Gard-
ner, pers. comm.). The two appear to be very· similar (Figure 13.10, left). 21 Numerous short
stems formed from leaf sheaths rise from an underground rhizome to a height of 5 or 6 m.
The leaves resemble banana leaves, and under cultivation assume various colours and pat-
terns: yellow, yellow-and-green striped, bright red or dark red. In the wild heliconias grow
in damp shady environments in primary and secondary forest.

    The leaves are used for covering and sealing the stone oven because of their thick, waxy
cuticle and very large leaf surfaces. Thanks to their size, fewer are needed, reducing the labour
of cutting and carrying (Henderson & Hancock 1988:239, Kwa' ioloa & Burt 2001: 196,
Hviding 2005: 120).

<
POe *paqo 'H eliconia sp'
     MM:     Nduke           vayo           'a large: perennial herb with banana-like leaves,
                                            Heliconia salomonensis'
     MM:     Marovo          vayo           'tree sp. with large banana-like leaves, Heliconia
                                            sp.'
     SES:    Gel a           vao-vao        'shrub with large leaves; wild banana'
     SES:    Santa Ana       fao            'Heliconia salomonensis'
     NCV:    Mwotlap         (no-yo)va      'Heliconia indica' (yo- 'leaf)
     NCV:    Mota            vao            'a heliconium'
     Fij:    Wayan           va-va          'Heliconia sp.'
     Fij:    Bauan           va-vao(a)      'a plant, Bleekeria elliptica'
>

<
PEOc *rako 'Heliconia sp., usually H . indica' (Lynch 2004a: PSOc *rau)
     SES:    Kwara' ae       rako            'Heliconia indica'
     NCV:    S Efate         n-rau           'Heliconia sp.'
     SV:     Sye             n-rau           'Heliconia sp.'
     SV:     Ura             !au             'Heliconia sp. (generic)'
>


13.6.6 Crinum asiaticum, spider lily (Amatyllidaceae)

Crinum asiaticum is a large lily with long erect leaves that are arranged in a spiral rosette
to form impressive clumps up to 1.5 m in height and 2 m wide (Figure 13 .10, right). The
leaves may be a metre long and 10 em wide. They emerge from huge bulbs that may weigh
as much as 9 kg. Its white flowers, with thick succulent stems, are shaped like tubes that flair
open into a crown of narrow petals.22 Hviding (2005: 103) distinguishes between Crinum
asiaticum, which is cultivated, and Crinum pedunculatum, which grows wild in sandy areas
near beaches and in other damp locations. Kwa' ioloa & Burt (2001: 216) distinguish between
a green-leaved wild variety of C. asiaticum and a yellow-leafed variety cultivated for deco-
ration in villages.

[21] An editor 's footnote indicates that Peekel (1984: 98 , 100) incorrectly identified H. indica as H. bihai, an
American species.

[22] http : I /www . floridata . com/ref/C/ crin\_as.i . cfm, accessed October 2007

422   Malcolm Ross




Figure 13.10 Left: Heliconia solomonensis: A, plant; B, mature inflorescence, open and showing
fruit. Right: Crinum asiaticum, spider lily.



    At Tinputz (Bougainville) the pounded roots of this plant were mixed with red iron oxide
and the mixture was rubbed onto coconut palm trunks to ensure that they bore well (Black-
wood 1935: 311). The Nakanai of New Britain and the Marovo use the light-coloured leaf
bases as trolling lures to catch large fish, in Marovo barracuda and Spanish mackerel (Hvid-
ing 2005: 103, Floyd 1954). The Nakanai also use the leaves for making women' s leaf skirts.
In Marovo the leaves are used to treat bruises and fractures.

    The forms listed below are clearly cognate, but it is not clear whether or how many of the
parenthesised segments of the Kairiru and Kilivila forms reflect part of the protoform: hence
the question mark against *mwalak.

<
POe *mwalak (?) 'spider lily, Crinum asiaticum '
  NNG: Kairiru        mlak(ap)        'Crinum asiaticum'
  PT:   Kilivila      mola(bau)       'a lily, Crinum asiaticum'
PSOc *mwalak 'spider lily, Crinum asiaticum' (Lynch 2004a)
  NCV: Mwotlap          mw[a]lak
  SV:  Anejom           no-(hos)meley 'Crinum sp.'
>

                                                                   Other cultivated plants   423


13.7 Cucurbits

The four plants discussed below, namely the bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria), the wax
gourd (Benincasa hispida ), the pumpkin ( Cucurbita moschata) and the cucumber ( Cucumis
sativus) have in common not only that they all grow on vines but, more relevant here, that the
dates and directions of their introductions into Oceania have been objects of controversy. The
linguistic evidence supports the controversial claim that the pumpkin, Cucurbita moschata,
was absent from the world of POe speakers but arrived soon after the break-up of POe.


13.7.1 Lagena ria siceraria (syn. L. vulgaris, L. leucantha, Cucurbita siceraria, C. lagena ria), bottle gourd, TP kambang (Cucurbitaceae)

The bottle gourd, Lagenaria siceraria, is grown throughout much of the Pacific, mainly for
its value as a container and occasionally for its food value (French 1986: 107). The plant
originated in Africa, but had spread across much of the world in pre-Columbian times. Barrau
( 1962: 189) regards it as an ancient plant in Melanesia, but no POe form can be reconstructed,
as noted by Ross (1996c).

    Clark (1996a) reconstructs PNCV *tavaya (Raga tavai, Mota wo-tavae), which, together
with Bauan tavaya 'bottle ' , implies PEOc *tapaya. But no cognates ofthe latter nor alterna-
tive cognate sets have been found in Western Oceanic or Admiralties languages, implying
that the bottle gourd was not known to POe speakers. Surveying recent findings , Green (2000)
suggests quite strongly that this was the case. The gourd may well have reached Oceania from
two directions, arriving in Melanesia from the Indo-Malaysian region and much later in east-
em Polynesia from South America. There is good evidence that the Polynesians did not carry
the gourd with them into eastern Polynesia (Whistler 1990, 1991 ). It is thus possible-and on
the linguistic evidence likely-that the bottle gourd first reached the Bismarck Archipelago
after the break-up of POe.


13.7.2 Benincasa hispida, wax gourd, white gourd, winter melon (Cucurbitaceae)

Golson (2002) also provides a survey of archaeological evidence which shows that allegedly
pre-Oceanic dates for the bottle gourd in Oceania are the result of misidentification of re-
mains of the wax gourd, Benincasa hispida. Whistler (1990) similarly shows that reports of
the bottle gourd in Polynesia reflect incorreclt identifications of the wax gourd. The latter is a
native of SE Asia and archaeological evidence indicates that it was present at least on main-
land New Guinea when the Austronesian speaking ancestors of POe speakers arrived there.
There are terms for it in non-Oceanic languages: terms from Philippine languages listed by
Madulid (200 1b: 42) together with Malay kundur point to a possible PMP *kundur, but this
may be an outcome ofborrowings across island SE Asia (Wolff 1994). Verheijen (1990: 195)
cites terms that point to a possible PCMP *kelas. As Golson points out, the botanical literature
indicates that B. hispida is at least occasionally present at locations on the mainland and in
the Bismarcks where Oceanic languages are spoken today. In support ofthis he cites Peekel
(1984: 547-548) and Borrell (1989: 66). French (1986: 108) also indicates that B. hispida is
grown in Papua New Guinea, but does not specify locations.

424         Malcolm Ross


    Whistler provides names for B. hispida, listed below, which allow us to reconstruct Proto
Central Pacific *va!J(o,u). I have accepted his arguments for glossing the Fijian terms as B.
hispida: his sources (H. B. R. Parham 1943, Capell1941) gloss them as species of Lagenaria.
Despite the obvious presence of B. hispida further west I have been unable to reconstruct an
earlier term for it, but not for the usual reasons. Usually, a term is not reconstructable because
there are no cognates in the data or because cognates are insufficiently widespread. In the case
of B. hispida, however, there are no data from outside Fiji and Polynesia except Peekel' s
Patpatar hulhul paraho. This can only indicate that, even if B. hispida was present in early
Oceanic times, its presence and significance in the agricultural suite of Oceanic-speaking
societies has faded almost to zero.[23]

<
PCP *va!J(o,u) 'wax gourd, Benincasa hispida'
     Fij:      Lau Is.      va!Jo            'Benincasa hispida'
     Fij:      Bauan        va!Jo            'Benincasa hispida'
     Pn:       Tongan      fa!JU             'Benincasa hispida'
     Pn:       Niue an     fa!JU             'bottle'
     Pn:       Samoan      fa!JU             'Benincasa hispida'
     Pn:       E Uvean     fa!JU             'Benincasa hispida'
     Pn:       E Futuna    fa!JU             'Benincasa hispida'
>


13.7.3 Cucurbita moschata, pumpkin, TP pamken (Cucurbitaceae)

Barrau (1962: 190) declares that the pumpkin[24] is a European introduction to Melanesia,
and the linguistic data largely support his assertion. A number of terms for it are borrow-
ings from English (MM: E Kara baniyin, Tinputz banken, NCV: Paamese vamuken, Lewo
pamken) or from elsewhere (PT: Motu mausini, Roro mauteni, apparently from Samoan mau-
tini 'gourd ').

[23] Barrau (1962: 189) lists B. hispida as a recent introduction to Oceania: he is apparently wrong, although there
may have been recent reintroductions.

[24] Barrau refers to the pumpkin as Cucurbita pepo . In Papua New Guinea, at least, the common pumpkin is
C. moschata, not C. pepo (R. Michael Bourke, pers. comm., and French 1986: 102-103 ). Both are evidently
recent introductions, so this possible confusion makes no difference to the argument of this paragraph.

    The set of seeming cognates below provides evidence, on the other hand, of an early
Oceanic etymon, *waluq or *[w]aruq, thatmusthave denoted C. moschata or a similar plant. I
write 'seeming' because, however one reconstructs the term, there are irregular phonological
developments due to borrowing. Dempwolff (1938) reconstructed *baluq 'bottle gourd, Lage-
naria siceraria' . However, the Oceanic forms below, together with Sundanese, Old Javanese,
Balinese waluh, Buru walu 'bottle gourd' , point to PMP *waluq 'bottle gourd ' . Whether PMP
actually had such a form or whether this is a series of borrowings postdating the break-up of
PMP and perhaps even ofPOc (cf §7.1) is not relevant here. What is relevant is that a form
related to these entered early Oceanic, but was applied to the pumpkin, C. moschata, or a
related species.


                                                                             Other cultivated plants        425


    If we assume that the Oceanic etymon was *waluq, then the consonants are regularly
reflected in Kela, Dami and Takia. Sio reflects *waruq, and Kela may also do so, as *-1- and
*-r-are neutralised as Kela -r-. Hote, Mapos Buang and Patep reflect *ruq-aruq and Lenakel
and Anejom reflect *ruq-ruq. 25 Gapapaiwa and Misima bonu-bonu (and similar forms in
other PT languages) reflect *bwalu-bwalu . If we assume instead that the Oceanic etymon was
*waruq or *aruq, we are still left with irregularities.

    The strong likelihood, then, is that the term was borrowed from community to commu-
nity sometime very soon after the break-up of POe. That is, C. moschata or a similar plant
must have found its way into NW Melanesia not much less that 3000 years ago. The genus
Cucurbita is indigenous to the tropical zone of the Americas, where domestication is known
to have occurred by 4000 years ago (Sauer 1993).

    This finding is not at odds with the historical fact that the modem pumpkin was introduced
to NW Melanesia by Europeans after 1870. It simply indicates that a variety of C. moschata
or a similar plant was already present, and had been present for a long time, albeit perhaps
as a very minor crop in a few areas.

<
Early Oceanic *waluq OR *[w]aruq 'pumpkin, Cucurbita moschata ?'
  NNG: Sio                  waru         'pumpkin'
  NNG: Kela                 waru-waru    'pumpkin'
  NNG: Hote                lu-alu        'pumpkin'
  NNG: Mapos Buang          rux-arux     'pumpkin' (-r- for t-1-)
  NNG: Mumeng (Patep) lu?-iJlu           'pumpkin'
  NNG: Dami                olu           'pumpkin'
  NNG: Takia                walu         'pumpkin'
  PT:    Gapapaiwa         bonu-bonu     'pumpkin'
  PT:    Misima            bonu-bonu     'pumpkin'
PSV *na-r(o,u)r(o,u)(q) 'pumpkin, gourd'
  SV:    Lenakel           (noua)ne-lulu 'pumpkin'
  SV:    Anejom            ne-rero       'gourd'
>


13.7.4 Cucumis sativus, cucumber (Cucurbitaceae)

Because of the varieties that have been introduced since 1870, it is sometimes assumed that
the cucumber is a crop introduced by Europeans. However, Bourke & Allen (forthcoming)
write that it was probably introduced via SE Asia thousands of years ago. The cognate set
supporting the reconstruction of POe *[ka]tim(o,u)n 'cucumber, Cucumis sativus' below con-
firms that the cucumber was part of the world of POe speakers, even though it is not indige-
nous to the Pacific. The genus Cucumis has its origins in Africa, and the cucumber is one of
the few African species known to have been domesticated outside Africa. Until recently it
was thought that it was part of a suite of plants that were domesticated in the Fertile Crescent
of SW Asia or in India, but recent work in molecular biology has cast doubt on this, placing
the cucumber instead in an Asian-Australian clade of the genus Cucumis (Renner et al. 2007).
There is thus no biogeographic challenge to the proposal that the cucumber was known to
both PMP and POe speakers.

[25] Hote, Patep and Lenakel also neutralise *-l- and *-r- , but I have ignored this here for the sake of simplicity
of presentation.

426   Malcolm Ross


    Blust (ACD) produces strong evidence to suggest that the denotatum ofPOc *[ka]tim(o,u)n
was the cucumber, but the reflexes below suggest that it may also have been used of other
species of Cucumis.

    The initial syllable of *[ka]tim(o,u)n is reflected only in Western Oceanic languages ,
whereas Central Pacific reflexes point to *timun . This distribution justifies the reconstruction
of POe forms with and without initial *ka-, which may represent or have been reanalysed as
the prefix *ka- 'tree' reflecting earlier *kayu 'tr,ee ' (ch.2, §7.1.2).

    Shown in parentheses below are irregular phonological developments, implying that al-
though the term was inherited into POe, it was sometimes borrowed from one language into
another.

<
PMP *[ka]timun 'cucurbit (generic); cucumber, Cucumis sativus' (Dempwolff 1938:
  *timun)
POe *[ka]tim(o,u)n 'Cucumis spp. (generic?); cucumber, Cucumis sativus' (ACD)
  NNG: Sengseng               tamun         'Cucumis sativus' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
                              katim         'small cultivated cucurbit with dark green skin and
                                            sweet orange flesh ' (A. Chowning, pers. comm.)
                                            (probably borrowed)
  NNG:    Gitua          karimon            'cucumber' (AcD)
  NNG:    Mapos Buang    qatim!J            'cucumber, Cucumis sativus'
  NNG:    Mumeng (Patep) katima             'cucumber, Cucumis sativus' (-a- for t -(o,u )-)
  NNG:    Numb ami       katimana           'cucumber' (-a- for t-(o,u)-)
  PT:     Motu           asemo              'small wild cucumber, Cucumis sp. ' (ACD)
  MM:     Sursurunga     katmur             'vegetable like pumpkin or cucumber' (-r for t-n)
  MM:     Tolai          katimur            'Pacific melon, Cucumis melo' (-r for t-n)
  MM:     Teop           asimuru            'a vegetable like a cucumber' ( -r fort -n)
  MM:     Tinputz        asimu              'cucumber'
  Fij:    Bauan          timo               'a plant, Cucumis acidus'
  Pn:     E Futunan      timo               'melon'
>



14 Concluding notes

14.1 The uses of plants

Reconstructed plant names in chapters 5 to 13 are usually accompanied by an indication of
each plant's recent or present-day uses. These are often drawn from the works listed in §5.2
of chapter 1, which have been consulted extensively. In these chapters I have made no attempt
to reconstruct the uses which POe speakers may have made of particular plants, but it is a
reasonable inference that where a particular use is reported in mutually distant locations-and
particularly where one or more of these locations is in the Bismarck Archipelago-this is
likely to be a use which POe speakers made of the plant under discussion.

     One observation which emerges from this work is that a given plant-or similar species
ofthe same genus-commonly has similar uses at widely separated locations in the Bismar-
cks, the Solomons, Vanuatu and sometimes Waya Island in western Fiji (Gardner & Pawley
2006). This is not surprising, insofar as the properties of a plant itself often determine the
uses to which it may be put, but there are also a number of cases where the use of a particular
plant for a particular purpose is to some extent culturally determined. For example, Cordy-
line fruticosa is (or was) held to have spiritual power in locations across Melanesia from New
Britain to Fiji (ch.l3, §6), and its longtime importance to Oceanic speakers is evidenced by
the number of cultivars ofthe species that are found across the region. Although the proper-
ties of the plant-variegated colourful leaves and a distinctive smell-provided the basis for
its uses in association with magic and taboo, they do not account for its cultural importance
across much of Oceania, and it is reasonable to infer that it already played a role in the cere-
monial and ritual practices of early Oceanic speakers. On present-day practice it seems likely
that another plant with colourful leaves, Codiaeum variegatum, was used by early Oceanic
speakers to mark taboo sites and other boundaries and as a source ofleaves to decorate men' s
bodies and cover the genitals during dances.

     It seems likely that some ofthe plant names reconstructed in this volume were not origi-
nally plant names but terms for useful material produced from the plant. Indeed, it may be that
some of the present-day terms which linguists and others have taken to be plant names are still
terms for materials, or generics for trees from which a certain material is produced. Obvious
candidates for POe terms that at least once upon a time denoted materials are *bau 'hard-
wood taxon' (see ch.7, §4.10), *toRas 'a taxon of hardwood trees including Intsia bijuga'
(see ch.7, §4.9) and *dotoq 'sticky liquids including the sap of (some?) trees; a mangrove
tree, probably Excoecaria agallocha' (see ch.6, §4.3).

428   Malcolm Ross




14.2 The durability of Proto Oceanic plant names

One cannot engage in the reconstruction of POe: plant names without becoming aware of the
fact that some names are far more durable than others. For some plant names a cognate set
several pages long could be provided (such sets have been cut down so that they provide
a reasonable sample of the available data), whilst for others only two or three cognates are
available, and in some cases no name is reconstructable for a plant, even though it can be
assumed with reasonable confidence that it occurred in the environment of POe speakers and
that they had a name for it. I have touched on these matters elsewhere (Ross 2005).

    As Chowning (1963) notes in her concluding remarks, a number of the plant names for
which we find cognates across Oceania were probably never cultivated and almost certainly
were not carried on migrant canoes, but people used the old names for the same or simi-
lar plants when they encountered them afresh. An observation that arises from this volume,
however, is that there appears to be a reasonably high correlation between the durability of
a POe plant name and the plant' s frequency of use. The evidence for this is admittedly im-
pressionistic and circumstantial, and takes the form of the uses to which a plant is put. A POe
reconstruction is more likely to be made for a species for which the sources (ch.1, §5.2) note
many and widespread applications than for a species with few or no uses. In other words, plant
names that are used more are mentioned more, and plant names that are mentioned more last
longer. This is unsurprising: more frequently mentioned names are passed on to and used by
the next generation. Less frequently mentioned names are either forgotten or never learned
by the next generation, leading to the creation of a new name when one is again needed. If
early groups of settlers on Oceanic islands beyond the Bismarcks were small in membership,
then the likelihood of less frequently used terms being replaced by neologisms is increased.


14.3 Where do Oceanic plant names come from?

Tables 14.3-14.9 list most of the POe, PWOc, PEOc and PROc terms (including generics)
reconstructed in this book. Omitted are (i) tem1s for plant parts and plant products and (ii)
POe terms whose origin is unclear, i.e. the term has suspected but uncertain non-Oceanic
cognates).

    The number of terms in Tables 14.3-14.9 reconstructed at each interstage is shown in
Table 14.1. A striking fact emerges: of 220 reconstructions, 177, or 80.4 %, are POe recon-
structions, and only 43, or 19.6 % are attributable exclusively to the later interstages PWOc,
PEOc and PROc-this despite the fact that data are available from languages that permit
the reconstruction of terms at these interstages, and every term that the data supported was
reconstructed at the highest possible interstage . This heavy skewing towards POe is not at-
tributable to patchiness in the data, but reflects a fact about Oceanic plant names, namely that
POe terms are generally quite durable, and that only a minority underwent replacement in
PWOc, PEOc and PROc. In fact the figures overstate replacement, because (i) a number of the
reconstructed lower-order terms coexisted with terms inherited from POe ; (ii) it is possible
that some of these terms will prove to be of POe antiquity as more data become available.

                                                                     Concluding notes     429


            Table 14.1    Number of plant terms reconstructed at each interstage


                                   POe         177   80.4 %
                                   PWOc         22   10.0%
                                   PEOc         15    6.8%
                                   PROc          6    2.7%
                                   Total       220   99.9%



        Table 14.2   Inherited and possibly innovatory plant terms in Proto Oceanic


                         Inherited from PAn or PMP       65    36.7%
                         Inherited from PCEMP            11     6.2%
                         Inherited from PEMP              4     2.3 %
                         Total inherited                 80    45.2%
                         Possibly innovatory             97    54.8%
                         Total                          177   100.0%



    This skewing revealed in Table 14.1 is not peculiar to plant names. It reflects the speed
of Oceanic settlement and the fact that Western Oceanic probably emerged out of a stay-at-
home dialect network, whilst Proto Eastern Oceanic and Proto Remote Oceanic, as we noted
in chapter 1 (§3 .2.3), perhaps never really existed as the languages of discrete communities.

    Of 177 reconstructed POe plant terms, Table 14.2 shows that 80, or 45 %, have a known
Austronesian source that precedes POe, i.e. the POe term has non-Oceanic cognates which
show that it was inherited into POe from an earlier interstage, whilst 97, or 55 %, have no
known non-Oceanic cognates. The latter figure is of course open to question. It cannot be
higher, but it could be lower, because some seemingly innovatory POe terms were probably
inherited from an earlier interstage, but the non-Oceanic sources listed in ch.1, §5.2 happen
not to record cognates. Nonetheless, it would not be surprising if many of these 97 were POe
innovations. Wolff (1994) points out how readily plant names are borrowed, and we would
expect POe speakers to have borrowed plant names from their Papuan speaking neighbours
and Papuan speakers to have retained older names as they shifted to POe (see ch. 2, §4). The
only reasonably clear example of such a loan is *mwapo(q) 'taro' (ch.9, §2.2.1). Whether we
will ever be able to source other terms convincingly depends partly on research in histor-
ical Papuan linguistics, currently in its infancy. However, there is one small pointer in the
forms themselves. As noted in vol. 1 (ch.2, §2.4), the POe labiovelar consonants *pw, *bwand
*mwwere not present in Proto Malaya-Polynesian and represent an innovation in the POe
consonant system. In some lexical items their presence is the result of conditioning (Blust
1981a, Lynch 2002b), in many their occurr,ence probably reflects borrowing from Papuan
languages. Items in Tables 14.3-14.9 which contain one of these phonemes are shown in
bold. Only three ( = 4%) of the 80 inherited items listed in Tables 14.3-14.5 include one of
these phonemes, and in two ofthese instances--*m(wJaso(q)u and *p(wJatoRu-the labiovelar
is uncertain, whilst the exact form of the third reconstruction, *qaramwaqi, is insecure in other
respects (§2.6). On the other hand 19 (20%) ofthe 97 items in Table 14.6 include a labiove-
lar, five if them albeit uncertain, suggesting that the table does indeed include a good number
ofPapuan loans-the more so as we would not ,expect more than a minority ofPapuan loans
to contain labiovelars.

430   Malcolm Ross


     If a POe plant name has cognates in eastern Indonesia, especially in EMP languages, then
it is possible that in some cases I am unaware of them, as the available sources for these lan-
guages are limited. However, non-Oceanic Austronesian plant names from the sources listed
at the beginning of §5.2 of chapter 2 have led 1to the reconstruction of a number of higher-
order (PCEMP and PMP) plant names in this volume, and it is a reasonable supposition that
many of the plant names reconstructed in this volume for which no non-Oceanic cognates
have been found really were POe innovations.

                 Table 14.3: Proto Oceanic plant terms inherited from Proto
                 Austronesian or Proto Malaya--Polynesian (65 reconstruc-
                 tions)

  *[a ]iiulil)     'Pisonia sp.'
  *aRu             'a shore tree, Casuarina equisetifolia'
  *bai-bai( t)     'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
  *[baR]baR        'coral tree, Erythrina variegata'
  *bitU(IJ)        'bamboo sp.'
  *botu(IJ)        'large bamboo, presumably Bambusa sp.'
  *buaq            'betelnut, areca nut, palm, Areca catechu'
  *drokol          'small Dillenia species'
  *droRu(fJ)       'Trema orientalis'
  *guRu(n)         'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica'
  *[ja]latol)      'Laportea and Dendrocnide spp.'
  *kanawa(n)       'Cordia subcordata'
  *[ka]tim(o,u)n   'Cucumis spp. (generic?); cucumber, Cucumis sativus'
  *kati(p)al       'a palm with black wood, Caryota sp.'
  *kayu            'tree or shrub: generic name for plants with woody stems and branches, prob-
                   ably not including palms or tree-ferns; wood, stick'
  *kiRe            'coastal Pandanus sp., probably Pandanus tectorius'
  *kulapu(R)       'Dillenia schlechteri'
  *kuluR           'breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis'
  *laqia           'ginger, Zingiber officinale (?)'
  *m(wlaso(q)u     'wild cinnamon, Cinnamomum sp., probably C. xanthoneuron; possibly also
                   Cananga odorata'
  *malo            'paper mulberry, Broussonetia papyrifera; barkcloth, loincloth'
  *naRa            'Pterocarpus indicus'
  *iiatuq          'Burckella obovata'
  *nini(q)         'shrub, Donax cannaeformis'
  Continued on next page
                                                                        Concluding notes      431


Table 14.3 continued
*nipaq            'Nypafruticans'
*niuR             'coconut palm and/or fruit, Cocos nucifera'
*nunuk            'fig trees, Ficus taxon'
*l)iRac           'Pemphis acidula'
*p(w)atoRu        'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
*padran           'coastal pandanus, Pandanus tectorius; pandanus (generic)'
*pali[s,j ]i      'generic term for grasses and other grass-like plants'
*(p,b)anaRo       'Thespesia populnea'
*para(k)          'Zingiberaceae spp. with edible rhizomes'
*paRu             'Hibiscus tiliaceus'
*pila(q)u         'Casuarina equisetifolia'
*pinu(q)an        'Macaranga spp., perhaps M. involucrata'
*piRaq            'giant taro, elephant ear taro,. Alocasia macrorrhizos'
*piRu(q)          'fan palm, Licuala sp.'
*pitaquR          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
*pudi             'banana, Musa cultivars'
*[pu-]pulu        'betel pepper, Piper betle'
*puna             'vine used for fish poison, probably Derris elliptica'
*putun            'Barringtonia asiatica'
*qa(l,R)a         'Ficus sp.'
*qaramwaqi        'Pipturus argenteus'
*qasam            'fern used for tying and binding, Lygodium circinnatum'
*(qate-)qate      'Wedelia biflora'
*qauR             'bamboo spp.'
*qipil            'a taxon ofhardwood trees including Intsia bijuga and Casuarina equisetifolia'
*qu(w)e           'rattan, Calamus spp.'
*qupi             'greater yam, Dioscorea alata; yam (generic)'
*Rabia            'sago, Metroxylon spp., mainly Metroxylon sagu (syn. Metroxylon rumphii)'
*raqu(p)          'New Guinea walnut, Dracontomelon dao'
*rarap            'coral tree, Erythrina spp.'
*talise           'Terminalia catappa'
*talo(s)          'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
*tOI)OR           'mangrove, Bruguiera spp.; mangroves (generic)'
*topu             'sugarcane, Saccharum officinarum'
*toR as           'a taxon of hardwood trees including Intsia bijuga' (?)
*tui              'Dolichandrone spathacea'
*tupa             'climbing shrubs, Derris spp.'
*wai, *waiwai     'mango (generic)'
*walasi           'tree sp. with poisonous sap, Semecarpus forstenii'
*waR[e)           'Flagellaria indica'
*waRoc            'generic term for vines and creepers, plants with creeping or climbing growth
                  structure; string, rope'
432     Malcolm Ross


                    Table 14.4: Proto Oceanic plant terms inherited from Proto
                    Central/Eastern Malaya-Polynesian ( 11 reconstructions)

      *[bual]bual    'species of palm used for making spears and bows; palm-wood spear or bow,
                     probably Caryota sp.'
      *dalo          'Calophyllum inophyllum'
      *dradrap       'Hoya sp.'
      *ima           'Pandanus sp. with useful leaves'
      *jasi          'Cordia subcordata'
      *kai(k)        'Albizia sp.'
      *[ka]IJaRi     'canarium almond, Canarium indicum'
      *lowal)a       'Litsea sp.'
      *pail          'F alcataria moluccana'
      *pau(q)        'mango, Mangifera sp. (not indica)'
      *Reqi          'sword grass, Imperata cylindrica'


                    Table 14.5: Proto Oceanic plant terms inherited from Proto
                    Eastern Malayo-Polynesian (4 reconstructions)

  *na[su]-nasu        'Scaevola taccada'
  *qayawan            'Ficus strangler fig taxon'
  *tawan              'Pometia pinnata'
  *tuRi-tuRi          'candlenut tree, Aleurites moluccana' (?)


                    Table 14.6: Proto Oceanic plant terms with no known non-
                    Oceanic cognates (97 reconstructions)

  *ba(k,g)a              'banyan tree, medium-sized Ficus spp., not stranglers'
  *babak                 'Falcataria moluccana'
  *bala                  'taxon including various Euodia spp.' (?)
  *baqun                 'banana cultivar'
  *baReko                'breadfruit'
  *bau                   'hardwood taxon'
  *bele                  'Abelmoschus manihot'
  *beta                  'breadfruit'
  *biRi-biRi             'Hernandia nymphaefolia'
  *basi                  'a forest tree with white wood, probably Euodia elleryana'
  *bou                   'Fagraea spp.'
  *bulu                  'Garcinia sp., perhaps G. novo-guineensis'
  *b(wla[a               'tree fern, Cycas or Cyathea sp.'
  *bwau                  'bamboo'
  *bwele                 'bamboo sp.'
  *bwera                 'Musa cultivar'
  Continued on next page
                                                                            Concluding notes      433


Table 14.6 continued
*drala                 'shrub sp., Vitex trifolia'
*(dr,d )aRa(q,k )a     'wild nutmeg, Myristica sp.'
*i(u)bu                'Corynocarpus cribbianus'
*iguRa                 'Ficus species with sandpapery leaves, either F. copiosa or F. wassa or both'
*ipi                   'Tahitian chestnut, I nocarpus fagifer'
*jajal                 'croton, Codiaeum variegatum'
*JamaR                 'Commersonia bartramia'
*jiRi                  'taxon consisting of Cordyline fruticosa and Dracaena angustifolia'
*joRaga                'banana, Fe'i (?) cultivars'
*ka(mwa)-kamwa         'Ficus sp., perhaps Ficus nodosa'
*ka[(r,l)a]qabusi      'Acalypha spp.'
*kalaka                'Planchonella sp.'
*kapika                'Malay apple, rose apple, Syzygium malaccense'
*karagwam              'seaweed, seagrass'
*kaRi(q)a              'taxon of decorative plants'
*kaRi(q)ana            'Pandanus lamekotensis'
*kayu qone             'Heritiera littoralis'
*koka                  'Macaranga spp.'
*koma(r,R)(o,u)        'Endospermum sp.'
*kopu                  'bamboo sp.'
*koRa                  'wild mango, Mangifera minor'
*kurat                 'the dye produced from Morinda citrifolia'
*m<wlase               'wild mulberry, paper mulberry, Broussonetia papyrifera'
*ma(i)tagaR(a)         'Kleinhovia hospita'
*mapuqan               'Flueggeaflexuosa' (?)
*maqota                'Dysoxylum spp.'
*maRakita              'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima'
*maRako                'Trichospermum peekelii'
*mari( a )sapa         'Syzygium sp.
*mol is                'citrus fruit or citrus-like fruit, perhaps Clymenia polyandra'
*mwala(q)u             'Glochidion philippicum'
*mwalak (?)            'spider lily, Crinum asiaticum'
*mwaiia                'Pandanus sp., perhaps Pandanus conoideus'
*mwapo(q)              'taro, Colocasia esculenta'
*mwaruqe               'Dioscorea sp. or perhaps a cultivar of D. alata'
*nip us                'Cryptocarya sp.'
*iioiiu                'Morinda citrifolia'
*olal)a                'Campnosperma brevipetiolatum'
*pakum                 'Pandanus dubius'
*pala(IJ)              'cut nut, bush nut, Barringtonia novae-hiberniae (green variety?)'
*paliaRua              'a vine, Merremia peltata'
*paqo                  'Heliconia sp'
*paqu                  'Kleinhovia hospita'
*pasa(r,R)             'Vitex cofassus'
Continued on next page
434   Malcolm Ross


  Table 14.6 continued
  *pesi                  'a coastal forest tree, perhaps Pongamia pinnata'
  *pi(y )UIJ             'Miscanthus floridulus'
  *pijo                  'cane or reed taxon, including Saccharum spontaneum'
  *poipoi                'Pandanus sp., perhaps P. tectorius'
  *poka(q)               'variety of Malay apple'
  *(p,b)oso              'k.o. taro'
  *puRe                  'taxon of beach creepers; perhaps prototypically Ipomoea grandiflora and
                         Ipomoea pes-caprae'
  *pwa(k,g)e             'k.o. green vegetable(?)'
  *pwabosi               'free-standing small or medium-sized Ficus sp., probably F. wassa'
  *pCwlasa(r,R)          'large Pandanus sp.'
  *pwatika               'potato yam, aerial yam, Dioscorea bulbifera'
  *pCwlawa(t)            'Cerbera spp., probably C.floribunda and C. manghas'
  *pwete                 'bird's nest fern, Asplenium nidus'
  *pwi(r,R)a             'Cananga odorata'
  *qarop                 'Premna spp.'
  *qat(V)                'Terminalia sp. with edible nut'
  *( q,k )atita          'the putty nut, probably Parinari laurina and Parinari glaberrima'
  *( q)alipa, *lalipa    'nut sp., possibly canarium almond, Canarium sp.' (?)
  *qope                  'Gyrocarpus americanus'
  *quRis                 'Spondias cytherea'
  *( quta )quta          'grass and weeds (generic)'
  *rabum                 'grass'
  *Rigi                  'rosewood, Pterocarpus indicus'
  *sabakap               'Alstonia scholaris'
  *sakup                 'banana cultivar with long fruit' (?)
  *seRa                  'Ficus sp., perhaps F. adenosperma'
  *sila                  'Job's tears, Coix lachryma-jobi'
  *tamanu                'Calophyllum sp.'
  *tal) a                'Ficus tinctoria'
  *tapi(l)               'puzzlenut tree, Xylocarpus granatum' (?)
  *tapoRa                'a nut-bearing tree sp.'
  *tawasi                'Rhus taitensis'
  *toRu                  'Cordia subcordata'
  *udu(r,R)              'Dioscorea alata cultivar (?)'
  *wasa                  'Abelmoschus manihot; green vegetables in general'
  *wasi-wasi             'Abroma augusta'
  *yal)o                 'turmeric, Curcuma tonga'
                                                                            Concluding notes      435


                Table 14.7: Proto Western Oceanic plant terms with no
                known external cognates (22 reconstructions)

*bara               'Macaranga spp.'
*basi               'mango'
*haul               'mangrove, Rhizophora sp. (?)'
*bwana              'I ntsia bijuga'
*bwatiq             'banana cultivar'
*gobu               'Dioscorea sp.'
*ka(p)ul            'seed yam'
*kamisa             'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
*kam(w)apaR         'Cryptocarya sp.'
*kasuwai            'mango'
*kobo               'taxon of Macaranga spp.'
*kokoi              'mushroom sp.'
*[ku,i]Rim(a,o)     'Octomeles sumatrana'
*lapuka             'k.o. tree with fruit similar to breadfruit, Parartocarpus venenosa' (?)
*m<wla[i            'Derris sp.'
*mamisa             'lesser yam, Dioscorea esculenta'
*moke               'Pandanus sp.'
*mwa(r,R)e          'taxon including Codiaeum variegatum and Cordyline fruticosa'
*nagi               'Cordia sp.'
*(s,j )a(q,k )umu   'Pandanus sp.'
*tabun              'Garcinia sp.'
*tabuqaR            'Saccharum edule'



                Table 14.8: Proto Eastern Oceanic plant terms with no known
                external cognates ( 15 reconstlfUctions)

*bakuRa                  'Calophyllum sp., probably C. kajewskii'
*buka                    'taxon oflittoral trees, including Pisonia spp. and Gyrocarpus americanus'
*bulipa                  'Ficus sp.'
*gama                    'Finschia cloroxantha'
*(k)a(r,l)adrol)a        'Acalypha sp.'
*koka                    'tree sp., Bischofiajavanica'
*mabwe                   'Tahitian chestnut, I nocarpus fagifer'
*melo                    'Elaeocarpus angustifolius'
*milo                    'Thespesia populnea'
*mwa(q)ele               'a cycad, Cycas rumphii'
*pakalo, *pwakala (?)    'Hibiscus sp.'
*paRage                  'Pangium edule
*pinuaq                  'a nut tree, perhaps Canarium sp. (?)'
*rako                    'Heliconia sp., usually H. indica'
*sinu                    'taxon of shrubs whose sap causes irritation, including species of Phaleria'
436     Malcolm Ross


                   Table 14.9: Proto Remote Oceanic plant terms with no
                   known external cognates (6 reconstructions)

      *buavu        'Hernandia sp.'
      *maRi         'breadfruit'
      *sasaRu       'Abelmoschus manihot'
      *vaRo         'Neisosperma oppositifolium'
      *vuba         'k.o. vine, probably Derris elliptica'
      *wasi-wasi    'Sterculia vitiensis'
