        Acknowledgments



Particular thanks are due to our co-editor, Malcolm Ross, for lending his technical skills, and
a great deal of his time, to the production of this volume. As well as reading and commenting
on successive drafts of each chapter, Malcolm did the final formatting of the volume, drew
all the maps, created several of the figures, and compiled the indices.

     John Lynch kindly provided comments on all the chapters and suggested a number of
additions to the cognate sets and reconstructions. We are also grateful to Ann Chowning,
Alexandre Frangois, Paul Geraghty and the late Phil Quick for their comments on a number
of chapters.

     Each chapter has benefited from discussions with and comments by various colleagues;
their particular contributions are acknowledged in a footnote in the relevant chapter.
     Thanks to Julie Manley for designing the cover and to Sandie Waters for providing the
cover photograph, featuring two Great Barrier Reef diagonal banded sweetlips (Plectorhiiichus
lineatus).

     We are grateful to Chris Healey for permission to use several of his drawings of mammals in Maj nep & Bulmer (2007), to Dick Watling and M.F. Charters for permission to copy
drawings of birds from Watling (1982), to Jutta Koestner for drawing these copies and to Ian
Faulkner for doing several of the drawings of fish.
     Other published sources of figures are as follows:
Chapter 2: Pawley & Sayaba (2003): 2.1, 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.9, 2.11, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15,
     2.16, 2.18, 2.21, 2.22, 2.24, 2.29, 2.30, 2.32, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35; Carcasson (1977): 2.20,
     2.26, 2.31; Tinker (1978): 2.3; FishBase website (Froese & Pauly 2010): 2.8, 2.10,
     2.12, 2.17, 2.23, 2.25, 2.27, 2.28.
Chapter 4: King (1991): 4.1, 4.2, 4.3; Wagner & Abbott (1964): 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 (turban, cone
     and murex); De Luca & Deluca (1976): 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10.
Chapter 5: Beehler (1991): 5.1, 5.3; Majnep & Bulmer (2007): 5.2, 5.4, 5.5; Pawley & Bul     mer (f.c.): 5.6, 5.13.
Chapter 6: Watling (1982): 6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 6.7, 6.9, 6.10, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15; Beehler (1991): 6.18;
     Beehler et al. (1986): 6.2, 6.21; Mayr (1945): 6.13, 6.14, 6.16.
Chapter 7: Curran (1946): 7.4, 7.5, 7.7, 7.8.

Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley
Canberra, January 2011


                                             xiv
                                                               xxv

Map 1   The Austronesian language family and major subgroups

xxvi

       Map 2   Geographic limits of historically known Oceanic speakers and of presently documented Lapita sites (after Kirch 1 <^<97:17, 54)



1 Introduction

1.1 Aims

This is the fourth in a series of volumes on the lexicon of the Proto Oceanic (POc) language.[1]
POc is the immediate ancestor of the Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian language family.
This subgroup consists of all the Austronesian languages of Melanesia east of 136° E,
together with those of Polynesia and (with two exceptions) those of Micronesia—more than
450 languages in all (see Map 1).[2] Extensive arguments for the existence of Oceanic as a
clearly demarcated branch of Austronesian were first put forward by Otto Dempwolff in the
1920s, and the validity of the subgroup is now recognised by virtually all scholars working
in Austronesian historical linguistics.

     The development and break-up of the POc language and speech community were stages in
a truly remarkable chapter in human prehistory—the colonisation by Austronesian speakers
of the Indo-Pacific region in the period after about 2000 BC. The outcome was the largest
of the world’s well-established language families and (until the expansion of Indo-European
after Columbus) the most widespread. The Austronesian family comprises more than 1,000
distinct languages. Its eastern and western outliers, Madagascar and Easter Island, are two-
thirds of a world apart, and its northernmost extensions, Hawai‘i and Taiwan, are separated
by 70 degrees of latitude from its southernmost outpost, Stewart Island in New Zealand. It is
likely that the divergence of Oceanic from its nearest relatives, which are the Austronesian
languages spoken around Cenderawasih Bay and in South Halmahera (Blust 1978a), began
when Austronesian speakers from the Cenderawasih Bay area moved eastwards along the
north coast of New Guinea and into the Bismarck Archipelago. There is a strong school of
opinion that associates the subsequent break-up of POc with the rapid colonisation of Island
Melanesia and the central Pacific by bearers of the Lapita culture between about 1200 and
 900 BC (see Map 2 and volume 2, chapter 2).


[1] The project has been jointly directed by Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross, with research assistance from
 Meredith Osmond, in the Department of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies at the Aus tralian National University. Originally, five volumes were planned, but the large amount of material has required
 this to be increased to seven (see p2).

[2] The listing in Tryon (1995) contains 466 Oceanic languages, many of which are subdivisible into dialects.

2   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     The present project aims to bring together a large corpus of lexical reconstructions for
POc, with supporting cognate sets, organised according to semantic fields and using a standard orthography for POc. We hope that this thesaurus will be a useful resource for culture
historians, archaeologists and others interested in the prehistory of the Pacific region. The
comparative lexical material should also be a rich source of data for various kinds of purely
linguistic research, e.g. on semantic change and subgrouping in the more than 400 daughter
languages.

     Volume 1 of The lexicon ofProto Oceanic deals with material culture. Volumes 2, 3 and 4
examine relevant sets of cognate terms in order to gain insights into how POc speakers viewed
and exploited their environment. Volume 2 deals with the geophysical or inanimate environment, volume 3 treats plants and the present volume animals. Volume 5, as it is planned at
the time of writing, will investigate terminologies centring on people, including the body
and human conditions and activities, and volume 6 will concern social organisation, belief
systems, rituals, recreation and other elements of non-material culture. The seventh and final
volume will perform a number of functions. It will treat certain lexical categories, e.g. closed
classes of lexical roots, not dealt with in earlier volumes. It will review the main findings
of the project concerning the culture and environment of Proto Oceanic speakers and will
compare these findings with what archaeology tells us about the way of life and environment
of the bearers of the Lapita culture. Volume 7 will also provide an index to the POc and other
reconstructions presented in the whole work, as well as an English-to-POc fmderlist and a
list of all languages cited, together with their subgroups.[3]

     The major headings under which animals are divided in this volume, e.g. Fish, Birds,
Aquatic invertebrates, etc., largely follow English-language rather than Oceanic categories.
There are several reasons for this choice. One is that descriptions of Oceanic taxonomies
of animals are few and imperfect. Another is that although the best-described Oceanic taxonomies typically agree with one another in some respects, they vary in others. Yet another
is that we assume that readers would be more likely to look, say, for ‘bats’ under Mammals
than under Birds.

     In keeping with the exceptionally rich diversity of marine fauna in Oceania and its economic and cultural importance to Oceanic societies, three (chapters 2-4) of the seven chapters that follow this introduction are largely devoted to creatures of the sea, as are portions of
two others (chapters 5 and 8). Chapters 2 and 3 both concern fish terminologies. Chapter 2
presents supporting cognate sets for more than 140 POc fish names and for many additional
names attributable to other major interstages below POc. A good many of the names are identifiable at the level of genus or species, others only to family or class. Chapter 3 investigates
the retention rates of a sample of 52 POc fish names and asks why the total number of fish
names reconstructed for POc is so much smaller than the number typically distinguished by
contemporary Oceanic languages. Chapter 4 presents reconstructions of terms for aquatic
invertebrates and their body parts. Chapter 5 examines terms for mammals, reptiles and amphibians. Again it is partly about creatures of the sea. Other than New Guinea, the islands
of Oceania have few native land mammals. Chapter 6 deals with names for bird taxa and
other terms associated with birds. Chapter 7 is entitled ‘Insects and other creepy-crawlies’,
the latter including non-insect terrestrial invertebrates: spiders, centipedes, worms, leeches
and grubs. The final chapter of the volume, chapter 8, investigates the semantic histories
of several terms that may have been high-level generics or life-forms in the POc taxonomy
of animals. It looks for recurrent patterns in the way different languages have extended or
reduced the referential range of each of these terms.

[3] This Introduction incorporates much of the material in the Introductions to Volume 1, 2 and 3. We replicate
 this material here in order that each volume can be used independently. The introduction to volume 3, however,
 introduced a fresh presentation of the subgrouping of Oceanic languages, and this is retained here.

                                                                              Introduction    3


1.2 The relation of the current project to previous work

Reconstructions of POc phonology and lexicon began with Dempwolff’s pioneering work in
the 1920s and 1930s. Dempwolff’s dictionary of reconstructions attributed to Proto Austronesian (PAn) (1938) — but equivalent in modern terms to Proto Malayo-Polynesian (PMP)
— contains some 600 reconstructions with reflexes in Oceanic languages.

     Since the 1950s, POc and other early Oceanic interstage languages have been the subject
of a considerable body of research. However, relatively few new reconstructions safely attributable to POc were added to Dempwolff’s material until the 1970s. In 1969 George Grace
made available as a working paper a compilation of reconstructions from various sources
amounting to some 700 distinct items, attributed either to POc or to early Oceanic interstages. These materials were presented in a new orthography for POc, based largely on Biggs’
(1965) orthography for an interstage he called Proto Eastern Oceanic. Updated compilations
of Oceanic cognate sets were produced at the University of Hawai‘i in the period 1977-1983
as part of a project directed by Grace and Pawley. These compilations and the supporting
data are problematic in various respects and we have made only limited use of them.

    Comparative lexical studies have been carried out for several lower-order subgroups of
Oceanic: for Proto Polynesian by Biggs (resulting in Walsh & Biggs 1966, Biggs et al. 1970
and subsequent versions of the pollex file, including Biggs & Clark (1993) and Clark &
Biggs (2006); for Proto Micronesian by scholars associated with the University of Hawai‘i
(Bender et al. 1983, Bender et al. 2003); for the ancestor of the Banks and Torres languages by
Alexandre Francois (several unpublished manuscripts); for Proto North and Central Vanuatu
by Clark (1996, 2009); for Proto Southern Vanuatu by Lynch (1978, 1996, 2001); for New
Caledonia by Ozanne-Rivierre (1992), Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre (1982) and Geraghty
(1989); for Proto SE Solomonic by Levy (1980) and Lichtenberk (1988); for Proto Central
Pacific by Hockett (1976), Geraghty (1983, 1986, 1996 together with a number of unpublished papers); for Proto Eastern Oceanic by Biggs (1965), Cashmore (1969), Levy & Smith
(1970), and Geraghty (1990); and for Proto Central Papuan by Pawley (1975), Lynch (1978,
1980), and Ross (1994).

    Robert Blust of the University of Hawai‘i has, in a series of papers (1970, 1980, 1983-84,
1986, 1989) published extensive, alphabetically ordered, lexical reconstructions (with supporting cognate sets) for interstages earlier than POc, especially for Proto Austronesian, Proto
Malayo-Polynesian and Proto Eastern Malayo-Polynesian. He has also written several papers
investigating specific semantic fields (Blust 1980Z>, 1982, 1987, 1994). Blust has a major
work in progress, the Austronesian Comparative Dictionary (ACD), which will bring together
all his reconstructions for Proto Austronesian and lower-order stages. This is stored in electronic form at the University of Hawai‘i. The version to which we refer dates from 1995.

4   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    Several papers predating our project systematically investigated particular semantic domains in the lexicon of POc, e.g. Milke (1958), French-Wright (1983), Pawley (1982, 1985),
Pawley & Green (1985), Lichtenberk (1986), Walter (1989), and the various papers in Pawley & Ross (1994). Ross (1988) contains a substantial number of new POc lexical reconstructions, as well as proposed modifications to the reconstructed POc sound system and the
orthography. However, previous Oceanic lexical studies were limited both by large gaps in
the data, with a distinct bias in favour of ‘Eastern Oceanic’ languages, and by the technical
problems of collating large quantities of data. Although most languages in Melanesia remain
poorly described, there are now many more dictionaries and extended word lists, particularly for Papua New Guinea, than there were in the 1980s. And developments in computing
hardware and software now permit much faster and more precise handling of data than was
possible then. A list of sources and a summary of the Project’s collation procedures is found
in Appendix 1.

    Several compilations of reconstructions have provided valuable points of reference, both
inside and outside the Oceanic group. We are indebted particularly to Bender et al. (2003),
two editions of pollex (Biggs & Clark 1993 and Clark & Biggs 2006), Blust (ACD), Clark
(2009) and Lynch (2001Z>).

    In the course of planning the several volumes for the present project, we came to realise
that the form in which preliminary publications were presented—namely as essays, each
discussing cognate sets for a particular semantic field at some length—would also be the
best form for the presentation of our final synthesis. A discursive treatment of individual
terminologies, as opposed, say, to a dictionary-type listing of reconstructions with supporting
cognate sets, makes it easier to relate the linguistic comparisons to relevant issues of culture
history, language change, and methodology. Hence each of the present volumes has as its core
a collection of analytic essays. Some of these have been published or presented elsewhere,
but are printed here in revised form. In some cases we have updated the earlier versions
in the light of subsequent research, and, where appropriate, have inserted cross-references
between contributions. Authorship is in some cases something of a problem, as a number of
people have had a hand in collating the data, doing the reconstructions, and (re)writing for
publication here. In most chapters, however, one person did the research which determined
the structure of the terminology, and that person appears as the first or only author, and where
another or others had a substantial part in putting together the paper itself, they appear as the
second and further authors.


1.3 Reconstructing the lexicon

The lexical reconstructions presented in these volumes are arrived at using the standard methods
of comparative linguistics, which require as preliminaries a subgrouping or internal classification of the languages in question (§3.2) and the working out of systematic sound correspondences among cognate vocabulary in contemporary languages (§3.3). As well as cognate
sets clearly attributable to POc, we have included some cognate sets which at this stage are
attributable to various interstage languages, particularly Proto Western and Proto Eastern
Oceanic (but see §3.2 for definitions). We have set out to pay more careful attention to
reconstructing the semantics of POc forms than has generally been done in earlier work, treating
words not as isolates but as parts of terminologies.

                                                                               Introduction    5


1.3.1 Terminological reconstruction

Our method of doing ‘terminological reconstruction’ is as follows. First, the terminologies
of present-day speakers of Oceanic languages are used as the basis for constructing a
hypothesis about the semantic structure of a corresponding POc terminology, taking account of
(i) ethnographic evidence, i.e. descriptions of the lifestyles of Oceanic communities and (ii)
the geographical and physical resources of particular regions of Oceania. For example, by
comparing terms in several languages for parts of an outrigger canoe, or for growth stages
of a coconut, one can see which concepts recur and so are likely to have been present in
POc. Secondly, a search is made for cognate sets from which forms can be reconstructed to
match each meaning in this hypothesised terminology. The search is not restricted to members
of the Oceanic subgroup; if a term found in an Oceanic language proves to have external (non-Oceanic)
cognates, the POc antiquity of that term will be confirmed and additional
evidence concerning its meaning will be provided. Thirdly, the hypothesised terminology is
re-examined to see if it needs modification in the light of the reconstructions. There are cases,
highlighted in the various contributions to these volumes, where we were able to reconstruct
a term where we did not expect to do so and conversely, often more significantly, where we
were unable to reconstruct a term where we had believed we should be able to. In each case,
we have discussed the reasons why our expectations were not met and what this may mean
for Oceanic culture history.

    Blust (1987a: 81) distinguishes between conventional ‘semantic reconstruction’, which
asks, “What was the probable meaning of protomorpheme X?”, and Dyen and Aberle’s (1974)
‘lexical reconstruction’, where one asks, “What was the protomorpheme which probably
meant ‘X’?” At first sight, it might appear that terminological reconstruction is a version
of lexical reconstruction. However, there are sharp differences. Lexical reconstruction applies
a formal procedure: likely protomeanings are selected from among the glosses of words
in available cognate sets, then an algorithm is applied to determine which meaning should
be attributed to each set. This procedure may have unsatisfactory results, as Blust points out.
Reconstructions may end up with crude and overly simple glosses; or no meaning may be
reconstructed for a form because none of the glosses of its reflexes is its protomeaning.

     Terminological reconstruction is instead similar to the semantic reconstruction approach.
In terminological reconstruction the meanings of protomorphemes are not determined in advance.
Instead, cognate sets are collected and their meanings are compared with regard to:

__ul__
    • their specific denotations, where these are known;
    • the geographic and genetic distribution of these denotations (i.e. are the glosses from
      which the protogloss is reconstructed well distributed?);
    • any derivational relationships to other reconstructions;
    • their place within a working hypothesis of the relevant POc terminology (e.g., are terms
      complementary —‘bow’ implies ‘arrow’; ‘seine net’ implies ‘floats’ and ‘weights’?
      Are there different levels of classification—generic, specific, and so on?).

For example, it proved possible to reconstruct the following POc terms for tying with cords
(vol.l, ch.9, §10):

__ul__
POc *buku ‘tie (a knot); fasten’
POc *p‘ita ‘tie by encircling’
POc *paqu(s), *pciqus-i- ‘bind, lash; construct (canoe +) by lashing together’
POc *pisi ‘bind up, tie up, wind round, wrap’
POc *kiti ‘tie, bind’

6   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     In each of the supporting cognate sets from contemporary languages there are a number of
items whose glosses in the dictionaries or word lists are too vague to tell the analyst anything
about the specific denotation of the item, and in the case of *kiti this prevents the assignment
of a more specific meaning. The verb *buku can be identified as the generic term for tying
a knot because of its derivational relationship (by zero derivation) with a noun whose denotation
is clearly generic, *buku ‘node (as in bamboo or sugarcane); joint; knuckle; knot in
wood, string or rope’ (vol.l, ch.4, §3.2). Reconstruction of the meaning of *p wita as ‘tie by
encircling’ is supported by the meanings of the Lukep, Takia and Longgu reflexes, respectively
‘tie by encircling’, ‘tie on (as grass-skirt)’, and ‘trap an animal’s leg; tie s.t. around
ankle or wrist’: Lukep and Takia are North New Guinea languages, whilst Longgu is SE
Solomonic. Reconstruction of the meaning of *paqu(s), * paqus-i- as ‘bind, lash; construct
(canoe +) by tying together’ is supported by the meanings of the Takia, Kiribati and Samoan
reflexes, respectively ‘tie, bind; construct (a canoe)’, ‘construct (canoe, house)’, and ‘make,
construct (wooden objects, canoes +)’: Takia is a North New Guinea language, Kiribati is
Micronesian, and Samoan is Polynesian. The meaning of *pisi is similarly reconstructed by
reference to the meanings of its Mono-Alu, Mota, Port Sandwich, Nguna and Fijian reflexes.

     Often, however, the authors have been less fortunate in the information available to them.
For example, Osmond (vol.l, ch.8, §9) reconstructs six POc terms broadly glossed as ‘spear’.
Multiple terms for implements within one language imply that these items were used extensively
and possibly in specialised ways. Can we throw light on these specialised ways?
Unfortunately, some of the word lists and dictionaries available give minimal glosses, e.g.
‘spear’, for reflexes of the six reconstructions. What we need to know for each reflex is: what
is the level of reference? Is it a term for all spears, or perhaps all pointed projectiles including
arrows and darts? Or does it refer to a particular kind of spear? Is it noun or verb or both? If
a noun, does it refer to both the instrument and the activity? Most word lists are frustratingly
short on detail. For this kind of detail, ethnographies have proved a more fruitful source of
information than many word lists.

     Another problem is inherent in the dangers of sampling from over 450 languages. The
greater the number of languages, the greater are the possible variations in meaning of any
given term, and the greater the chances of two languages making the same semantic leaps
quite independently. Does our (sometimes quite limited) cognate set provide us with a clear
unambiguous gloss, or have we picked up an accidental bias, a secondary or distantly related
meaning? Did etymon x refer to fishhook or the material from which the fishhook was made?
Did etymon y refer to the slingshot or to the action of turning round and round?


1.3.2 Subgrouping and reconstruction

1.3.2.1 Subgrouping

Although the subgrouping of Austronesian languages, and hypotheses about which protolanguage
was spoken where, remain in certain cases somewhat controversial, it is impossible
to proceed without making some assumptions about these matters. Figures 1.1 and 1.2 are
approximate renderings of our subgrouping assumptions. The upper part of the tree, shown in
Figure 1.1, is due to Blust, originally presented in Blust (1977) and repeated with additional
supporting evidence in subsequent publications (1978, 1982, 1983-84, 1993, 2009).[4][5] The diagram
of the lower (Oceanic) part of the tree in Figure 1.2 shows nine primary subgroups of
Oceanic. Its rake-like structure indicates that no convincing body of shared innovations has
been found to allow any of the nine subgroups to be combined into higher-order groupings.
Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.3 and 3.2.4 offer some commentary on our subgrouping, and in §3.2.4 we
explain how we handle the rake-like structure in making reconstructions.

                                                                                        Introduction     7


     Figure 1.1       Schematic diagram showing higher-order subgroups of Austronesian
                                          languages.


1.3.2.2 Kinds of subgroup

In Figures 1.1 and 1.2 each node is either a single language,3 usually a reconstructed
protolanguage, or, in italics, a group of languages.


[4] For critical overviews of the literature on Austronesian subgrouping, see Ross (1995), Adelaar (2005) and
 Blust (2009a). The CEMP and Central Malayo-Polynesian linkages, and also PEMP, have been called into
 question recently, but these issues lie beyond our present scope (Blust 20096, Donohue & Grimes 2008, Ross
 20086).

[5] The two very closely related languages Mussau and Tench form a minor exception.

                                                                                                       Proto Oceanic

      Figure 1.2     Schematic diagram showing the subgrouping of Oceanic Austronesian languages.

                                                                                              Introduction       9


    Where a node is a protolanguage, its descendants form a proper subgroup (in the technical
sense in which historical linguists use the term ‘subgroup’). A proper subgroup is identified
by innovations shared by its member languages, i.e. it is ‘innovation-defined’ in the terminology
of Pawley & Ross (1995). These innovations are assumed to have occurred just once in
the subgroup’s protolanguage, i.e. the exclusively shared ancestor of its members. Thus languages
of the large Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian share a set of innovations relative to
the earlier Austronesian stages shown in Figure 1.1 (Dempwolff 1934).6 By inference these
innovations occurred in their common ancestor, POc, and the claim that they are innovations
is based on a comparison of reconstructed POc with reconstructed PMP The innovations may
be phonological (e.g. PMP *e, pronounced [ə], and PMP *aw both became POc *o), morphological
(e.g. POc acquired a morphological distinction between three kinds of possessive
relationship: food, drink and default), or lexical (e.g. PMP *limaw ‘citrus fruit’ was replaced
by POc *molis).

    Italics are used in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 to indicate a group of languages which is not a
proper subgroup, i.e. has no identifiable exclusively shared parent. Thus Formosan languages
in Figure 1.1 indicates a collection of languages descended (along with PMP) from PAn.
They are spoken in Taiwan, but do not form a subgroup. There was no ‘Proto Formosan’, as
Formosan languages and language groups are all descended directly from PAn.

    Some of the italicised labels in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 include the term linkage. A linkage
(an ‘innovation-linked group’ in the terminology of Pawley & Ross 1995) is a collection
of usually quite closely related languages or dialects,[7] speakers of which were in sufficient
contact at one time or another during their history for innovations to pass from one language
to the next, often resulting in a pattern such that the domains of various innovations overlap
but are not coterminous.[8] A number of Oceanic linkages were recognised during the 1980s
(Geraghty 1983, Pawley & Green 1984, Ross 1988).[9] A linkage may arise in at least three
ways, but distinguishing between them is often impossible.

    First, what would otherwise be a proper subgroup may happen to lack exclusively shared
innovations, perhaps because the parent did not exist as a unit for long enough to undergo
any innovations of its own.[10]

    Second, a linkage may consist of some but not all of the languages descended from a
single parent. The Western Oceanic linkage reflects the innovations of POc, but no innovation
is common to the whole of Western Oceanic (although the merger of POc *r and *R comes
close). However, the languages of its three component linkages—North New Guinea, Papuan
Tip and Meso-Melanesian—display complex patterns of overlapping innovations. The Western Oceanic
linkage appears to be descended from the dialects of POc that were left behind
in the Bismarck Archipelago after speakers of the languages ancestral to the other eight
primary subgroups in Figure 1.2 had moved away to the north or east. After these departures
various innovations occurred. Each arose somewhere in the Western Oceanic dialect network
and spread to neighbouring dialects without reaching every dialect in the network.

[6] Chapter 4 of Lynch et al. (2002) gives a recent account of these innovations.

[7] In what follows, ‘language' is used to mean ‘language or dialect’.

[8] One or more innovations may spread right across the languages of the linkage. In this case it becomes virtually
 impossible to distinguish it from a proper subgroup.

[9] Recent work in Indo-European appeals to the concept of linkage: Garrett (2006) suggests that the dialects
 ancestral to Greek were not dialects of ‘Proto Greek’ but a collection of Nuclear Indo-European dialects drawn
 together by relations between the communities ancestral to the Greek city states, across which spread the innovations which characterise Ancient Greek.

[10] A situation in which a subgroup is both proper (i.e. defined by exclusive innovations) and a linkage (displaying
overlapping patterns of innovations) is of course possible, the exclusively shared innovations having occurred
in the parent, the others after the break-up of the parent. It so happens that we have no need of this construct
here.

10 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    The third type of linkage is the result of contact among languages descended from more
than one immediate parent, indicated in Figure 1.2 by a dashed line around the relevant groups
of languages. An example is the Fijian linkage, which represents the partial resynthesis of the
Fiji-based descendants of earlier Western Central Pacific and Eastern Central Pacific linkages
after Rotuman and Polynesian had split off from them (Geraghty & Pawley 1981, Geraghty
1983, Pawley 19967?).11 Geraghty reconstructed the history of the Fijian linkage by painstaking
analysis of innovations from at least two stages in its history. From the earlier period
Western Fijian languages share innovations with Rotuman and Eastern Fijian with Polynesian.
From a more recent period Western Fijian and Eastern Fijian languages share innovations
with each other, reflecting their reintegration into a single linkage, within which the present
Western/Eastem boundary has shifted relative to the (fuzzy) boundary of the earlier period.

    For most of the linkages noted in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 this kind of analysis is not available.
For example, Blust (1993) indicates that CEMP was a linkage. But its history is far from clear.
Does CEMP perhaps include some languages that share history with languages to their west
and others that share history with those to their north? The North/Central Vanuatu linkage,
long assumed to be some sort of genealogical unit, appears to reflect the partial reintegration
of at least two dialect networks, North Vanuatu and Central Vanuatu, that probably had not
diverged greatly from each other, but the details of this history are difficult to elucidate (Lynch
2000a).[12]

    The languages of a linkage have no identifiable exclusively shared parent.Yet we have
found many instances in which a cognate set is limited to one of the linkages in Figures 1.1
and 1.2: CEMP, Western Oceanic, New Guinea Oceanic, Southern Oceanic or the reintegrated
North and Central Vanuatu linkage. As with PEOc and PROc (§3.2.4), we think it is preferable
to attribute these reconstructions to a hypothetical protolanguage rather than to a higher node
in the tree. Hence there are reconstructions labelled PCEMP, PWOc and so on. Again these
apparent lexical innovations offer only the weakest evidence for the protolanguage to which
they are attributed. In addition to the explanations of the kinds offered for PEOc and PROc
etyma in §3.2.4 it is possible, for example, that an innovatory ‘PWOc’ etymon arose when the
Western Oceanic dialect network was still close-knit, and spread from dialect to dialect before
the network broke into the two networks ancestral to its present-day first-order subgroups.

1.3.2.3 Further notes on subgroups

This section brings together brief notes on the subgroups in Figure 1.2 beyond those mentioned
in the discussion in §3.2.2.

    Admiralty is a proper subgroup (Ross 1988: ch.9).

    Western Oceanic consists of the North New Guinea (NNG), Papuan Tip (PT),
MesoMelanesian (MM) linkages and the Sarmi/Jayapura (SJ) group (see Map 4). The last-named
may belong to the NNG linkage, but this is uncertain (Ross 19967?). It is not shown in
Figure 1.2 and its languages do not play a crucial role in reconstruction. It is likely that the NNG
and PT groups form a super-group, the New Guinea Oceanic linkage, and so etyma reflected
only in NNG and PT languages are attributed to a putative Proto New Guinea Oceanic (Milke
1958, Pawley 1978), and etyma reflected in either NNG or PT (or both) and in MM are labelled PWOc.

[11] ‘Eastern Fijian languages’ in Figure 1.2 is our label for Geraghty’s (1983) ‘Tokalau Fijian’.

[12] For a history of scholarly views of the subgrouping of North and Central Vanuatu languages see Clark
 (2009: §1.3). For arguments supporting a NCV grouping, see Clark (2009: ch.4).

                                                           Introduction

Map 3   Groups of Oceanic languages used in cognate sets

12 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

    SE Solomonic was established as a proper subgroup by Pawley (1972: 98-110). Further
support was provided by Levy (1979, 1980, n. d,), Tryon & Hackman (1983) and Lichtenberk
(1988).

     Temotu comprises the languages of the Reef Islands, Santa Cruz, Utupua and Vanikoro,
located 400 km east of the main Solomons archipelago and to the north of Vanuatu (Map 3).
It was established as a proper subgroup by (Ross & Nasss 2007).

    The Southern Oceanic linkage as proposed by Lynch (1999, 2000, 2001, 2004) is characterised
by complex overlapping innovations, but by none that are reflected in all its member languages
and would qualify it as a proper subgroup (see discussion in Lynch et al.
2002: 112-114).[13]

    Micronesian is a proper subgroup (Jackson 1983, 1986, Bender et al. 2003).

    Central Pacific is a proper subgroup, but one defined by only a handful of shared innovations,
indicating that the period of unity was short (Geraghty 1996). The high-order subgrouping of
Central Pacific is due to Geraghty (1983), except for the position of Rotuman,
due to Pawley (1996Z>). Within Central Pacific is another long recognised proper subgroup,
Polynesian, for which Pawley (1996«) lists diagnostic innovations.

1.3.2.4 Criteria for reconstruction

The strength of a lexical reconstruction rests crucially on the distribution of the supporting
cognate set across subgroups. The distribution of cognate forms and agreements in their
meanings is much more important than the number of cognates. It is enough to make a secure
reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in just two languages in a family, with agreement in
meaning, provided that the two languages belong to different primary subgroups and provided
that there is no reason to suspect that the resemblances are due to borrowing or chance.
The PMP term *apij ‘twins’ is reflected in several western Malayo-Polynesian languages
(e.g. Batak apid ‘twins, double (fused) banana’) but only a single Oceanic reflex is known,
namely Roviana avisi ‘twins of the same sex’. Because Roviana belongs to a different first-
order branch of Malayo-Polynesian from the western Malayo-Polynesian witnesses and because
there is virtually no chance that the agreement is due to borrowing or chance similarity,
this distribution is enough to justify the reconstruction of PMP *apij, POc * apic ‘twins’.

    The rake-like form of Figure 1.2 almost certainly reflects the very rapid settlement of
Oceania out of the Bismarcks,14 but it confronts us with a methodological question. If we
follow the rubric that we make a reconstruction if a cognate set occurs in languages of just
two primary subgroups, then reflexes of an etymon in, say, a SE Solomonic language and a
Micronesian language would be sufficient evidence for a POc reconstruction and the absence
of reflexes in Admiralty and Western Oceanic would be irrelevant. Given what we know
about the location of the POc homeland (in the Bismarcks; vol.2, ch.2) and the early eastward
spread of Oceanic speakers, this is too loose a criterion. Instead, we assume two hypothetical
nodes not shown in the tree in Figure 1.2.[15] These are

__ul__
    • Remote Oceanic, comprising Southern Oceanic, Micronesian and Central Pacific;
    • Eastern Oceanic, comprising SE Solomonic and Remote Oceanic.[16]


[13] Because they have only been recently proposed, Temotu and Southern Oceanic do not appear in Figure 1 of
volumes 1 and 2.

[14] Bearers of the Lapita culture had settled various parts of the Bismarck Archipelago by around 1400 BC
 (Specht 2007) and colonised the Reefs and Santa Cruz Is. in the Temotu Archipelago by 1200-1100 BC (Green
2003, Green et al. 2008). There were Lapita settlements in New Caledonia by 1100-1000 BC (Sand 2001), in
Fiji by about 1000 BC (Clark & Anderson 2009, Nunn et al. 2004), in Tonga by 900 BC (Burley & Connaughton
2007), and in Samoa and the smaller islands between Tonga and Samoa by 800-700 BC (Clark & Anderson
2009).

[15] We included these nodes in the corresponding tree in Figure 1 of volumes 1 and 2, but this was too easily
interpreted as a statement of our views on subgrouping, so we abandon it here and in Appendix 2.

[16] The term ‘Eastern Oceanic’ and the search for evidence of an Eastern Oceanic subgroup has a relatively
long pedigree in Oceanic linguistics (Biggs 1965, Pawley 1972, Pawley 1977, Lynch & Tryon 1985, Geraghty
 1990). However, by the time volume 1 of the present work was published in 1998 it was already evident that
innovations supporting the existence of an Eastern Oceanic subgroup were not forthcoming, as Pawley & Ross
 (1995:79) had mentioned in a footnote. Our use of the term here is more inclusive than most, resembling more
closely the ‘ Central/Eastern Oceanic’ of Lynch & Tryon (1983) (the published version of which, Lynch & Tryon
 1985, presents a less inclusive version of Central/Eastern Oceanic) and of Lynch et al. (2002:94-96). who also
express reservations about its status.

                                                                                         Introduction       13


If a cognate set occurs in two or all three of the groups in Remote Oceanic, the reconstruction
is attributed to Proto Remote Oceanic (PROc). If a cognate set occurs in one or more of the
groups in Remote Oceanic and in SE Solomonic, it is attributed to Proto Eastern Oceanic
(PEOc). In this way we acknowledge that such reconstructions may represent an innovation
that postdates the spread of the early Oceanic speech community. There are enough PROc and
PEOc reconstructions to suggest that such lexical innovations indeed occurred. This in turn
provides weak evidence for Remote Oceanic and Eastern Oceanic subgroups, but evidence
that is too weak to be relied on, for at least two reasons. First, it is quite possible that some of
our PROc and PEOc reconstructions will be promoted to POc as more Admiralty and Western
Oceanic data become available. Second, it is reasonable to assume that some of our PROc
and PEOc etyma are of POc antiquity but happen to have been lost in Proto Admiralty and
Proto Western Oceanic. Without supporting phonological or morphological evidence we are
unwilling to treat PROc or PEOc as anything other than convenient hypotheses which allow
us to retain rigorous criteria for a POc reconstruction.

     In volumes 1 and 2 a reconstruction here labelled ‘PROc’ would have been labelled
‘PEOc’, but the absence of SE Solomonic reflexes from among its reflexes indicates that
it has the same status as a PROc reconstruction in volume 3 and the present volume. Two
factors have led to the distinction between PEOc and PROc here. One was particularly relevant to
volume 3: because the primary biogeographic divide in Oceania is between Near
and Remote Oceania (see vol. 2, Map 5), i.e. between the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, the
question of whether or not a plant name includes a SE Solomonic reflex is significant, and
there are many plant names that do not (and are thus attributed to PROc). The other is that the
historical separateness of SE Solomonic from both Western Oceanic and the groups treated
as Remote Oceanic has become increasingly clear through recent research (Pawley 2009).

     Our criterion for recognising a reconstruction as POc is that the cognate set must occur
in at least two out of four criterial groupings: Admiralties (or Yapese or Mussau), Western
Oceanic, Temotu and our hypothetical Eastern Oceanic. Both here and at the hypothetical
interstages defined above, no reconstruction is made if there are grounds to infer borrowing
from one of these groupings to another.[17] We also reconstruct an etymon to POc if it is
reflected in just one of the four criterial groupings and in a non-Oceanic Austronesian language
(a member of one of the subgroups on the left branches in Figure 1.1), as illustrated above
by the reconstruction of POc *apic ‘twins’.


[17] Cases where such an inference can be made occur mostly at the boundary (in the Solomon Islands) between
Western and Eastern Oceanic. Borrowing is likely (and is often reflected in unexpected sound correspondences)
where an etymon occurs (i) in Western Oceanic and only in SE Solomonic languages or (ii) in SE Solomonic
languages and only in the NW Solomonic languages (a subgroup within the Meso-Melanesian linkage of Western Oceanic).

14   Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


     These criteria are identical to those applied in volumes 1 and 2 except for the addition of
Temotu (which figures in very few cognate sets). The establishment of Temotu as a primary
subgroup (Ross & Nasss 2007) postdates the publication of volumes 1 and 2.

     There are indications that Yapese (a single-language subgroup) and Mussau and Tench (a
subgroup with two closely related languages) may be more closely related to Admiralty than
to any other Oceanic subgroup,18 and for this reason they are treated as Admiralty languages
for the purposes of reconstruction. That is, the presence of a reflex in one or more of these
languages and in Admiralty does not support a POc reconstruction, but the presence of of a
reflex in one or more of these languages and one of Western Oceanic, Temotu and Eastern
Oceanic does support one.

     In chapter 2 (§4) of volume 2 Pawley discusses Blust’s (1998) proposal that the primary
split in Oceanic divides Admiralty from a subgroup embracing all other Oceanic languages.
Pawley dubs the latter ‘Nuclear Oceanic’. If Blust’s subgrouping were accepted, then an
etymon which lacked cognates outside Oceanic would need to be reflected both in an Admiralties
language and in a non-Admiralties language for a POc reconstruction to be made.
Etyma with reflexes in both Western and Eastern Oceanic, but not in the Admiralties, would
be reconstructed as Proto Nuclear Oceanic. Under the criteria outlined above, however, we
attribute these reconstructions to POc. These criteria were used in volumes 1 and 2, and
we have thought it wise to maintain them throughout the volumes of this work. The reader
who wishes to single out reconstructions attributable to a putative Proto Nuclear Oceanic
(rather than to POc) can easily recognise them, however. They are those POc reconstructions
for which (i) there are no Admiralties reflexes, and (ii) there is no higher-order
reconstruction (i.e. PEMP, PCEMP, PMP or PAn), since the latter would be based on cognates outside
Oceanic.


1.3.3 Sound correspondences

As we noted above, reconstruction depends on working out the systematic sound correspondences
among cognate vocabulary in contemporary languages and on having a working hypothesis about
how the sounds of POc have changed and are reflected in modern Oceanic
languages. Working out sound correspondences even for twenty languages is a large task,
and so we have relied heavily on our own previous work and the work of others. The sound
correspondences we have used are those given by Ross (1988) for Western Oceanic and Admiralties;
by Levy (1979, 1980) and Lichtenberk (1988) for Cristobal-Malaitan, by Pawley
(1972) and Tryon & Hackman (1983) for SE Solomonic; by Ross & Nasss (2007) for Temotu;
by Tryon (1976) and Clark (2009) for North and Central Vanuatu; by Lynch (1978, 2001)
for Southern Vanuatu; by Geraghty (1989), Haudricourt & Ozanne-Rivierre (1982), Ozanne-
Rivierre (1992) and Ozanne-Rivierre (1995) for New Caledonia; by Jackson (1986) and Ross
(1996a) for Nuclear Micronesian; by Geraghty (1986) for Central Pacific; by Biggs (1978)
for Polynesian; by Ross (1996a) for Yapese; and by Ross (1996Z>) for Oceanic languages of
Irian Jaya.

[18] On the positions of Yapese and Mussau. see respectively Ross (1996a) and Ross (1988:315-316, 331).

                                                                                                                       --------        Approximate boundaries of

Map 4      Oceanic language groups in northwest Melanesia: the Admiralties and St Matthias groups and the
                                      subgroups of Western Oceanic

16 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond

__pre__
                   Table 1.1         Reconstructed paradigm of POc phonemes
                            'I' pw     *p         *c             *q
                                            *t
                            *b'v       *b   *d    *J   *g
                                            *s
                            *mw        *m   *n    *n
                                                                 *R
                                            *dr
                                            *1
                            *w                    *y
                                            *a

    For non-Oceanic languages we have referred to sound correspondences given by Tsuchida
(1976) for Formosan languages; by Zorc (1977, 1986) and Reid (1982) for the Philippines;
by Adelaar (1992) and Nothofer (1975) for Malay and Javanese; by Sneddon (1984) for
Sulawesi; by Collins (1983) for Central Maluku; and by Blust (1978a) for South Halmahera
and Irian Jaya.

    We are well aware that regular sound correspondences can be interfered with in various
ways: by phonetic conditioning that the analyst has not identified (see, e.g., Blust 1996a), by
borrowing (for an extreme Oceanic case, see Grace 1996), or, as recent research suggests, by
the frequency of an item’s use (Bybee 1994). We have tried at least to note, and sometimes
to account for, irregularities in cognate sets.


1.3.4 POc phonology and orthography

Work based on the sound correspondences of both Oceanic and non-Oceanic languages has
resulted in the reconstructed paradigm of POc phonemes shown in Table 1.1. The orthography
used here and in the POc reconstructions in this work is from Ross (1988), with the
addition of *p w and *k w. POc phonology and its relationship to PMP are discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 2 (§2) of volume 1. Since the publication of volume 1, articles by John
Lynch have appeared on POc stress (2000) and POc labiovelar phonemes (2002). The putative
protophoneme *k w is added in this volume for the first time as a result of taking stock
of reconstructions in volumes 1-3 and the current volume. It must have had a very low
functional load, as it occurs only word-initially before *a and then only rarely (Ross 2010).

                                                                                        Introduction   17

    Table 1.2 shows two POc orthographies. The first was established by Biggs (1965), for
PEOc, and Grace (1969), who applied it to POc. It has been used with a number of variants,
separated by a slash in Table 1.2. The second, introduced by Ross (1988), is the one generally
used in this work. The terms ‘oral grade’ and ‘nasal grade’ were used by Grace (1969) and
have become conventional among Oceanic linguists to refer to the outcomes of certain sound
changes that occurred between PMP and POc (vol.l, ch.2, §2.4).


1.4 Conventions common to the series

1.4.1 Presentation of reconstructions

Each of the contributions to these volumes concerns a particular POc ‘terminology’.
Generally, each contribution begins with an introduction to the issues raised by the reconstruction of
its particular terminology, and the bulk of each contribution consists of reconstructed etyma
with supporting data and a commentary on matters of meaning and form.

     The reconstruction of POc *taRaqan ‘Holocentrus spp,, squirrelfish’ below, adapted from
Chapter 2, §14, shows how reconstructions and supporting cognate sets are presented. Above
it is a superordinate (PMP) reconstruction drawn from Blust’s Austronesian Comparative
Dictionary (acd; see §2). Below it are supporting reflexes. Contributors vary in the degree to
which they insert lower-order reconstructions like PMic *tard and PPn *taʔa below. Lower-
order reconstructions are sometimes given to clarify the relationship of reflexes to the higher-
order reconstruction: Southern Vanuatu languages, for example, have undergone so much
phonological change that a Proto Southern Vanuatu reconstruction helps explicate the relationship
between Southern Vanuatu reflexes and the POc reconstruction. Sometimes a lower-
order reconstruction displays an extension of meaning or some other semantic change.

__pre__
PMP *taRaqan ‘Holocentrus spp,, squirrelfish’ (ACD)
POc *taRaqan ‘ Scirgocentron spp,, squirrelfish, including A spiniferunf (Geraghty 1990:
  PEOc *taRciʔa)
  Adm: Loniu          taʔay          ‘squirrelfish or silver biddy’ (metathesis: expected form ^1aya(?))
  NNG: Yabem          talaŋ          ‘a red sea fish’
  PT:    Gumasi       tayawana       ‘squirrel fish’
     PT:   Misima       talayan       ‘Sargocentron spp,, spiny and blue-striped
                                      squirrelfish’
  PT:    Motu           tara          ‘S. violaceum, violet squirrelfish’
  MM: Nakanai           talaha        ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Lihir             taran         ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  MM: Roviana           ta-tara       ‘small reddish fish, easily hooked’
  SES: Gela             tala          ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  NCV: S Efate          tra(kap)      ‘squirrelfish’
  NCal: Pije           jald           ‘Holocentrus spinifef [ʌ'. spiniferum]
  NCal: Jawe           jarak          ‘ H. spinifef [5. spiniferum]
PMic *tara ‘squirrelfish’ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic: Kiribati         td            ‘Sargocentron spp.’
  Mic: Marshallese cera               ‘Sargocentron, Myripristis spp., squirrelfish’
  Mic: Ponapean         sara          ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  Mic: Chuukese         sard          ‘Sargocentron sp,, yellow-lined squirrel fish’
  Mic: Woleaian         sezd          ‘Adioryx spinifer, spiny squirrel fish’ [5. spiniferum]
  Mic: Puluwatese hara                ‘k.o. red fish’
PPn *taʔa 'Sargocentron spiniferum, armoured soldierfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan         taʔa          ‘S. spiniferum, red, edible’
  Pn:    Niuean         td            ‘Myripristis violacea, lattice soldierfish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan td                 ‘S. spiniferum’'
  Pn:    Samoan         td (malau)    ‘name given to certain fishes of genus Sargocentron
                                      when about 30 cm in length’. (See also under
                                      *malau below.)
  Pn:    K’marangi td                 ‘S. ruber, red squirrelfish’ [ʌ'. rubrum]
  Pn:    Tokelauan td                 ‘S. spiniferum'
  Pn:    Tuvaluan       td (malau)    ‘Adioryx spp.’ [Sargocentron]
  Pn:    Tikopia        ta            ‘sea fish, app. related to large squirrelfish’


__pre__
             Table 1.2    POc orthographies after Grace (1969) and Ross (1988)
    Grace   oral grade     *p          —         *t     *d/
                                                        r
                                                        **s          *j   *k    —
    Ross                   *p                    *t              *s          *
                                                                             c    *k    *kw
    Grace   nasal grade   *mp    *qp/
                                 *
                                 mpw             *nt   *
                                                       n r
                                                       *nd/            *nj        *pk
    Ross                   *b                    *d        *dr         *j         *g
    Grace                 *m     mw
                                 *qm/
                                 **n       *n     *ij        w
                                                                            **y     *1   *q   *
                                                                                                   R
    Ross                  *m          •fc jɪɪw   *n       *n     *ij        w
                                                                            **y     *1   *q   *
                                                                                                   R
    Grace                  *i          *0        *e       *a     *u
    Ross                   *i          *0        *e       *a     *u

18     Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


    Because our supporting data are drawn from such a wide range of languages, the convention
is adopted of prefixing each language name with the abbreviation for the genealogical
or geographic group to which the language belongs, so that the distribution of a cognate set
is more immediately obvious. Table 1.3 is a key to the labels. Figure 1.2 shows the positions
of these groups in the Oceanic tree. We have sought to be consistent in always listing these
groups in the same order, but contributors vary in the ordering of languages within groups.

    Lynch’s recent research on Southern Oceanic (§3.2.3) renders the NCV group mildly
anomalous, although there is no doubt that it reflects an integrated dialect network. There
are a number of etyma whose reflexes are confined to North and Central Vanuatu, and so we
continue to make ‘Proto North/Central Vanuatu’ reconstructions, even though these perhaps
represent a Southern Oceanic term that has been lost in southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia.
Where the distribution of reflexes requires it, the chapters in this volume include
reconstructions for PROc and for PSOc. Etyma with these distributions were attributed to PEOc in
volumes 1 and 2, but the distributions are transparent, thanks to the presence of the group
labels in cognate sets.


                                                                                 Introduction      19


    In the interests of space we have not given the history of the reconstructions themselves,
as this would often require commentary on the modifications made by others and by us, and
on why we have made them. Where a reconstruction is not new, we have tried to give its
earliest source, e.g. ‘acd’ above, but this is difficult when earlier reconstructions differ in
form and meaning.

    In general, the contributions to these volumes are concerned with items reconstructable
in POc, PWOc, PEOc, PROc and occasionally Proto New Guinea Oceanic (PNGOc). Etyma
for PWOc, PNGOc and PEOc are reconstructed because these may well also be POc etyma
for which known reflexes are not well distributed (see discussion in §3.2.4). The contributors
vary in the degree to which they reconstruct etyma for interstages further down the tree.
Reconstructions for lower-order interstages are decreasingly likely to reflect POc etyma and
may be the results of cultural change as Oceanic speakers moved further out into the Pacific.

    Contributors have usually not sought to make fresh reconstructions at interstages
superordinate to POc. What they have done, however, is to cite other scholars’ reconstructions for
higher-order interstages, as these represent a summary of the non-Oceanic evidence in support
of a given POc reconstruction. These interstages are shown in Figure 1.1, together with
their abbreviations.

    Sometimes non-Oceanic evidence has been found to support a POc reconstruction where
no reconstruction at a higher-level interstage has previously been made. In this case a new
higher-order reconstruction is made, and the non-Oceanic evidence is given in a footnote.

    Whilst we have tried to use the internal organisation of the lexicons of Oceanic languages
themselves as a guide in setting the boundaries of each terminology, we have inevitably taken
decisions which differ from those that others might have made. There are, obviously, overlaps
and connections between various semantic domains and therefore between the contributions
here. We have done our best to provide cross-references, but we have sometimes duplicated
information rather than ask the reader repeatedly to look elsewhere in the book. Indexes at the
end of each volume and in the final volume are intended to make it easier to use the volumes
collectively as a work of reference.

__pre__
            Table 1.3     Abbreviations for the genealogical or geographic groups
    Yap:     Yapese(one language)
    Adm:    Admiralty and Mussau/Tench
    SJ:      Sarmi/Jayapura
    NNG:    North New Guinea
    PT:     Papuan Tip
    MM:      Meso-Melanesian
    SES:     Southeast Solomonic
    TM:      Temotu
    NCV:    North/Central Vanuatu, i.e. the reintegrated network formed by the North and
             Central Vanuatu linkages
    SV:      Southern Vanuatu
    NCal:    Loyalty and New Caledonia
    Mic:     Micronesian
    Fij:     Fijian, i.e. the reintegrated network formed by Western and Eastern Fijian dialects
    Pn:      Polynesian

20    Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pawley and Meredith Osmond


1.4.2 Data

Data sources are listed in Appendix 1.

     For some reconstructed etyma only a representative sample of reflexes is given. We have
endeavoured to ensure, however, that in each case this sample not only is geographically and
genetically representative, but also provides evidence to justify the shape of the reconstruction.
Where only a few reflexes are known to us, this is usually noted.

     Although there are accepted or standard orthographies for a number of the languages from
which data are cited here, all data are transcribed as far as possible into a standard phonemic
orthography based on that used by Ross (1988: 3^4) in order to facilitate comparison.19 This
means, for example, that the j of the German-based orthographies of Yabem and Gedaged
becomes ʃ, Yabem c becomes 2, Gedaged z becomes I and so on; the ng of English-based
orthographies becomes ŋ`, and Fijian g, q and c become ŋ, g and ð respectively.

     The following symbols have more or less their usual IPA values: ð, g, y, h, k, I, l, I, T, m, n,
ŋ, h, p, q, /, r, /; s, t, w, x, z, ?, a, æ, e, s, ə, i, i, o, æ, o, .t, u, ui. As far as possible, however, our
orthography is phonemic and does not show allophonic variation, so that there are instances
where a symbol does not have its usual phonetic value. For example, Wayan Fijian k is a
voiceless stop word-initially but [k] is in free or stylistic variation with [y] word-medially.
The voiced stops b, d, g and the voiced bilabial trill b are prenasalised in some languages,
but prenasalisation is not written unless it is phonemically distinctive. Where a language has
just one rhotic, we usually write r, despite the fact that that rhotic is sometimes a flap. Other
orthographic symbols (with values in IPA) are:

__pre__
             f      [$, fɪ       voiceless bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
             v      [P, v]       voiced bilabial or (less often) labio-dental fricative
             c      [ts], [tn    voiceless alveolar or palatal affricate
             j      [cfe], [ʤ]   voiced alveolar or palatal affricate
             y      D]           palatal glide
             dr     fɪr]         prenasalised voiced alveolar trill (as in Fijian)
             o      [0]          rounded mid front vowel
             u      [y]          rounded high front vowel

 Other superscripts and diacritics are as follows:

__ul__
     • contrastive long vowels are represented by a macron, e.g. d;
     • contrastive vowel nasalisation in New Caledonian languages is represented by a circumflex, e.g. a;
     • labialisation is marked by a superscript w, e.g. p‘;
     • velarisation is marked by a superscript ui, e.g.
     • contrastive aspiration is marked by a superscript h, e.g. ph',
     • apicolabials are represented by the corresponding apical symbol and the linguolabial diacritic (the ‘seagull’), e.g./;
     • retroflexes are represented by the corresponding apical symbol with a dot beneath, e.g. r.

[19] The main reason for retaining Ross' orthography was that the electronic files initially used in this project
were drawn in large part from those used in the research reported in Ross (1988).

                                                                            Introduction    21


     Except for inflexional morphemes, non-cognate portions of reflexes, i.e. derivational
morphemes and non-cognate parts of compounds, are shown in parentheses (...). Where an inflexional
morpheme is an affix or clitic and can readily be omitted, its omission is indicated
by a hyphen at the beginning or end of the base. This applies particularly to possessor
suffixes on directly possessed nouns (vol. 1, ch.2, §3.2). Where an inflexional morpheme cannot
readily be omitted, then it is separated from its base by a hyphen. This may happen because
of complicated morphophonemics or because the morpheme is always present, like the adjectival
-n in some NNG and Admiralties languages and prefixed reflexes of the POc article
 *na in scattered languages. When a reflex is itself polymorphemic (i.e. the morphemes reflect
morphemes present in the reconstructed etymon) or contains a reduplication, the morphemes
or reduplicates are also separated by a hyphen.

     Languages from which data are cited in this volume are listed in Appendix B in their
 subgroups, together with an index allowing the reader to find the subgroup to which a given
language belongs. Appendix B also includes alternative language names. The difficulty of
deciding where the borderline between dialect and language lies, combined with the fact that
these volumes contain work by a number of contributors, has resulted in some inconsistency
in the naming of dialects in the cognate sets. Some occur in the form ‘Kara (E)’, i.e. the East
dialect of the Kara language, or ‘Lukep (Pono)’, i.e. the Pono dialect of the Lukep language,
whilst others are represented simply by the dialect name, e.g. Iduna, noted in Appendix B as
 ‘Iduna (= dialect of Bwaidoga)’.


1.4.3 Conventions used in representing reconstructions

Reconstructions are marked with an asterisk, e.g. *tciRaqcin ‘squirrelfish’, in keeping with
the standard convention in historical linguistics. POc reconstructions, and also PWOc and
PNGOc reconstructions, are given in the orthography of §3.4. For reconstructions at higher-
order interstages the orthographies are those used by Blust in his various publications and the
acd. Reconstructions at lower-order interstages are given in the standard orthography adopted
for data (§4.2). Geraghty’s (1986) PCP orthography, for example, is based on Standard Fijian
spelling, and is converted into our standard orthography in the same way as Fijian spelling is.
In practice, this means that the orthographies for PEOc, PROc and PCP are the same as for
POc, except that a distinction between *p and *v is recognised and *R is absent from PCP.
Biggs and Clark’s PPn reconstructions are in any case written in an orthography identical
to our standard. Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms are shown in Table
 1.4.

      PMP final consonants are usually retained in POc in absolute word-final position. In many
cases decisive evidence for retention or loss can be found in those Oceanic languages that
usually retain final consonants. However, there are some cases where it is uncertain whether
POc kept the PMP finals. This is so when a PMP etymon is not attested in an Oceanic language that
consistently retains POc final consonants. An example is *-R in PMP *kamaliR
‘men’s house’, a term reflected in Oceanic only in certain languages that regularly lose POc
final consonants. In such cases the consonant is reconstructed in parentheses (e.g. POc *ka-
mali(R)').

      In presenting words that display anomalies of form, it is often necessary to posit
an expected form. For example, in the cognate set supporting POc *tciRaqan ‘squirrelfish’ in §4.1,
the Loniu form taʔay is presented in support of PEOc *taRaqan. Given the reconstruction,
however, we would expect the Loniu form to be taya(?). In this volume we use a less widely
employed convention and mark expected forms with a dagger, e.g. ~\taya(?), to distinguish
them both from reconstructions and real data.[20]

[20] Another convention sometimes used for this purpose is a double asterisk, e.g. **taya(?)'. we prefer the dagger
 on aesthetic grounds.

22 Malcolm Ross, Andrew Pciwley and Meredith Osmond

__pre__
              Table 1.4      Bracketing and segmentation conventions in protoforms
             (x)      it cannot be determined whether x was present
              (x,y)   either x or y was present
              [x]   the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with and one without x
              [x,y] the item is reconstructable in two forms, one with x and one with y
              x-y     x and y are separate morphemes
              x-      x takes an enclitic or a suffix
              <x>     x is an infix

     Sometimes we need to refer to a reconstructed form that one would expect as the regular
reflex of an established POc etymon, but which does not occur because an irregular sound
change has occurred. In such cases the dagger and asterisk conventions are used together. For
example, in ch.7, §4, we reconstruct POc *simuk ‘mosquito, small biting fly’. Its Proto SE
Solomonic reflex is reconstructed as *simi (this is the form reflected by the SE Solomonic
data), but the expected (regular) Proto SE Solomonic form, referred to in our discussion, is
f*simu, the regular reflex of POc *simuk. The dagger marks it as expected but not attested
to.

     Sometimes a hypothetical POc form is marked in this way. In ch.7, §5, we cite PMP *nik-
nik, *hik-hik ‘tiny biting insect: gnat, sandfly, fruitfly’. The expected POc form is 'Oninik,
marked with a dagger because it does not actually occur. Instead, the Oceanic data require us
to reconstruct the irregular form POc *niku-niku ‘small biting fly’.

     When historical linguists compile cognate sets they commonly retain word for word the
glosses given in the sources from which the items are taken. However, again in the interests
of standardisation, we have often reworded (and sometimes abbreviated) the glosses of our
sources, while preserving the meaning. Where glosses were in a language other than English
we have translated them. In the interests of space and legibility, and because data often have
multiple sources, we have given the source of a reflex only when it is not included in the
listings in Appendix A.

     Sometimes we use the convention of providing no gloss beside the items in a cognate set
whose gloss is identical to that of the POc (or other lower-order) reconstruction at the head
of the set, i.e. the reconstruction which they reflect.

     Where necessary, we use ‘(v)’, ‘(vi)’, or ‘(vt)’ to indicate that a gloss is a verb, intransitive
verb or transitive verb, ‘(n)’ to indicate that it is a noun.

     Within glosses we use the conventional abbreviations ‘k.o.’ (as in ‘k.o. yam’) for ‘kind
of’, ‘s.o.’ for ‘someone’, ‘s.t.’ for ‘something’, ‘sp.’ for a species and ‘spp.’ for more than
one species.

                                                                               Introduction    23

     In putting together cognate sets we have quite often found possible cognates which do not
quite ‘fit’ the set: they display unexplained phonological irregularities or their meaning is just
a little too different from the rest of the set for us to assume cognacy. Rather than eliminate
them we often include them below the cognate set under the rubric ‘cf. also’.


1.5 Indexes

This volume has three indexes. The first, as in volumes 1 and 2, is an index of reconstructions
arranged by their protolanguages. The second is an alphabetical list of reconstructions. The
third is an index of animals by their English and Linnaean glosses.



2 Fish

2.1 Introduction

Proto Oceanic speaking communities subsisted on what they could grow and gather and what
they could glean from the reef and sea.[1] Through their dependence on fishing, the inhabitants
would have amassed knowledge of the environments favoured by particular fish, and awareness of
fish habits as they related to such things as season of the year, the lunar and diurnal
cycle, tidal movements, winds and currents. The times of certain fish to be fat, to be abundant,
and to aggregate in a certain spot for spawning or feeding would have been marked.

     This chapter deals mainly with the names of fishes. Paul Geraghty (1994) and Robin
Hooper (1994) have provided a substantial starting point with their work on rconstructing
fish names for Proto Central Pacific and Proto Polynesian respectively. Their data and lower-
level reconstructions are reproduced here when included in a higher level reconstruction.
Otherwise I simply record the existence of a PCP or PPn reconstruction.

     In most Oceanic languages the lexicon of fish names is the largest of all faunal fields. The
lists of local fish names available to me include almost 300 items for Mbunai Titan in the
Admiralties (Akimichi & Sakiyama 1991), over 400 for both Marovo in the NW Solomons
(Hviding 1996), and Wayan Fijian (Pawley & Sayaba 2003), 250 for Kapingamarangi in Polynesia
(Lieber 1994) and around 400 for Satawalese in Micronesia (Akimichi & Sauchomal
1982). The evidence is overwhelming that knowledge of fish is, or has been until the breakdown
of traditional lifestyles, extremely detailed, and one not restricted to a small group of
people, but widespread among the majority of Oceanic communities.



[1] I am particularly grateful to Malcolm Ross who has spent many hours checking and suggesting solutions
 to problematic cognate sets, and to Paul Geraghty for a host of detailed comments. Andrew Pawley has also
 commented on earlier drafts and made many useful suggestions. Others who have contributed over the years
 that this work lias been in progress include Simon Foale, Alexandre Francois, John Lynch. Alice Pomponio,
 the late Phil Quick, Kevin Salisbury, Ian Scales and David Walsh.

26   Meredith Osmond


     A preliminary question that arises is: Do varieties of fishes in the tropical Pacific diminish
in number the further one moves east from the major land masses? From linguistic evidence
alone it appears that the major families continue to be represented throughout the region, but
the number of genera and species diminishes. The greatest number of families noted in a
wordlist available to me is from one of the more remote locations.[2]

    Davis’s listing for Chuuk (1999) records 71 of the 78 families included in my survey.[3]
Leach & Davidson (2000) have considered the question from an archaeological perspective.
From fish remains identified from 24 different island groups in the tropical Pacific they list
 48 families that were taken in any quantity by prehistoric people (p.414). Although they
note signs of regional specialisation, they write that this ‘cannot be explained by changes
in natural abundance of fish types from one place to another’ but is due rather to aspects
of human behaviour (p.416). Thus it should be possible to reconstruct terms to at least the
taxonomic level of family from the full range of linguistic subgroups including Micronesia
and Polynesia, notwithstanding that the range of environment declines. This is in contrast to
the land-based flora and fauna.

    Although I have used western taxonomy as the basis of my classification, it should not
be assumed that all Oceanic peoples used a similar system of organization. As an example,
Edvard Hviding describes the system used by the people of the Marovo Lagoon, on the island
of New Georgia, western Solomons. He writes:

|       Marovo fish taxonomy has a structure that differs considerably from Linnaean or western
|       scientific taxonomy. For instance, a number of Marovo fish taxa are highly general
|       “lump'’ categories that cover a considerable number of Linnaean species under one name.
|       The temi kepe (etymology uncertain) covers, without further specification, all
|       (in western terms) ‘butterflyfish' and 'eoralfish', as well as any number of similar small, colorful
|       reef fish with high and flat bodies. On the other hand, one Linnaean species may be
|       subdivided in Marovo into a great number of named subtypes. One example is the skipjack
|       tuna or makasi, w hich in Marovo has more than a dozen specific names that refer to
|       growth stages, colorings, and more. Important food species are often finely subdivided
|       in such a manner, in three-to-four-level taxonomic structures, w hile insignificant fishes,
|       such as the small reef species just mentioned, are more commonly “lumped‘. This does
|       not imply that Marovo fishers do not generally and readily distinguish between similar
|       looking fish species. They have names for at least four hundred Marovo “species”, and
|       experienced people can easily single out and identify by name closely related fishes that
|       differ only very subtly in color or general appearance. For example, at least tw elve types
|       of medium-sized parrotfish (no generic term in Marovo) are classified and named, as
|       well as more than seventeen ‘trevallies’ [Carangids: mara] and at least twenty ‘groupers’
|       [Serranids: pajara] (Hviding 1996:192-193).

[2] Apart from general dictionaries and wordlists, the following lists of fish names were consulted: Andra, McEl-
 dow nev (1995); Chuukese. Davis (1999); Dobu, Lithgow (1975); Gela, Foale (1998); Kadavu Fijian, Kikusawa
 (1995); Kapingamarangi. Lieber (1994); Kiribatese, Thaman & Tebano (n.d.); Lau (of Malaita), Akimichi
 (1978); Lau Fijian, Paul Geraghty (pers. comm.); Motu, Oram (n.d.); Marovo, Hviding (1990, 1996, 2005);
 Marquesan, Lavondes (1977); Mbunai Titan, Akimichi & Sakiyama (1991); Misima, Kinch (1999); Mutu.
 Pomponio (n.d.); Nadroga Fijian, Paul Geraghty (pers. comm.); Nduke, Ian Scales (pers. comm.); Niuatop-
 utapu. Dye 1983; Ponam. Carrier (1982); Pukapuka, Kevin Salisbury (pers. comm.); Raga, David Walsh (pers.
 co nun.); Satawalese. Akimichi & Sauchomal (1982); Teop, Shoffner (1976); Uvean (Wallisian), Rensch (1983).

[3] Other totals recorded are 67 for Gela (SES), 66 for Wayan Fijian, 64 for Titan (Adm) and 62 for Satawalese
 (Mic).

                                                                                        Fish    27


    Primary lexemes can denote a fish at the species, the genus or the family level, and
occasionally, as with sharks and rays, suborders or even orders. Particular species are more likely
to be separately named if they are distinctive in appearance, like the bump-headed parrotfish,
or valued food, like the great barracuda. At the species level or lower, names are more likely
to be binomial. Some may be multimorphemic, reflecting attributes such as similarity of appearance,
habit (schooling or not), environment (e.g. bottom-dwellers, pelagic, fresh-water,
estuarine, reef or deep sea dwellers), whether diurnal or nocturnal, and nastiness (poisonous
to eat, stingers). Distinctive appearance may be reflected, with terms for head, nose, eye,
spikes, filaments, similarity to sail or palm leaf and so on being incorporated into the name.
In Polynesian languages some colour terms, particularly reflexes of PPn *tea ‘white’, *quli
‘black’, * kefu ‘reddish-brown’, *kula ‘red’ and * mea ‘reddish’, are quite common. Wayan
Fijian has kciti ni tanive, lit. ‘biter of sardines’ for a medium sized trevally, after its feeding
habits, while a scorpionfish whose poisonous spines can inflict severe pain is called taŋitaŋi
ga net, lit. ‘cry until high tide’. Niuean calls a species of parrotfish mohe-aho lit. ‘sleep by
day’. Valued fish and fish whose appearance changes with age will often have names for
particular growth stages. In Tonga, for instance, a species of mullet (Valamugil cunnesius)
has six named stages, ranging from smallest to largest, te?evela, te?ekona, te?efd, ?unomoa,
kanahe, and kanahe fau.

    A common difficulty in reconstructing the semantic range of a term is that although apparent
cognate names may exist in, say, the Admiralties, the Solomons and Polynesia, the
fishes bearing these names may belong to different species or genera. While some species
are widespread, others are highly restricted in their geographic range, and the name of a fish
in the Admiralties may well be given elsewhere to another species within the same family,
or to an unrelated fish that resembles it in some aspect. As well, the western scientific
taxonomy of fishes is subject to continuing revision and occasional name replacement. These
are problems both for the wordlist compiler in identifying a fish by its Linnaean classification
in addition to its common name, and for ourselves in tracing the somewhat fluid species
association that a cognate set may produce.


2.2 Organisation

The cognate sets that follow are grouped in terms of Linnaean families and high order groupings.
The ordering of groups substantially follows that of Ian Munro (1967) in his encyclopaedic volume
_The Fishes of New Guinea_. However, since then there have been numerous revisions to fish taxonomy.
In particular, I have been guided by the FishBase website
(Froese & Pauly 2010) in tracing synonyms and revised scientific classification. Dictionary
identifications have been retained, with any revision of terminology added in square brackets.

    For descriptions of fish appearance and behaviour I have also relied heavily on Munro (1967)
and Allen & Swainston (1993).


    As frequent references are made to Geraghty 1994, Hooper 1994 and Munro 1967, the
year is omitted and I refer to them respectively as Geraghty, Hooper and Munro.


    Terms for fish parts are included in this chapter. Marine mammals have been included in
chapter 5.

28    Meredith Osmond


2.3 Fish (generic)

It is likely that the POc term *ikan had both a narrow and a broad sense. The narrow sense
applied to ‘typical’ fish, while the broad sense included some or all of the following: whales,
dolphins, dugongs, eels, turtles, cephalopods and rays. Shellfish are generally excluded in
daughter languages. See chapter 8 for a fuller discussion.

<
PAn *Sikan ‘fish’ (ACD)
PMP *hikan ‘fish’ (ACD)
POc *ikan ‘fish (generic)’
  Adm :    Nyindrou      ni             ‘fish’
  Adm :    Lenkau        nik            ‘fish, excl. turtle, dolphin etc.’
  Adm :    Penchai       nii            ‘fish, including turtle, dolphin, whale, octopus’
  NNG:     Gitua         iga            ‘fish’
  NNG:     Manam         iʔa            ‘fish’
  NNG:     Takia         i              ‘fish’
  NNG:     Yabem         i              ‘fish’
  PT:      Ubir          ian            ‘fish’
  PT:      Dobu          iana           ‘fish’
  PT:      Tawala        iyana          ‘fish’
  PT:      Kilivila      yena           ‘fish’
  MM:      Ramoaaina     ian            ‘fish’
  MM:      Nakanai       ia             ‘fish (generic)’
  MM:      Mono-Alu      iana           ‘fish’
  MM:      Roviana       iyana          ‘fish (generic)’
  MM:      Marovo        iyana          ‘generic for all free-swimming creatures (e.g. fish, eels, stingrays, dolphins, whales, squids, jellyfish)’
     SES:  Gela           iya           ‘a creature of the sea: fish, mollusc, crayfish, whale, squid, sea anemone, etc.’
     SES:  ’Are’are       iʔa           ‘fish (generic)’
     SES:  Sa’a           iʔe           ‘fish’
     SES:  Arosi          iʔa           ‘fish, including sharks, rays, porpoises and possibly other main animals’
     SES:  Lau            iʔa           ‘fish; any sea creature’ (Akimichi 1978:307 includes e.g. dugong, porpoise and whale)
  SES: Kwaio              iʔa           ‘fish, porpoises, whales’
  NCV: Mota               iya           ‘fish’
  NCV: Raga               iye           ‘fish, including whales and porpoises but not eels, seasnakes, octopus, squid, cuttlefishjellyfish or balolo worms’
  NCV: NE Ambae           ige           ‘typical fishes, rays and dolphins but not sharks and whales (which are grouped together), eels or cephalopods’ (Hyslop, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Nguna             na-ika         ‘fish’
  NCal: Nemi             nuk            ‘fish’
  NCal: Cemuhi           ikua           ‘fish’
  Mic:    Kiribati       ika            ‘fish: all swimming marine creatures including turtles, dugong, whales and porpoises, but not squid or octopus’
  Mic:    Woleaian       ix(a)          ‘fish’
  Mic:    Chuukese       ik             ‘general name for fish’
  Mic:    Puluwatese     ylk, yikan          ‘fish, porpoises, whales, but not squid’
  Fij:    Rotuman        iʔa            ‘fish: including also turtles, whales, alligators, etc., but not crabs, shellfish, etc.’
  Fij:    Wayan          ika            (i) ‘fish, including eels, cetaceans, turtles and sometimes cephalopods’; (2) ‘true fish’
  Fij:    Bauan          ika            ‘fish, including also eels, turtles, cetaceans, cephalopods’
  Pn:     Tongan         ika            ‘fish, including also turtles (fonu) and whales (tofuaʔa) but not eels, cuttle-fish or jelly-fish’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu ika              ‘fish, including eels, turtles, cetaceans, cephalopods’
  Pn:     Niuean       ika              ‘fish, whales and dolphins’
  Pn:     Rennellese   ika              ‘fish, turtle’
  Pn:     Samoan       iʔa              ‘fish (including turtles and whales)’
  Pn:     Tikopia      ika              ‘general category with reference to fish, but including allied creatures like turtle, cetaceans’
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele     ika            ‘fish, whale, porpoise but not turtles, eels or octopus’
  Pn:     Rarotongan     ika            ‘fish (generic)’
  Pn:     Tahitian       iʔa            ‘fish, including porpoise, whale, turtle, octopus’
  Pn:     Maori          ika            ‘fish’
  Pn:     Hawaiian       iʔa            ‘fish or any marine animal, as eel, oyster, crab, whale; meat or any flesh food’
>

                                                                                      Fish    29




2.4 Sharks: Carcharhinidae, Sphyrnidae etc

In this section and in §5 on rays, I am dealing with sub-orders rather than families. Kailola
(1987) lists twelve shark families, the best-known probably being Carcharhinidae, the largest,
with tiger sharks, black-tip and white-tip sharks among its species, and Sphyrnidae, hammerheads.

    Most sharks inhabit shallow coastal waters around reefs. A number of species are regarded
as dangerous, but in parts of the southeast Solomons sharks are thought to be the ghosts of
men and are considered sacred. I have reconstructed one possible generic term, *bakewa,
its cognates widespread, but undergoing a change of meaning in Central Pacific. Reflexes
of ^maŋewa have replaced *bakewa as the generic term in Polynesia. In Motu and Fiji the
reflex of a POc term for shark has come to be applied instead to the remora or sucker fish
which attaches itself to sharks and other large sea creatures (§65). This is the case with Motu
mayoa and PCP *bakewct. Tolai gul can be used to refer to either a ‘k.o. striped shark (tiger
shark?)’ or ‘the pilotfish Nucrates ductor’, a fish which also stays in the close vicinity of
sharks.

30    Meredith Osmond


                        Figure 2.1   Carcharodon carcharias, great white shark

   Proto Oceanic speakers undoubtedly distinguished many different species of sharks by
name, as contemporary Oceanic speech communities do, but reconstructed terms have not
been clearly identified with particular species at a level higher than Proto Central Pacific.

   Cognates in the following set from the Admiralties, Papuan Tip, SE Solomons and Micronesia
provide the strongest evidence for *bakewa as the generic term for ‘shark’ in POc.

<
POc *bakewa ‘shark (generic)’
     Adm: Mussau           baio           ‘shark’
     Adm: Loniu            pew            ‘shark, generic. Used as first element in compound terms for kinds of’
     Adm:   Nyindrou       bePeu          ‘shark’
     Adm:   Titan          peu            ‘shark’
     Adm:   Lenkau         paheu          ‘shark (generic)’
     NNG:   Yabem          yak™ a         ‘shark’
     NNG:   Kove           vayewa         ‘shark’
     NNG:   Bariai         bakewa         ‘shark’
     NNG:   Wogeo          bagewa         ‘shark’ (g for ^k)
     PT:    Wedau          vayewa         ‘shark’
     PT:    Duau           baewa          ‘shark’
     PT:    Mi sima        baewa          ‘shark (generic)’
     PT:    Sinaugoro      bayewa         ‘shark’
     MM:    Patpatar       baiawa         ‘shark’
     MM:    Lungga         bayea          ‘shark’
     SES:   Gela           bayea          ‘k.o. shark, basking shark’
     SES:   Gela           bake-bake      ‘ Carcharhinus melanopterus, blacktip reef shark’
     SES:   Lau            baekwa         (i) ‘general term for shark’; (2) ‘any dreaded animal, crocodile, swordfish, poisonous snake etc’
     SES:   Arosi          baPewa         ‘shark. The shark was sacred. Men had familiar sharks which killed their enemies. A man and a shark sometimes exchanged souls’
     SES:   Sa’a           paPewa         (1) ‘shark’; (2) ‘generic term for all sea-ghosts, incarnations where sharks or swordfish or gropers are in question’
  SES: Kwaio          ba?ekwa      ‘shark (generic)’
  SES: Kahua          pagewa       ‘shark (generic)’
  NCV: Lo-Toga        payewa       ‘shark’
  NCV: Mota           payoa        ‘shark’
  NCV: Mwotlap        bayo         ‘Carcharhinidae spp
  NCV: Namakir        bake         ‘shark’
  NCV: S Efate        pako         ‘shark’
  SV:   Ura           (u)beu       ‘shark’
  SV:   Anejom        ne-pyev      ‘shark’
  Mic: Kiribati       bakoa        ‘shark (generic)’
  Mic: Marshallese pako            ‘shark’
  Mic: Ponapean       pako         ‘shark (generic)’
  Mic: Woleaian       paxow        ‘shark’
PCP *bakewa ‘k.o. fish that accompanies sharks’
  Fiji  Bauan         bakewa       ‘remora or sucking fish’
PPn *pakewa ‘ Carangoides ferdau jordan ’ (Hooper: Carangoides orthogrammus)
  Pn:   Tuvalu        pakeva       ‘fish sp., Carangoides orthogrammus‘
  Pn:   Pukapukan pakeva           ‘C. orthogrammus"
  Pn:   Takuu         pakeva       ‘name of principal sea deity’
  Pn:   Tokelauan pakeva           ‘black-spot jack, Carangoidesferdaujordan‘
  Pn:   Tuamotuan pakeva           ‘k.o. fish’
cf. also:
   TM:      Burna      boe^b'oe       ‘shark’
>

                                                                                   Fish   31


    In Polynesian languages, reflexes of PPn *pakewa usually refer to a trevally (belonging
to the same family as Naucrates ductor, the pilot fish), while reflexes of PPn *mcujd are the
generic term for shark.

    The next reconstruction, POc *maŋewa ‘shark’, appears to be a variant of *bakewa in
which the stops are replaced by nasals. It is impossible to know how such a variant might
have arisen, but the probability of two formally parallel homonymous trisyllables arising by
chance is extremely low (Nichols 1996:50-51).

    The reconstruction *mcujewa assumes that segment coalescence has occurred in both
Motu and the SES languages. Motu mayoa reflects coalescence of *-ew- as -o-, SES maŋeo
coalescence of *-wa as -o. Note that a similar change occurred in NCV and Micronesian
reflexes of *bakewa.

<
POc *maŋewa ‘k.o. shark’
  PT:       Motu       mayoa        ‘suckerfish: Phtheirichthys lineatus, Echeneis naucrates, Remora remora‘
  MM: Tomoip          maŋ(gel)      ‘ shark’
  MM: Tolai           moŋ           ‘common shark, Carcharinus sp.’
  SES: To’aba’ita maŋeo             ‘sp. of small shark’
  SES: Lau            maŋeo         ‘k.o. sea snake’ (also back'd ‘shark’, baekwa i asi ‘sea snake’)
PPn *ma/jo ‘general term for shark spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Niuean        maŋd          ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Pukapukan     maŋd           ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Rennellese    maŋd           ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Samoan        maŋo           ‘k.o. shark’
  Pn:    Tuvalu        maŋd           ‘shark’
  Pn:    Tokelauan     maŋd           ‘shark’
  Pn:    K’marangi     moŋo(henua)    ‘grey shark’
  Pn:    Tikopia       maŋd           ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Tahitian      ma?o           ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Maori         maŋo           ‘shark (generic)’
  Pn:    Hawaiian      mano           ‘shark (generic)’
cf. also:
   Mic: Puluwatese məŋo(wur)          ‘k.o. shark’
>

32   Meredith Osmond


   Reflexes of *k w arawa serve as a generic term in parts of WOc, but in Polynesia refer to
specific species.

<
POc *k w arawa ‘k.o. shark’
  NNG: Gitua          arawa          ‘shark’
  NNG: Kove           kaluya         ‘shark’ (borrowed from Bali below?)
  NNG: Mutu           korau          ‘generic for several shark spp.’
  PT:    Dobu         kwalawa        ‘shark, general name’
  PT:    Muyuw        kwaw           ‘shark’
  PT:    Kilivila     kwau           ‘shark’
  PT:    Lala        olava          ‘shark (generic)’
  PT:    Motu         karava         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Bali            kaluya         ‘shark’
  MM: Vitu            kaliya         ‘shark’
  NCal: Nixumwak arau                ‘k.o. shark’
  Fij:   Rakiraki     karawa         'lsurus, mako shark’ (Paul Geraghty pers. comm.)
PPn *qalawa ‘k.o. shark’
  Pn:    E Uvean      ?alava         'Carcharhinus limbatus, black-tipped shark’
  Pn:    Tongan       ?alava         ‘k.o. shark’ (marked with a wavy stripe)
  Pn:    Rennellese lagaba           ‘large shark, probably black-tip or mullet shark, C. melanopterus’
  Pn:     Samoan       alava         ‘k.o. shark’
  Pn:     Tuvalu       alava         ‘C. longimanus, white-tipped shark’
  Pn:     K’marangi    alawa         ‘C. longimanus, Oceanic white-tipped shark’
  Pn:     Maori        arawa         ‘k.o. shark’
>

   Geraghty (p. 143) also lists PCP *qaso ‘k.o. large shark, Carcharhinus sp.’ If the Taiof
and Halia terms below are cognate, then POc *kaso(r,R) is reconstructable.

<
PCP *qaso ‘k.o. large shark’
  Fij: Bauan          yaso           ‘k.o. shark, male, savage, big belly, short body’
PPn *qaso ‘shark sp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn: Tongan          ?aho           ‘k.o. shark’
  Pn:      Pukapukan          ayou          ‘large deep-sea shark’ (final -u irregular)
  Pn:      Samoan             aso           ‘Carcharhinus, white-tipped shark’ (Rensch 1999:19)
  Pn:      Tokelauan          aho           ‘huge, clumsy grey deep-sea fish about 5 metres long, probably shark family’
  Pn:      Maori              aho-aho       ‘a fish’
cf. also:
   MM: Taiof                  kas           ‘shark’
   MM: Halia                  kosoro        ‘brown man-eating shark, plentiful around Nissan and associated with sorcery’
>

                                                                                        Fish   33


    Languages frequently use binomial terms to refer to particular shark species, although
sometimes the generic first element is regarded as optional. Fijian (unspecified) uses gz'o4 +
modifier, e.g, gio uvi‘Carcharhinusplumbeus, sandbar shark’, gio daniva ‘Galeocerdo, tiger
shark’, gio uluvai ‘hammerhead shark’ (Geraghty pers. comm.). Modifiers tend to develop
independently in different languages, although elements recur. Two of the Fijian modifiers,
uvi and daniva, are found also in Polynesian terms, PPn *nai-ufi ‘k.o. large shark, probably
tiger or grey reef shark’ and PPn *tanifa ‘tiger shark’. The latter is remarkably a reflex of
POc * tanipa ‘sardine’ (§7), presumably because of similar iridescent zigzag vertical lines on
both tiger sharks and sardines (Geraghty p. 143).

    Probably because of similar wavy iridescent lines on the sides of Spanish mackerel, also a
large predatory fish, reflexes of POc *taijiRi ‘ Spanish mackerel’ (§57) have been incorporated
into names for a kind of shark in Muyuw (PT) and Marovo (MM).

__pre__
    PT: Muyuw                 tagili gal    ‘shark’
    MM: Marovo                kiso taŋiri   'Galeocerdo cuvier, tiger shark, the most dangerous shark in Marovo’

    An obviously descriptive name, PCP *mata qi taliŋa ‘eyes of ears’ is used in Central
Pacific languages to refer to the hammerhead shark, although the term has been lost in Eastern Polynesian. In Molima (PT), this shark is referred to as mala balabala, literally ‘eyes
crosswise’, while in Gela (SES) it is bayeapapala vohe ‘paddle-handle shark’.

[4] Geraghty (1994) has *gio.

34    Meredith Osmond


2.5 Rays: stingrays (Dasyatidae), eagle rays (Myliobatidae), manta rays (Mobulidae)

Stingrays and eagle rays inhabit
sandy bottoms in the vicinity of
coral reefs, and are common in
estuaries where there is abundant
mud. Eagle rays are so named because of their wide flaps and ability to leap from the water. Manta
rays rank among the largest known
fishes. They are specialised in having largely abandoned the bottomliving habit and usually swim near
the surface, often leaping from the
water. Manta rays inhabit open
ocean, and are seldom seen near

     Figure 2.2    Ae‘°ba,'S mrinar‘’ SpOtted eagk ray

     Reflexes of POc *p aK are numerous and widespread. It seems
that the POc term had both a generic and a specific sense. Although most of the reflexes
listed below are glossed ‘stingray’, *paRi is used as the first element in compound terms for
rays other than stingrays (see *paRi-manuk below). The same pattern occurs in Marovo (NW
Solomonic) where tape is the term both for stingrays and other rays in general, giving rise
to compounds like tape kurukuru ‘spotted eagle ray, Aetobatus nannan`.

      Oceanic languages usually distinguish several taxa, typically binomials, *paRi + modifier.

<
PAn *paRiS ‘stingray’ (ACD)
POc *paRi (i) ‘stingray’; (2) ‘ray (generic)’
     Adm:   Mussau      pe             ‘stingray’
     Adm:   Titan       pei            ‘ray’
     Adm:   Nali        pei            ‘stingray’
     Adm:   Bipi        pay            ‘stingray’
     Adm:   Wuvulu      pai            ‘stingray’
     Adm:   Nyindrou    bei            ‘stingray’
     NNG:   Gitua       par            ‘stingray’
     NNG:   Manam       paru           ‘stingray’
     NNG:   Bariai      pali           ‘stingray’
     NNG:   Mangap      par            ‘stingray’
     PT:    Dobu        ali            ‘stingray’
     PT:    Molima      vali           ‘stingray’
     PT:    Tawala      wa/i           ‘stingray’
     PT:    Kilivila    vai            ‘stingray’
     MM:    Tolai       var            ‘fish of the ray species’
     MM:    Minigir     vari           ‘stingray’
  MM:     Tab ar        vari           ‘stingray’
  MM:     Patpatar      har            ‘ray’
  MM:     Roviana       vari           ‘wood rasp’ (from skin of sandpaper ray?)
  MM:     Marovo        vari(popolo)   ‘bull ray, Mylobatus sp.’
  SES:    Gela          vali           ‘ray, skate’
  SES:    Arosi         hari           ‘a fish, ray’ (mara-hari ‘k.o. shark’)
  SES:    Lau          fali            ‘general term for rays’
  SES:    Kwaio        fali            ‘ray (fish) (generic)’
  NCVr:   Mota          var, vari      ‘stingray’
  NCVr:   NE Ambae      vari           ‘stingray’
  NCVr:   Raga          vari           ‘blue-spotted stingray’
  SV:     Sye           (u)var         ‘stingray’
  SV:     Ura           (u)var         ‘stingray’
  NCal:   Nemi         pe              ‘stingray’
  NCal:   Ajie         pe              ‘stingray’
  NCal:   Xaracuu      pe              ‘stingray’
  NCal:   Iaai          ve             ‘stingray’
  Mic:    Puluwatese                   ‘ray fish’
  Mic:    Woleaian     fai(ya)         ‘file (a tool); rayfish (general term)’
  Fij:    Rotuman       hai            ‘stingray’
  Fij:    Bauan         vai            ‘a ray or skate’
  Fij:    Way an        vai            ‘generic for stingrays, manta or devil rays and eagle rays’
PPn *fai ‘stingray, general term’
  Pn:     Tongan                       ‘skate or stingray’
  Pn:     E Uvean       /«7            ‘stingray’
  Pn:     Samoan        /«7            ‘stingray’
  Pn:     Pukapukan wai                ‘stingray’
  Pn:     Rennellese hai               ‘generic for rays and skate-like fishes
  Pn:     Tikopia      fai             ‘various rays’
  Pn:     Tahitian     fai             ‘stingray’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      hai(lepo)      ‘stingray’
>

                                                                                    Fish   35


<
PMP *paRih manuk      ‘? ray’ (presumably ‘eagle ray’) (ACD)
POc *paRi-manuk ‘Aetobatus narinari, spotted eagle ray’ (fmanuk ‘bird’)
  PT:     Dobu       ali manu(wa) ‘eagle ray’
  MM:     Patpatar   har man       ‘spotted eagle ray’
PEOc * vaRi manu ‘Aetobatisnarinari, eagle ray’ (Geraghty 1990)
  SES: Kwaio        fali manu      ‘manta ray’
  SES: ’Are’are      hari manu     ‘spotted eagle ray’
  SES: Arosi         hari manu     ‘eagle ray’
  SES: Bauro         hari manu     ‘eagle ray’
  Fij:   Bauan       vai manu      ‘skate or ray’
>

36   Meredith Osmond

<
PPn *fai-manu ‘Aetobatis narinari, eagle ray’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan     fai manu         ‘eagle ray’
  Pn:    Samoan     fai manu         ‘ray sp.’
  Pn:    Tuvalu     fai manu         ‘spotted eagle ray’
  Pn:    K’marangi hai manu          ‘Aetobatis sp., eagle ray’
  Pn:    Tahitian   fai manu         ‘eagle ray’
  Pn:    Maori       whai manu       ‘eagle ray’
>

    Banks Islands languages (North Vanuatu) support Proto Banks *vaRi mala ‘eagle ray’,
where the term for‘hawk’ rather than‘bird’ is the modifier (Alexandre Francois, pers. comm.).

    Reflexes of POc *Ropok ‘to fly’ are sometimes used in compounds to distinguish rays
that leap from the water. Examples are Nakanai (MM) kova lovo-lovo ‘ray with two wings’
(kova ‘stingray’) and Gela (SES) vali-lovo ‘eagle ray, manta ray, devil ray’.

    Lower level reconstructions include PCP *vai bek'cr PPn faipeka ‘Aetobatis narinari,
spotted eagle ray’ (PCP *bek‘a ‘bat’) (Geraghty p. 144); PPn fai kili ‘sandpaper ray’
(probably Himantura granulata, Dasyatidae) (*kili ‘file’); and PNPn fdfa-lua ‘Manta biroslris.
manta ray’ (lit. ‘full of holes’, presumably a description of the pitted appearance of the skin),
the latter two from Hooper (p. 197).


2.6 Bonefishes (Albulidae) and tarpons (Elopidae, formerly Megalopidae)

Bonefishes are coastal fishes, moderately sized and brilliantly silver, which often congregate
in large schools. They are generally valued as food, but have many fine bones. Tarpons are
also moderately large coastal game fishes which ascend rivers in search of food. The flesh
is tough, with numerous fine bones. They are renowned as active strong fighters capable of
swift movement, leaping ability and great endurance (Munro 1967: p.41).

     The two families are treated together because the second reconstruction below, POc * pu-
pulan, is based on cognates referring to both and seems a broader term than POc *kuRo\
bonefishes and tarpons are similar in colour and habitat, and both are marked by the presence
of many fine bones.

<
PMP *kuRaw ‘edible marine fish’ (acd: PWMP *kuRaw)
POc *kuRo ‘bony fish, probably Albula’
  MM: Tolai            kura           ‘k.o. fish’
  SES: Gela            gulo           ‘k.o. fish’
  NCal: Nyelayu        yhu            ‘Albula vulpes’
  Mic: Puluwatese kuwo                ‘k.o. small fish’
  Fij:   Rotuman       ?uo            ‘Albula’’
  Fij:   Bauan         (yawa)kio      ‘Albula’ (yawa ‘Chanos chanosf
  Fij:   Lau           kikio          ‘Albula’
PPn *kiokio ‘Albula vulpes, bonefish’ (Hooper 1994)’’
  Pn:      Tongan     kio-kio                ‘Albula vulpes, bonefish’
  Pn:      Tokelauan kio-kio                 ‘Albula vulpes, bonefish’
  Pn:      Tikopia    kio-kio                ‘Chanos chanos, milkfish’ (also a bony fish)
  Pn:      Mangarevan kio-kio                ‘Albula vulpes, bonefish’
cf. also:
   NNG: Kove               koha              ‘bonefish’
>

[5] Geraghty comments that the vowel sequence -uo is rare in Central Pacific languages, and suggests that PPn
 *-io may be regularly derived (pers. conun.).

                                                                                                   Fish   37

<
PMP *bulan-bulan ‘a white fish, Megalops cyprinoides‘ (ACD)
POc *pu-pulan ‘bony fish, Megalops, Albula spp.’ [6]
  NNG:     Gitua        vu-vula             ‘spotted herring’
  NNG:     Mutu         ublan               ‘herring’ (metathesis)
  PT:      Motu         hu-hula             ‘fish sp.’
  MM:      Marovo       vulu                ‘Albula vulpes, bonefish, found in mangrove pools (-w unexplained)
  NCal: Nemi       pulon                    "Megalops cyprinoides"
  NCal: Iaai       hu                       ‘Albula vulpes, large’
PCP *vula ‘ Megalops ’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Wayan      (a)vula                 ‘fish, possibly Megalops cyprinoides‘
  Fij:  Bauan       vu-vula                 "Megalops cyprinoides, white, bony to eat, easily chokes people’
   Fij:   Kadavu vu-vula                ‘Megalops'
   Fij:   Nadroga (ya)vula              "Megalops'
cf. also:
   Mic: Mokilese pallau                     ‘tarpon’
>


2.7 Sardines and herrings (Clupeidae) and anchovies (Engraulidae)

                                                Figure 2.3 Spratelloides delicatulus, small round herring


Sardines and herrings are small migratory
fishes which congregate in enormous shoals
in shallow coastal waters. Flesh is oily but
tasty (Munro 1967: p.50). They are taken in nets
in Oceanic communities.

    Anchovies also live in large schools in
coastal waters and estuaries. They have a
long slender maxillary (upper jaw) and pro
truding snout, and most are silvery or have a
bright silvery lateral band. Some species migrate seasonally, and the schools come close inshore where they can be captured with seines
(Munro 1967: p.43).

[6] An association with POc *pulan ‘moon’ is suggested, possibly a reference to its silvery colour.

38    Meredith Osmond

    In the cognate sets which follow, terms show some crossover of meaning between sardines
and anchovies. This is most likely due to looseness of definition of the English terms by the
wordlist compilers, but it is possible that the two families are regarded as sufficiently similar
in some languages for one term to cover both. The fact that we can reconstruct six POc terms
indicates that speakers differentiated between the referents in some regard.

<
PMP *paya ‘k.o. small fish, sardine or anchovy’ (ACD)
POc *paya ‘k.o. small fish, sardine or anchovy’
  Adm: Nyindrou        ba            ‘k.o. small fish’
  Adm: Ponam          pa             ‘anchovy’
  NNG: Gitua          paya           ‘anchovy, pilchard’
  NNG: Mutu           pai            ‘anchovy spp.’
  NNG: Manam           waya-waya ‘sardine’
  PT:   Bunama         haya          ‘k.o. anchovy’ (Mueller)
  PT:   Saliba         haya          ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:   Dobu           (?a)aya       ‘k.o. anchovy’
  PT:   Kilivila       vaya          ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Patpatar         haia          ‘k.o. fish, small, black’
  MM: Nehan           wai            ‘fish fry, anchovy?’
  NCal: Nemi           bac           ‘sardine’
  NCal: Nelemwa        ba            ‘sardine’
PCP *vaya ‘k.o. small school fish’ (Geraghty: ‘k.o. anchovy’)
  Fij:  Bauan          vaya          ‘small fish like the daniva (similar to a sardine), but with a red tail’
  Fij:  Lau            vaya          ‘ Thrissina baelama’’
  Fij:  Kadavu         vaya          ‘k.o. school fish’
  Pn:   Samoan        fa             Megalops (tarpon), found in marshes and river mouths’
>

<
POc *jaja ‘small fish, herring or anchovy’
  NNG: Bing           (yiy)zaz      ‘k.o. fish, Clupeidae’ (yiy ‘fish’)
PCP *dadd ‘ Spratelloides sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Verata       ðaða          ^Sprale![aides'
PPn *sasd ‘anchovy’ (Hooper: ‘Spratelloides sp.’ [herring])
  Pn:    Tongan        hahd          ‘k.o. small fish, anchovy’
  Pn:    E Uvean       hahd          ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Tokelauan hahd              ‘k.o. sprat’
  Pn:    Tikopia       sd            ‘small reef fish of anchovy type’
>

    In the next cognate set, there is reasonable consistency of meaning as far east as Fiji, but
Polynesian reflexes undergo a striking change of meaning, referring to a kind of shark with
similar markings to sardines (see p.33). Polynesian terms for sardine, together with a number
of Fijian terms, have the same form minus the first syllable.

<
POc *tanipa ‘Sardinella spp., sardine’
     Adm: Loniu        tenih          ‘sardine’
     Adm: Nyindrou     drahip         ‘sardine’
  Adm:   Ponam          hahef           ‘anchovy’
  PT:    Bunama         taniha(na)      ‘k.o. herring’ (Mueller 1985)
  PT:    Kilivila       taninuva        ‘sardine’ (for fianiva)
  PT:    Gumawana       taninava        ‘goldspot herring’ (for jtaniva)
  NCV:   Raga           tanive          'Hyperlophus villains, sandy sprat’
  NCV:   Tamambo        tanive          ‘sardine’
  NCV:   Uripiv         daniv           ‘sardine’
  Mic:   Puluwatese     hanif           ‘anchovy’
  Mic:   Chuukese       senif           ‘Herklotsichthys quadrimaculatus, goldspot herring’
  Mic:   Chuukese       senifana        ‘sardine’
  Mic: Ponapean         saip            ‘sardine’
PCP * taniva 'Sardinella’’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Nadroga       tanive        'Herklotsichthys’
  Fij:    Wayan         tanive        ‘generic for a number of species of small sardine-like fish’
  Fij:    Kadavu        daniva        ‘schooling fish’
PPn *tanifa ‘fierce shark’
  Pn:      Tongan       tanifa        ‘k.o. large man-eating shark’
  Pn:     Niuean        tenifa        ‘general name for shark’
  Pn:     E Uvean       tanifa        ‘k.o. shark’
  Pn:     Pukapukan taniwa            ‘fierce shark’
  Pn:      Samoan       tanifa        ‘large man-eating shark’
  Pn:      Tahitian     tanifa        ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Maori         tanifa        ‘shark or any formidable marine creature’ (maŋo tanifa'white pointer shark’)
>

                                                                                     Fish   39


<
PCP *niva ‘Sardinella spp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:     Verata        niva           ‘S. melanura, S. fijtense’
  Fij:     Ovalau        niva           ‘S. melanura, S.fijiense’
  Fij:     Nadroga       nive-nive      ‘S. fijiense’
PPn *nifa 'Sardinella sp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:      E Uvean       nifa           ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:      Tahitian      nifa           ‘k.o. spotted fish’
  Pn:      Tuamotuan nifa               ‘juvenile Albula’
  Pn:      Marquesan nifa               'Sardinella marquesensis’
>

<
POc *k‘'aru 'Sardinella, sardine’
  Adm: Titan       k''al         ‘sardine’
  MM: Marovo       karu(mehe) ‘anchovy, found in river mouths’
  Mie: Marshallese k''`ar‘-kwar" ‘sardine’
>

40     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *kepwa ‘Clupeidae, probably sardine sp.’
     Adm:    Titan         kepai            ‘sardine-like fish’ (-z unexplained)
     MM:     Halia         keho-keho        ‘dark blue sardine’
     MM:     Marovo        kevo             ‘Stolephorus sp., anchovy’
     MM:     Maringe       khefo            ‘sardine’
     SES:    Gela          kepo             ‘Herklotsichthys quadrimaculalus. fourspot herring’
     SES:    Lau           kefo             ‘sardine’
     NCal:   Nelemwa       heva             ‘sardine’
>

<
POc *s(a,i)waRa ‘Clupeidae, sardine or herring’
     Adm: Loniu            caway           ‘k.o. sardine or anchovy’
     PT:  Dobu             siwala          ‘gold-spot herring’
     PT:  Molima           siwala          ‘sardine, fish which comes in bolimana (SW wind = May-June) time’
     PT:     Kilivila      lawiya          ‘k.o. fish’ (vowel metathesis)
>

<
PEOc *buma ‘k.o. fish, possibly sardine’
     MM:     Maringe       bumct            ‘edible fish, frequently travels in schools’ (probably borrowed from Bugotu)
     SES:    Bugotu        buma             ‘sardine’
     SES:    Gela          buma             ‘k.o. fish’
     SES:    Lau           buma             ‘sardine’
     SES:    Arosi         buma             ‘sardine, many taboos connected with it’
     SES:    ’Are’are      puma             ‘k.o. fish’
     Pn:     Luangiua      puma             ‘k.o. fish’ (probably loan from a Solomons language)
cf. also: The items listed here other than from Ba are due to John Lynch (pers. comm.)
   NCV: Neve’ei            na-buŋ           ‘fish intermediate between sardine and mackerel’
   NCV: Nati               ni-''puŋ         ‘mackerel’
   NCV: Nahavaq            ne-buŋ           ‘mackerel’
   NCV: Nese               na-buŋo          ‘mackerel’
   NCV: South Efate        na-pum``         ‘Scombridae’
   SV:     Anejom          (na-tie)pom      ‘Scombridae’
   NCal: Nyelayu           bume             ‘k.o. mackerel’
   Fij:    Ba              bima             ‘k.o. middle-sized mullet’
>


2.8 Milkfishes (Chanidae)

This family consists of a single species, Chanos chanos. Fishes grow to around a metre in
length, are finely scaled, silvery and toothless. They inhabit both open sea and brackish water
and can ascend into rivers. They feed on crustaceans, worms and detritus. Although very
bony, the flesh has soft texture and excellent flavour (Munro 1967: p.54).

                                                                                    Fish     41

   There is a well-supported POc reconstruction continuing PMP *qawa or *qcrwcin. New
Caledonian reflexes provide support for final *-q. At least two SES cognates show confusion
with terms for mullet (cf. POc * (k,q)aRua(s), §18).

<
PMP *qawa, *qawan ‘ Chanos chanos, milkfish’ (Blust 2002)
POc *qawaq 'Chanos chanos, milkfish’
  NNG:      Gedaged     an            ‘white marine fish about 50 cm long’
  NNG:      Mutu        an            'Chanos chanos’
  SES:      Gela        od            ‘name given to bonefish and milkfish
  SES:      Lau         hetk'et       ‘Chanos sp.’
  SES:      ’Are’are    reiwa         ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:      Sa’a        sawa          ‘freshwater mullet’
  SES:      Arosi       sawa          ‘mullet’
  NCal:     Nyelayu     knak          ‘adult milkfish’
  NCal:     Nelemwa     kna           ‘adult milkfish’
  NCal:     Nemi        nn-hyaok      ‘juvenile milkfish’
  Mic:      Kiribati    (bane)awa     'Chanos chanos’
  Mic:      Kiribati    awa(tai)      ‘adult milkfish’
PCP *qawa 'Chanos' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Bauan       yawa              ‘milkfish, Chanos chanos'
  Fij:  Wayan       awa               ‘k.o. fish, more than one metre long, bony, feeds in schools, good eating’
  Fij:  Wayan      qawa ‘Chanos chanos, milkfish or salmon herring’ (Hooper 1994)
PPn *
  Pn:   Tongan     ?ava          ‘k.o. fish’ Cava tahi ‘sea lava’, lava Inlet ‘land lava’')
  Pn:   Samoan     ava           ‘large fish, Chanos sp., caught by torchlight’
  Pn:   Tokelauan ava            ‘milkfish’
  Pn:   Tuvalu     ava           ‘milkfish’
  Pn:   Tahitian   ava           ‘milkfish’
  Pn:   Hawaiian   awa           ‘Chanos chanos, milkfish’
cf. also:
   SES:     Arosi       ?awa          ‘k.o. fish’
   Mic:     Kiribati    tdwa          ‘fry of milkfish’
>


2.9 Lizardfishes (Synodontidae)

Lizardfish are small, slender and cylindrical, with a rather wide mouth. Most are bottomliving
inhabitants of muddy or sandy areas of shallow coastal waters. They are barred and
mottled to blend in with bottom surroundings, and their general appearance suggests that of
a lizard. The flesh is not very bony but insipid (Munro 1967: p.70).

     The only reconstruction made for this family is PCP *dolo, PPn *tolo ‘Sanrida, lizardfish’
(Geraghty p.146). These may reflect POc *(t,d)oloq ‘eel’ (§11.3), with semantic shift.

42 Meredith Osmond


                          Figure 2.4    Plotosus lineatus, striped eel catfish


2.10 Catfish (Plotosidae)

Catfish are recognizable by thick slimy naked skin and long head feelers which resemble a
cat’s whiskers. They are edible, with excellent flesh despite their appearance. Munro (p.74)
describes most New Guinea species as estuarine, although some frequent fresh water, while
Geraghty (pers. comm.) notes that in Fiji and probably Polynesia catfish are found only in
salt water. They are carnivorous bottom feeders, swallowing anything in their way. Plotosus
anguillaris is a synonym ford lineatus.

    Reflexes undergo a change of meaning in some Polynesian languages. Hooper (p.221)
suggests that an elongate shape may provide the semantic link with snake mackerels, and,
although the two are found in very different environments, both are black and slimy (Geraghty
pers. comm.).

<
POc *kaboRa ‘Plotosus spp., catfish’
  Adm: Loniu              kopow             ‘catfish or catfish eel’
  NNG: Gedaged            gabol             ‘k.o. fish, to 7 cm, usually in swarms’ (g- for ''`k-zero)[8]
  PT:   Misima      kaboiya                 ‘Plotosus lineatus, striped catfish’
  MM: Patpatar      uboro                   ‘catfish’
  SES: Gela         (i)yabola               ‘catfish spp.’ (ya- reanalysed as iya ‘fish’)
PEOc *kaboRa ‘Plotosus, catfish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  NCV: Mota         yapwora         'a fish, Silurus [Plotosus]‘
  NCV: Lewo         kapwo           ‘catfish’
  NCV: Nguna        (na-i)kapwoa ‘catfish’ (ka- reanalysed as ika ‘fish’)
  SV:   Anejom      n-yope          ‘Plotosus anguillaris’ (P. lineatus)
  NCal: Pije        sago            ‘P. anguillaris’
  NCal: Nyelayu     cago            ‘P. anguillaris’
  NCal: Iaai        (wa)aba         ‘P. anguillaris’
  Fij:  Bauan       kaboa           ‘small black shoal fish, catfish’
  Fij:  Wayan       kabo            ‘Plotosus spp. Sharp spikes can inflict wound’
  Fij:  Wayan     kapoa ‘fish sp,, probably Plotosus sp,, catfish’ (Hooper 1994)
PPn *
  Pn:   Tongan        kopoa          ‘catfish’
  Pn:     E Uvean       kapoa           ‘P lineatus, catfish’
  Pn:     Samoan        ?apoa           ‘P. anguillaris'
  Pn:     Pukapukan     kapoa           ‘ Promethichthysprometheus, snake mackerel’
  Pn:     Tokelauan     kapoa           ‘Promethichthysprometheus, snake mackerel’
>

 Geraghty (pers. comm.) notes that juvenile catfish do move in very dense populous swarms.

                                                                                      Fish     43





2.11 Eels

Eels are classified in a number of families within the Order Anguilliformes. The best known
within the region are the freshwater eels (Anguillidae), and several sea eel families including 
morays (Muraenidae), pike eels (Muraenesocidae), congers (Congridae) and snake eels
(Ophichthidae).


2.11.1 Freshwater eels (Anguillidae)

Although they spend most of their lives in fresh water, freshwater eels migrate to sea to spawn.
In inland areas they constitute an important food item. POc *tuna is well supported as the
generic term for all freshwater eels.

<
PAn *tuNa ‘freshwater eel’ (Blust 2002)
POc *tuna ‘Anguillidae, freshwater eel (generic)’
  Adm: Mussau            tuna          ‘eel’
  Adm: Lenkau            trun          ‘large freshwater eel’
  Adm: Penchai           run           ‘large freshwater eel’
  NNG: Bilibil           tuna          ‘eel’
  NNG: Wogeo             tuna          ‘eel’
  NNG: Kairiru           tun           ‘freshwater eel’
  NNG: Bariai            tuna          ‘large eel’
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) tunu               ‘eel (generic)’
  NNG: Mutu              tun           ‘Anguilla reinhardti, freshwater eel’
  PT:    Tawala          tuna          ‘freshwater eel’
  PT:    Lala           kuna          ‘eel’
  MM: Tolai              (maleo) tuna ‘k.o. eel’ (maleo ‘generic for sea eels’)
  MM: Tab ar             tuna          ‘eel’
  MM: Nduke              tuna(sa)      ‘eel’
  Mic: Kosraean          ton           ‘freshwater eel’
PCP *tuna ‘Anguillidae, freshwater eel’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Rotuman        funa           (1) ‘freshwater eel’; (2) ‘similar saltwater eel’
  Fij:   Wayan           tuna          (1) ‘freshwater eel’; (2) ‘generic for eels includin; morays and congers’
  Fij:   Bauan           duna          ‘freshwater eel’
  Fij:   Kadavu          tuna          ‘generic term for freshwater eels’
PPn *tuna ‘Anguilla spp,, freshwater eel’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan          tuna          ‘k.o. eel’ (including tuna tahi, tuna vai)
  Pn:    Niuean          tuna          ‘freshwater eel’
  Pn:     E Uvean        tuna            ‘freshwater eel’
  Pn:     Rennellese     tuna            ‘k.o. lake eel’
  Pn:     Pukapukan      tuna            ‘generic for several eels, both sea and fresh water’
  Pn:     Samoan         tuna            ‘Anguilla, freshwater eel’
  Pn:     Tikopia        tuna            ‘eel: generic term applied especially to lake eels’
  Pn:     Maori          tuna            ‘generic for all freshwater eels’
  Pn:     Hawaiian       kuna            ‘k.o. freshwater eel’
>

44 Meredith Osmond


2.11.2 Morays (Muraenidae)

Morays are large, thick-skinned eels with sharp knife-like teeth but no pectoral fins. They
can be pugnacious when confronted, although shy by nature. Many are nocturnal. They are
often found in the crevices of coral banks. There are numerous species in New Guinea waters,
many quite distinctive in colouring and markings.

    POc *[la]b'' a(s,j)i ‘moray eel’ is reconstructable both with and without initial */«-.

<
POc *[la]b''a(s,j)i ‘moray eel’
  Adm:    Titan        pes             ‘moray eel’
  Adm:    Lenkau       pes             ‘moray eel’
  Adm:    Nali         p'''esi         ‘moray eel’
  NNG:    Psohoh       basi            ‘eel’
  PT:     Sudest       lah'adi         ‘freshwater eel’
  Mic:    Mokilese     lapwet          ‘k.o. eel’
  Mic:    Ponapean     lapwet          ‘saltwater eel (generic)’
  Mic:    Chuukese     lop''iit        ‘general name for moray eels’
  Mic:    Woleaian     rab''uto        ‘generic for snake, worm, eel’ (-o unexpected)
  Fij:    Lau          pusi            ‘Echidna nebulosa, starry or clouded moray’
>

<
PPn *pusi ‘sea eel generic, Gymnothorax spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Rennellese    pusi            ‘starry or clouded moray eel’
  Pn:    Samoan        pusi            ‘generic for moray eels’
  Pn:    Tokelauan     puhi            ‘generic for moray eels’
  Pn:    Tikopia       pusi            ‘Gymnothorax sp., grey-brown reef eel’
  Pn:    Maori         puhi            ‘very large variety of eel’
  Pn:    Hawaiian      puhi            ‘eel (generic)’
>

    The reconstruction below is weakly supported and it is uncertain what kind of eel it referred to. It is listed in this section as its Titan reflex refers to a kind of moray.

<
POc *b walup ‘k.o. eel, moray eel ?’
  Adm:    Titan           pwalu               ‘Echidna nebulosa, starry or clouded moray’
  NNG:    Mangga          vayob               ‘eel’
  NNG:    Mumeng (Kumaru) vyob                ‘eel’
  NNG:    Adzera          b'' am              ‘freshwater eel’
>

                                                                                  Fish   45



                        Figure 2.5   [Gynmothorax sp., barred moray eel


   The Micronesian evidence below points to a reconstruction with a single final vowel,
while the PCP evidence reflects two.

<
PROc *dabea' Gymnothorax, moray eel’
  Mic:    Marshallese      rap            ‘ Gymnothorax, moray, large and black’
  Mic:    Chuukese         rap            ‘moray eel’
  Mic:    Ponapean         rap            ‘saltwater eel, commonly found on barrier reef’
PCP * dabea ‘k.o. sea eel or sea snake' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Bauan            dabea          ‘conger eel, large and dangerous sea eel’
  Fij:    Kadavu           dabea          ‘moray eel’
PPn *tapea ‘generic for morays’
  Pn:    E Futunan       tapea            ‘Gymnothorax spp.’
  Pn:    Rennellese  (Bellona)     tapea            ‘generic for morays, reef eels
>

    Lower-level reconstructions include PCP *boila ‘moray eel’ and *dravua ‘Gymnothorax
sp.’ (Geraghty p.145).


2.11.3 Pike eels (Muraenesocidae) and congers (Congridae)

Pike eels are large, with prominent canine teeth and a long slender snout. Conger eels are
also large, with well-developed vertical and pectoral fins. The two are sometimes classified
together. The flesh of both is excellent. Both occur in shallow water, although congers also
have deep-water forms.

<
PROc *bomi ‘k.o. eel, probably conger'
  Mic:     Kiribati    (ra)pwono     ‘moray eel’ (ra- ‘defective’?)
PCP *bon(u,o) ‘conger eel’ (Geraghty: *bonu ‘Ophichthidae, snake eel’)
   Fij:    Bauan       bomi          ‘Scolecenchelys macropterus, slender snake eel’
   Fij:    Rewa        bomi(ika)     ‘Conger sp.’
   Fij:    Wayan       bonu          ‘an eel of the mangrove swamp, probably conger’
   Pn:     Tongan      ponu(taliŋa) ‘k.o. eel, inedible’
   Pn:     Tongan      ponu-ponu ‘k.o. sea worm’
   Pn:     K’marangi pono            ‘conger sp., white eel’
cf. also:
   PT:     Ubir        bonu-bonu ‘fish (freshwater)’
>

46   Meredith Osmond

<
PROc *bakn ‘conger eel’
  SV:   Sye         poki                     ‘k.o. eel, possibly conger’
  SV:  Lenakel      pəku                     ‘k.o. eel’
  Fij: Rotuman      pa?u                     ‘sea eel’
  Fij: Wayan        bdku                     ‘Conger cinerus’
  Fij: Nadroga      baku                     ‘Conger cinerus’
>


2.11.4 Snake eels (Ophichthidae)

Snake eels tend to lie on sandy or muddy bottoms in the vicinity of reefs, often spending daylight hours completely buried, although they can swim to the surface at night when attracted
by lights. They are difficult to trap, seldom taking a hook, while their slender bodies pass
through the mesh of nets and traps (Munro 1967: p.91). No reconstructions have been made.


2.11.5 Other terms for eels

In a number of reconstructions it has proved difficult to link terms to particular kinds of eel.
The following may be a generic term for sea eels.

<
POc *malayo ‘sea eel, possibly generic’
  NNG:      Kove              malen            ‘freshwater eel’
  NNG:      Mutu              (az)mala         ‘Gymnothorax cribroris. brown-flecked reef eel’
  MM:       Lamasong          male             ‘eel’
  MM:       Madak             mele             ‘eel’
  MM:       Tolai             maleo            ‘generic name for sea eel’
  MM:       Minigir           malo             ‘eel’
  MM:       Ramoaaina         maleu            ‘eel’
  MM:       Halia (Selau)     melio            ‘eel’
  MM:       Tai of            mereou           ‘eel’
  MM:       Nehan             malio            ‘moray eel’
  NCV:      Mota              maleo            ‘sea eel’
>

    Mota has two similar terms, maleo and marea, and it is possible that the former is a
borrowing from a Western Oceanic language. The next set is in complementary distribution
to the one above, and it may be that we are dealing with a single cognate set, although we
would expect PROc ^*malaya if directly inherited. It is possible that PROc *maraya was
borrowed from an unrecorded language’s reflex of POc *malayo. Arosi (SES) marea ‘k.o.
eel’ also appears to reflect *maraya, but it is reasonably likely that this is a Mota borrowing
introduced by missionaries, as Mota was a missionary lingua franca which was also used in
parts of the Solomon Islands in the nineteenth century.

<
PROc *maraya ‘sea eel’ (Clark 2009:141)[9]
  NCV: Mota                 marea                ‘sea eel’
  NCV:     Tamambo      marai            ‘k.o. eel, not for eating’
  NCV:     NE Ambae     marae            ‘eel’
  NCV:     Raga         marae            ‘eel (generic)’
  NCV:     S Efate      mra (ni nai)     ‘eel (generic)’
  Mic:     Carolinian   (li)mw are-mw ar ‘white or yellow eel with black banded stripes’ (//- ‘attributive prefix’)
  Mie:     Puluwatese   (li)mw ara-mw ar ‘k.o. eel’ (7z- prefix to names of birds, eels, fish, lizards etc.)
cf. also:
   SES: Arosi           marea              ‘k.o. eel’ (borrowed from Mota marea ?)
>

[9] Clark also suggests POc * niale(u,wa) ‘freshwater eel' (see previous set).

                                                                                     Fish   47


                     Figure 2.6   Myrichthys colubrinus, harlequin snake eel

<
PMP *kasuli ‘Anguillidae, freshwater eel’ (acd: PWMP *kasuli)
POc *(k,q)asuli ‘k.o. sea eel’
PCP *qasuli ‘k.o. sea eel’ (Geraghty 1994)
   Fij:   Bauan        siili         ‘conger’
   Pn:    Samoan       asiilu        ‘Strophidon, moray eel’ (Rensch 1999:20)
cf. also:
   SES: Bugotu         kasa          ‘sea eel’
   Mic: Kiribati       kuru-kuru     ‘moray eel’
>

<
POc *(t,d)oloq ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Meramera     tulu           ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Torau        tolo(u)        ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Mono-Alu     tolo?o         ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Vaghua       toloko         ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Varisi       toloko         ‘k.o. eel’
  MM:      Hoava        toloko         ‘k.o. eel’
  SES:     Baegu        dolo           ‘k.o. eel’
  SES:     Kwara’ae     dol            ‘k.o. eel’
  SES:     Kwai         dolo           ‘k.o. eel’
  SES:     Langalanga   dolo           ‘k.o. eel’
  SES:     Lau          dolo           ‘k.o. eel’
cf. also
   Pn:     Tikopia      toro           ‘lizardfish’
   Pn:     Samoan       tolo           ‘small mud skipper’
>

48    Meredith Osmond


    The Polynesian terms may be linked through association with PPn *tolo ‘to crawl’. Some
eels (particularly snake eels), lizardfish (§9) and mud skippers (§49) may all be described as
mud dwellers.

    The SES terms below show coalescence of *wci as -o as has been noted also in some shark
terms.

<
PEOc *pulewa ‘k.o. eel’
     SES:   Gela        puleo           ‘k.o. eel’
     SES:   Birao       puleo           ‘eel’
     SES:   Lengo       puleo           ‘freshwater eel’
     SES:   Longgu      puleo           ‘eel’
PCP *bulewa ‘k.o. eel’
  Pn:    Tuvalu        puleva           ‘k.o. eel’
cf. also:
   PT:    Bunama        pw a-pw alewa ‘k.o. lizardfish’
   Fij:   Bauan         bulewa        ‘zoophyte that adheres to reefs’
>

     PPn *toke ‘sea eel’ has also been reconstructed (Hooper p.198).


2.12 Flying fishes (Exocoetidae)

Figure 2.7 Exocoetus volitems, blue flying fish

These fish are pelagic, swimming near the surface and gliding above the water for considerable distances. They inhabit open coastal and
oceanic waters, are attracted to light at night
and often leap aboard vessels. Their flesh is of
good quality (Munro 1967: p. 115). In Sa’a (Malaita),
flying fish, like the bonito, require a certain supernatural power to be caught. Certain
formalities must be followed and particular sacrifices
made before a canoe can set out to catch flying
fish (Codrington 1891:138).

     Munro identifies more than a dozen species, but terms located have little elaboration of
identity.

<
POc *mwagaRut ‘Exocoetidae, flying fish’
 Adm: Titan                mokou            ‘generic for flying fish, Exocoetidae’
 Adm: Lenkau               mokow            ‘flying fish’
 Adm: Lou                  mokou            ‘flying fish’
 MM: Halia                 magalut          ‘flying fish’
  SES: Arosi               magaru           ‘flying fish’
 NCV: Mwotlap              nci-mwkey        ‘Exocoetidae spp,, flying fish’
 NCV: NE Ambae             mwakaru          ‘flying fish’
 NCV: Raga                 mayaru           ‘generic for various flying fish’
PMic *mcujar ‘flying fish’ (*-//- for +*-g-)
  Mic:    Carolinian        maŋar          ‘flying fish’
  Mic:    Woleaian          meŋaz          ‘flying fish’
  Mic:    Mokilese          moŋor          ‘flying fish’
>

                                                                                      Fish   49


    Lower-level reconstructions include PPn *malolo ‘flying fish spp.’ and PPn *sasawe ‘Exocoetidae spp., flying fish’ (Hooper 1994 p.201).
PPn *sipa ‘small or immature flying fish’ is considered to be a reflex of POc *sipa ‘Hemiramphidae’, proposed in §13.


2.13 Half beaks and garfishes (Hemiramphidae), needlefishes and long toms (Belonidae)

Adult halfbeaks and garfishes have an elongated shaft-like lower jaw and very short upper
jaw, although in juveniles the mouth is symmetrical. Like needlefish they live near the surface
and are semipelagic. They inhabit shallow water and estuaries. The flesh is delicate but full of
fine bones. They are important food fishes (Munro 1967: p. 109). Hemiramphus is the most common
genus.

    Needlefish and long toms are very slender, elongated with forceps-like jaws, well-toothed
with minute scales. They are both marine and estuarine, and a few live permanently in fresh
water. They often congregate in schools. Generally voracious, they are potentially dangerous
because of their great speed and habit of making sudden leaps, especially when attracted to
lights at night. The flesh is excellent (Munro 1967: p. 105). Genera include Belone, Platybelone,
Strongylura and Tylosurus.

    The two families are here treated together because in a number of languages
(Halia, Kiribati, Mokilese, Rennellese, Samoan, Tikopia) there is one term covering both, presumably
reflecting similarities in shape and habitat.

<
POc *Rije ‘Hemiramphus, halfbeak’ (Geraghty 1990)
  MM: Nakanai            Use            ‘small fish which flies, has a sharp bill’
  Fij:   Rotuman        jija            ‘Hemiramphus, garfish’ (/- for f0)
  Fij:   Bauan           sise           ‘Hemiramphus, garfish’ (.s- for f0)
  Fij:   Lau             sise           ‘Hemiramphus, garfish’ (.s- for f0)
PPn *ise ‘halfbeak spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan          ihe            ‘Hemiramphus'1
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu ihe-ihe           ‘growth stage of halfbeak’
  Pn:     Samoan         ise            ‘Hemiramphus and Belone taxa’
  Pn:    Tokelauan       ihe            ‘halfbeak spp.’
  Pn:    Tikopia         ise            ‘garfish Belonidae or (??) small crocodile needlefish’
  Pn:     Maori           ihe           ‘H. intermedins' (?)
  Pn:     Hawaiian        ihe-ihe       ‘any of several halfbeaks’ (ihe ‘spear, javelin, dart’)
>

    The change in gloss in PPn below can be explained because of close resemblance between
garfishes and some flying fish, with the latter, such as the beaked flying fish, Oxyporhamphus
micropterus micropterus, classified as Exocoetidae by Munro (p l 18) and more recently as
Hemiramphidae (Kailola 1987:153, FishBase). Half beaks, garfish and flying fish all belong
to the same suborder.

50   Meredith Osmond


                       Figure 2.8   Hemiramphus lutkei, Lutke's halfbeak

<
POc *sipa ‘Hemiramphus spp.’
  PT:    Kilivila     seva(leya)      ‘garfish’
  MM:    Tolai        ive             ‘k.o. fish’
PPn *sipa young flying fish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Niuean       hipa          ‘young small flying fish’
  Pn:    Samoan       sipa          ‘young flying fish’
  Pn:    Tokelauan hipa             ‘young flying fish’
  Pn:    Tikopia      sipa          ‘young flying fish’
>

<
POc *mwakoR ‘Hemiramphus, garfish’
  Adm:    Titan         makoi       ‘Hemiramphus sp,, garfish’
  NNG:    Kela          (i-)makwa?  ‘k.o. long tom’ (shift of labialisation)
  PT:     Hula          muyu        ‘sea garfish’
  PT:     Motu          moa         ‘Hemirhamphus quoyi, small white garfish’ [now Hyporhamphus quoyi] (vowel metathesis)
   PT:     Lala        moa          ‘small garfish’ (vowel metathesis)
   NCal: Nixumwak mwak              ‘k.o. fish’
   NCal: Xaracuu       mwe          ‘k.o. fish’
   Mic: Kiribati       mwake        ‘Strongylura sp,, garfish’
   Mic: Marshallese m''ak           ‘Strongylura, needlefish’
   Mic: Woleaian       m"’axi       ‘young needlefish’
PCP *Tj"’a(k,x)a ‘Hemiramphus ’ (Geraghty 1994)
   Fij: Kadavu         ljaxa        ‘Hemiramphus"
   Pn:    E Uvean      ŋala         "Rastrelliger (Scombridae)’
cf. also:
   Mic: Mokilese       m''alak      ‘k.o. needlefish (flat-sided garfish?)’
>

    The following reconstruction is echoed in the transparent compound, PMP/POc *saku-
layaR ‘sailfish, swordfish’, which contains as its second element *layaR ‘sail’ (§58 and vol.1,
pp.194-195).

                                                                                 Fish      51

<
PMP *saku ‘needlefish’ (Blust 2002)
POc *saku ‘needlefishes, garfishes, long toms (Belonidae)’
  NNG:  Manam           sa?u          ‘garfish’
  NNG:  Lukep (Pono) sau              ‘needlenose fish’
  PT:   Dobu            sa-sau(li)    Tong tom when small’
  MM:   Vitu            saku          ‘needlefish’
  MM:   Patpatar        sok           Tong tom’
  MM:   Nehan           hau           Tong tom (generic)’
  NCV:  Namakir         soka(raru)    ‘garfish’
  NCal: Iaai            (wa)saə       ‘ Hemiramphusfar‘
  Mic:  Kiribati        raku          ‘swordfish’
  Mic:  Kiribati        ran (bara)    ‘garfish’ (bara ‘small fry’)
  Mic: Marshallese      tak           'Beloneplatyura’’ [Platybelone argahisplalyura]
  Mic:  Ponapean        tak           ‘needlefish’
  Mic: Mokilese         tok           ‘needlefish, barred long tom?’
  Mic: Puluwatese       tak           ‘needlefish’
  Mic: Woleaian         taxu          ‘needlefish (generic)’
  Fij:  Kadavu          saxu          ‘generic term for needlefishes’
  Fij:  Bauan           saku          ‘swordfish’
  Fij:  Way an          saku          ‘generic for needlefish and longtoms’
PPn *haku ‘garfish and needlefish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Niuean          aku           Tong tom, pipe fish, edible’
  Pn:   Tongan          haku          ‘k.o. fish: a young hakuld ‘swordfish’
  Pn:   Rennellese      aku           ‘general term for needlefish and garfish’
  Pn:   Pukapukan       aku           ‘general name for needlefishes’
  Pn:   Pukapukan       aku-aku       ‘Platybelone sp.’
  Pn:    Samoan         a?u           ‘Strongylura, fish said to attack humans
  Pn:   Tokelauan       aku           ‘needlefish, about 60 cm long’
  Pn:   Tikopia         aku           ‘general term for needlefish and garfish’
  Pn:   Tahitian        a?u-a?u       ‘Platybelone sp.’
  Pn:   Marquesan       aku           ‘general term for needlefish and garfish’
>

<
POc *panapa ‘garfish and needlefish taxon’ (acd: ‘needlefish sp.’)
  Adm: Loniu          panah         ‘Hemiramphus commersoni, barred garfish’ \H. far]
  Adm: Lou            panap         ‘small blue fish with long needle-like mouth’
  Adm: Likum          panah         ‘small blue and green marine fish with projecting lower jaw’
  Adm:    Nyindrou    banap         ‘small dotted fish with needle nose’
  MM:     Nehan       pon(pou)      ‘large barred garfish’ (smaller is kohkoh)
  MM:     Halia       pon-pon       ‘halfbeak’
  MM:     Teop        pon-pon       ‘long-billed garfish, Quoy’s short-billed garfish, barred garfish’
  Mic:    Kiribati    and           ‘a fish, small slender species, needlefish, garfish, halfbeak’ (loss of initial p- unexpected)
  Mic:    Chuukese    fand          ‘small needlefish’
     Mic:   Mokilese   pana          ‘k.o. needlefish’
     Mic:   Woleaian   ferd          ‘k.o. needlefish’
cf. also:
   Adm: Titan            cinap       ‘barred garfish’
>

52     Meredith Osmond



    Reduplicated reflexes of POc *sao in PPn below, refer instead to Sphyraena, the barracuda,
and possibly its juvenile form. There is evidently some crossover of meaning between
PPn *sao-sao ‘Sphyraena sp.’ and PPn *tao-tao ‘Fistularia spp,, probably including
trumpetfish’ (see §15). This may be because both barracuda and trumpetfish are, like the
needlefish and garfish, long narrow fish, spear-like in shape.

<
POc *sao ‘k.o. long tom’
  Adm:   Titan          co             ‘generic for needlefish, long toms’
  Adm:   Nali           so             ‘needlefish, ae’
  Adm:   Loniu          co             ‘k.o. long tom’
  NNG:   Gedaged        sao            ‘Strongylura incisa, long tom’
  NNG:   Lukep (Pono) sau              ‘needlenose fish’
  NNG:   Takia          sao            ‘k.o. long tom’ (Mueller)
  NNG:   Tami           (i)-sa         ‘k.o. long tom’ (Mueller)
  MM:    Halia          soa-soa        ‘garfish, needlefish’ (vowel metathesis)
  MM:    Marovo         cho-cho        ‘Hemiramphus spp,, small garfish (generic)’
PPn *sao-sao ‘juvenile Sphyraena sp.   (Hooper: ‘Sphyraena sp.’)
  Pn:    Niuean         hao-hao        ‘trumpetfish’
  Pn:    E Uvean        sao-sao        ‘juvenile Sphyraena sp. ’ (5 for f h-)
  Pn:    Samoan         sao-sao        ‘k.o. fish, said to be predatory and dangerous’
  Pn:    Tokelauan      hao-hao        ‘S. forst erf
  Pn:    Tikopia        sao-sao        ‘juvenile Sphyraena sp. ’
>

                                                                                      Fish   53



2.14 Squirrelfishes, soldierfishes (Holocentridae)

This family is well-represented through the region by most of the approximately 70 species
known worldwide. Most are brilliant red, armoured with large rough scales with j agged edges.
The head is extremely rough and spiny. They have large eyes, and are often longitudinally
banded. Many species are nocturnal, living in holes in the reef during the day (Munro 1967: p. 138).
Although most of the species are small, the flesh is considered good eating. In Niuatoputapu
they are caught on moonlit nights either from a boat anchored near the reef or while standing
on the reef edge (Dye 1983:250). Genera include Sargocentron \Holocentrus}, Myripristis
and Flammeo. Adioryx is now classified as a junior synonym of Sargocentron.

    A number of taxa are typically distinguished in Oceanic languages. Three POc terms are
reconstructable. Nuclear Micronesian reflexes in the following reconstruction confirm that
this form was trisyllabic, as an original disyllable would be reflected without final vowel
(ACD).

<
PMP *taRaqan ‘Holocentrus spp,, squirrelfish’ (ACD)
POc *taRaqan ‘Sargocentron spp,, squirrelfish, including S. spiniferimf (Geraghty 1990:
  PEOc *taRaʔa)
  Adm: Loniu         taʔay         ‘squirrelfish or silver biddy’ (metathesis: for ■\taya(?))
  NNG: Yabem         talaŋ         ‘a red sea fish’
  PT:   Gumawana tayawana          ‘squirrel fish’
  PT:   Mi sima      talayan       ‘Sargocentron spp,, spiny and blue-striped squirrelfish’
  PT:   Motu         tara          ‘S. violaceum, violet squirrelfish’
  MM: Nakanai        talaha        ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Lihir          taran         ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  MM: Roviana        ta-tara       ‘small reddish fish, easily hooked’
  SES: Gela          tala          ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  NOV: S Efate       tra(kap)      ‘squirrelfish’
  NCal: Pije        jald           ‘Holocentrus spinifeF [ʌ'. spiniferum}
  NCal: Jawe        jarak          "Holocentrus spimfer' [ʌ'. spiniferum}
PMic *tara ‘squirrelfish’ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic: Kiribati        td             ‘Sargocentron spp.’
  Mic: Marshallese cera               ‘Sargocentron, Myripristis spp., squirrelfish’
  Mic: Ponapean        sara           ‘S. spiniferum, spinecheek squirrelfish’
  Mic: Chuukese        sard           ‘Sargocentron sp,, yellow-lined squirrel fish’
  Mic: Woleaian        sezd           ‘Adioryx spinifer, spiny squirrel fish’ [ʌ'. spiniferum}
  Mic: Puluwatese hara                ‘k.o. red fish’
PPn *taqa ‘Sargocentron spiniferum, armoured soldierfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan        taʔa           ‘S. spiniferum, red, edible’
  Pn:    Niuean        td             ‘Myripristis violacea, lattice soldierfish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan td                  ‘S. spiniferum ’
  Pn:    Samoan        td(malau)      ‘name given to certain fishes of genus Sargocentron when about 30 cm in length’. (See also under *malau below, p.55.)
     Pn:    K’marangi td                 ‘S. ruber, red squirrelfish’ [S. rubrum}
     Pn:    Tokelauan td                 ‘S. spiniferum’
     Pn:    Tuvalu      td (malau)       ‘Adioryx spp.’ [Sargocentron}
     Pn:    Tikopia   ta                 ‘sea fish, app. related to large squirrelfish’
cf. also:
   Pn:      Rennellese tagae             ‘general name for some squirrelfish’ (borrowed from a non-Polynesian language)
>

54     Meredith Osmond


     Figure 2.10   Left Myripristis murdjan, crimson squirrelfish. Right Sargocentron spiniferum,
                                        armoured soldierfish.

<
POc *kuru[ru] ‘Myripristis spp., squirrelfish’
  Adm: Penchai           kululu     ‘squirrelfish, Holocentridae’
  Adm: Lou               kurur      ‘squirrelfish, Holocentridae’
  NNG: Gedaged           ulu        ‘Myripristis murdjan, crimson squirrelfish’ (Mueller)
  NNG: Manam        ididi           ‘squirrelfish’
  NNG: Takia        uru             ‘k.o. squirrelfish’
  PT:  Gumawana gilulu              ‘squirrelfish’ (g- for jk- or 1'0-)
  PT:  Iduna          kululu (bawe) ‘k.o. fish’ (ðmve ‘pig’)
  PT:  Kilivila     kuyu            ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:  Motu           kururu        ‘squirrelfish’ (kururu ioio, kururu matabadd)
  MM: Vitu            kururu        ‘squirrelfish’
  MM: Patpatar      kurur           ‘red-orange squirrelfish’
  MM: Tolai         kurur           ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Lihir         kurur           ‘Holocentridae, esp. Myripris’
  SES: Lau            alulu         ‘squirrelfish’ (a- for fPw-; -I- for f-r-: borrowed form?)
  NCV: Lo-Toga        wur-wur       ‘Myripristis berndti`
  Mic: Kiribati     ku              ‘Sargocentron spp., soldierfish’
  Mic: Mokilese kir                 ‘k.o. soldierfish’
  Mic: Marshallese kur              ‘Sargocentron binotatus'
PCP      ‘Myripristis'’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij: Rotuman ?uru                 ‘red blunt-nosed fish’
  Fij: Bauan       kuru             ‘fish with a long snout’
PPn *kuru Myripristis sp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Niuean       ku                ‘small red fish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan (malau) kulu         ‘Myripristis adusta‘
  Pn:    Rapa         kii               Myripristis sp.’ (loss of *-r- irregular)
  Pn:    Tahitian     ?u-?u             ‘red-coloured fish’ (archaic) (loss of *-r- irregular)
  Pn:    Hawaiian     ?u-?u             Myripristis sp.’ (loss of *-r- irregular)
>

                                                                                      Fish   55

<
POc *jori ‘squirrelfish, possibly generic’
   PT:     Dobu        doli           ‘squirrelfish’
   MM:     Nduke       hori           ‘general name for red squirrelfish’
   SES:    Gela        sori           Myripristis spp., soldierfish (generic)’
   SES:    Arosi       dori(awa)      ‘k.o. fish’
cf. also
   MM:     Teop        hori           ‘squirrelfish (generic)’
   MM:     Maringe     sori           ‘squirrelfish (generic)’
   MM:     Marovo      hori           ‘Sargocentron spiniferum, spiny squirrelfish, bright red’
>

<
PROc *mwalau ‘squirrelfish, possibly generic for a number of spp.’
  Mic: Marshallese m‘ an            Myripristis sp., squirrelfish’
  Mic:  Woleaian      mweri         ‘red snapper, general term’
  Mic: Carolinian mwen              ‘k.o. squirrelfish’
  Mic: Satawalese nfan              Myripristis spp., squirrelfish’
PPn *malau ‘general term for a number of fishes of the genera Holocentrus, Adioryx,
  Myripristis and Flammeo, soldier fishes and squirrel fishes’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan        malau         ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   E Uvean       malau         ‘Adioryx spp.’
  Pn:   Rennellese magau            ‘Holocentrus sp.’ [Sargocentron sp.]
  Pn:   Tikopia       marau         ‘Holocentrus spinifeF [Sargocentron spiniferum}
  Pn:    Samoan       malau         ‘name given to red squirrelfish, Holocentrus and Myripristis"
  Pn:   W Futunan marau             ‘Adioryx caudimaculatus and others’ [Sargocentron caudimaculatum}
  Pn:   Marquesan maʔau             ‘Myripristis spp.’
>

   Other reconstructions at PPn level include *malau taqa or *taqa malau 'Adioryx sp. ’ (taʔa
from POc *taRaqan above) and *tala-kisi ‘ soldier or squirrelfish spp.’ (Hooper 1994 pp.201-202).


2.15 Trumpetfishes (Aulostomidae), cometfishes and flutemouths (Fistulariidae)

Trumpetfishes (Aulostomidae) have a long compressed body, long head and small mouth
at the end of a long compressed snout. Colours change from green through orange to reddish-
brown in harmony with surroundings. They are rather small, shallow-water fishes, frequently
observed resting motionless on the bottom (Munro 1967: p.149). The family is widely distributed
(Fowler 1928:6).

56   Meredith Osmond

    Cornetfishes somewhat resemble long toms, but are readily distinguished by long flutelike
snouts and whiplash-like filamentous prolongation of middle caudal (tail) fin rays (Munro 1967: p.149).

    A lower-level reconstruction is PCP *baba ‘ Fistularia, flutemouth’ (Geraghty 1994: p.148).
Hooper 1994 (p.200) offers PPn *tao-tao ‘Fistularia sp,, flutefish’, which no doubt reflects the
fish’s spearlike form (PPn *tao ‘spear’).



2.16 Pipefishes, seahorses (Syngnathidae)

Most pipefishes (Syngnathidae) are long and thin, with a body covered in bony plates. Though
poor swimmers and very sluggish, many are widely distributed by currents. Jointed bony
armour of both species prevents active swimming. Fins are of little use and have degenerated
(Munro 1967: p. 151).

    The seahorse probably did not hold much interest for early Oceanic speakers, being
neither economically useful nor dangerous. Collected terms for it are rare, as evidenced
by responses to a request from Bruce Biggs on the an-lang e-mail list in 1999.10 However, a
common element is apparent from NNG, MM and SES terms, reinforced by a term from
Yamdena (CMP), bwa-watan ‘seahorse’ {bwaye ‘crocodile’) which permits reliable reconstruction
of the word for crocodile as the first element in an otherwise variable compound.

<
PMP *buqaya + modifier ‘Hippocampus sp,, seahorse’ (Blust 2002)
POc *puqaya + modifier ‘seahorse’
  NNG: Numbami            yuwaya tina     ‘seahorse’ (lit. ‘crocodile mother’)
  NNG: Bariai             puaea gerei-rei ‘seahorse’ (puaea ‘crocodile’, gereirei ‘newly-hatched’)
   MM:      Roviana        vu-vua         ‘seahorse’ (vua ‘crocodile’)
   SES:     Lau           fuasa niʔafu    ‘seahorse’ (lit. ‘crocodile of green seaweed’)
   SES:     Arosi          bote huasa     ‘seahorse’ (lit. ‘crocodile louse’)
cf. also:
   SES:     Gela           hinapi ni vua       ‘various pipefish spp.’ (lit. ‘crocodile limestick’)
>

[10] Biggs’ request appeared in the an-lang list on 7 May 1999.

                                                                                                 Fish   57


                          Figure 2.12    Mugil cephalus, flathead grey mullet


    Kove (NNG) uses the same comparison, albeit with a non-cognate term for ‘crocodile’,
bayele eleɑto ‘seahorse, pipefish’ (bayele ‘crocodile’, ele 'ite',ato ‘messenger’) (Ann Chown-
ing, pers. comm.[11]). In Dobu (PT) the term for crocodile is warigoa, and that for seahorse
or pipefish wari-warigoa, reduplication of the first two syllables being a common way of
indicating an inferior or diminutive form of the named item (Ross 2005:199).


2.17 Razorfishes (Centriscidae)

Razorfish are small, extraordinarily modified fishes which are extremely flattened and practically
transparent. They swim in small schools, each in a vertical position with head downward
among branching corals or sea urchins (Munro 1967: p. 148). The name in Gela for Aeoliscus strigatus,
razorfish is iya tuyuru, literally ‘standing fish’. They also ‘sleep’ under the sand and
will disappear under the sand when threatened by predators (Allen & Swainston 1993:82).
No reconstructions have been made.


2.18 Mullets (Mugilidae)

Some mullet species are extremely abundant, occurring in large schools in coastal waters and
estuaries. At least one species resides permanently in fresh water. The fish usually swim near
the surface and congregate among grass-like plants on tidal flats. They are readily taken in
hauling seines, although many possess great leaping powers and escape. The flesh is tasty
and rich, with few bones (Munro 1967: p. 164).

    Although there are two soundly based reconstructions going back to PMP level, and one
or two other more questionable POc reconstructions, I have very few cognates from Western
Oceanic. POc *kanase is widely supported, and evidently refers to the best-known species,


[11] The word ato is not glossed by Chowning. but means ‘message, messenger’ in closely related Bariai.

58   Meredith Osmond


Valamugil cunnesius, (formerly Liza cephalus or Mugil cephalus]. POc *kaRapa is reconstructable,
but as a term for L. vaigiensis is reliable only for Eastern Oceanic. Reflexes of
POc * (k,q)aRua(s) refer to a range of mullet species, with size/growth stage possibly relevant.

    Named growth stages of Valamugil cunnesius are listed from Dobu (PT) and three Polynesian
languages. They run from from smallest to largest.

__pre__
      Dobu:            gwala, lonamua. iyakayo.
      Niuatoputapu: tePefd, Paua, Pauapuna, 'diualele, kanahe.
      Tongan:          tePevela, tePekona, tePefd, Punomoa, kanahe, kanahe fan.
      Hawaiian:        pua [child] lama, puaPamaPama, puapo Pola, PoPola kahaha, PamaPama, Panae

<
PMP *kanasay ‘mullet’ (ACD)
POc *kanase ‘mullet spp. including Valamugil cunnesius'’
  Adm :   Loniu        kanas         ‘sea mullet’
  Adm:    Lou          kanas         ‘k.o. fish’
  Adm:    Drehet       kanah         ‘k.o. fish, about 35 cm, silvery, black-edged’
  MM:     Patpatar     anas          ‘k.o. fish, small and white, salt and fresh water
  MM:     Teop         anahi         ‘mullet generic’
  SES:    Sa’a         Panate        ‘mullet’
  SES:    Arosi        Panate        ‘mullet’
  SES:    Bauro        yanate        ‘Liza cephalus’ [Valamugil cunnesius]
  SES:    Kahua        yanate        ‘L. cephalus’
  TM:     Burna        onole         ‘bluespot mullet, Valamugilseheli’
  TM:     Vano         anala         ‘bluespot mullet, Valamugilseheli’
PNCV *kanase ‘mullet’ (Clark 2009:107)
  NCV:Mota           yanase        ‘mullet’
  NCV:Mwotlap        na-ynah       ‘L. macrolepis’ [Chelon macrolepis]
  NCV:NE Ambae ganahe              ‘mullet’
  NCV:Paamese        anase         ‘mullet’
  NCV:Namakir        kanah         ‘mullet’
  SV:   Sye          (w)ane        ‘mullet’
  SV:   Ura          (w)ana        ‘mullet’
  NCal Nelemwa       hdldt         ‘adult mullet’
  NCal Iaai          enei          ‘adult mullet’
PCP *kanade ‘Liza spp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Rotuman      Panasi        ‘jumping mullet’
  Fij:  Bauan        kanaðe        ‘Mugilidae’
  Fij:  Wayan        kanaðe        ‘certain grey and blue-tailed mullet species including Valamugil sp.’
PPn *kanahe ‘Liza cephalus, Crenimugilcrenilabis and other mullet spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan      kanahe       ‘mullet’
  Pn:   Niuean      kanahe       ‘several species of mullet. Usually refers to full-grown fish (cf. fua-fua)
  Pn:   E Uvean     kanahe       ‘Liza macrolepis’ [Chelon macrolepis]
  Pn:     E Futunan     kanae          ‘Crenimugil crenilabis’
  Pn:     Pukapukan     kanae          ‘C. crenilabis'
  Pn:     Samoan        lanae          ‘L. cephalus, grey mullet’ \Valamugil cunnesius]
  Pn:     Tokelauan     kanae          ‘L. cephalus’
  Pn:     Tikopia       kanae          ‘L. cephalus’
  Pn:     Maori         kanae          ‘L. cephalus’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      lanae          ‘full-sized mullet’
>

                                                                                    Fish    59

<
PMP *qaRuas ‘young growth stage of mullet, Neomyxus chaptalii’ (ACD)
POc *(k,q)aRua(s) ‘mullet (generic)’
  Adm: Seimat           aw           ‘k.o. mullet, about one metre in length’
  Adm: Titan            (nian) kau   ‘mullet (generic), Mugilidae’
  Adm: Ponam            au           ‘mullet’
  PT:    Kilivila       kauya        ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Bulu              karua        ‘mullet’
  MM: Tolai             karua        ‘k.o. fish, like pilchard’
  SES: Gela             yalua        ‘Crenimugil crenilabis, warty-lipped mullet
  SES: To’aba’ita       kalua        ‘Mugil cephalus’ \Valamugil cunnesius]
  SES: Lau              kalua        ‘Mugil spp’
  Mic: Kiribati         ana          ‘mullet (generic)’
  Mic: Woleaian         yaiuwa       ‘Neomyxus chaplahi, silvery mullet’
  Mic: Satawalese       yayuw        ‘mullet, Liza spp. (generic)’
PCP *qaua ‘juvenile mullet’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Rotuman        aua          ‘very young mullet’ (Polynesian loan?)
PPn *qaua ‘mullet sp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan         ?aua         ‘mullet sp.’
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu ?aua           ‘second of five growth stages of kanahe’
  Pn:    E Uvean        ?aua         ‘growth term of kanahe’
  Pn:    Samoan         aua          ‘grey mullet, ?anae when about 5-7 cm in length
  Pn:    Tokelauan      aua          Neomyxus chaptalii, silvery mullet’
  Pn:    W Uvean        aua          ‘small mullet’
  Pn:    Maori          aua          ‘Aldrichetta forsleri, yellow-eye mullet’
cf. also:
   MM: Halia             karua          ‘small mullet, silversides’ (for fkalua)
>

     Blust (2002:128) reconstructs both PMP * qaRuas and PMP *qawas, but the reflexes of
the latter are almost all from languages in which *R is lost, so it is reasonable to infer that
they reflect PMP *qciRuas, and that *qawas is not reconstructable.

     Although the following set of forms points to POc *kaRapa, the reference is consistent
only for Remote Oceanic cognates. There is a single putative Western Oceanic reflex which
refers to the mandarin fish (Synchiropus splendidus), a distinctive, brilliantly coloured but
little-known fish, not more than 10 cm in length, and very dissimilar to mullets.


60    Meredith Osmond

<
POc *kaRapa ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:     Balawaia      kalava         ‘mandarin fish’
PROc *kaRapa ‘Liza vaigiensis, diamond-scaled mullet’
  SV:   Anejom       kapa(n)       ‘adult freshwater mullet’
  NCal: Nelemwa      kholap        Mugi! macrolepis ’ [Chelon macrolepis\
  Mic: Carolinian    araf          ‘mullet’
  Mic: Satawalese yaraf            ‘Z. vaigiensis’
  Mic: Mokilese      kap(ee)       ‘L. vaigiensis, diamond-scaled mullet’
PCP *kava LLiza vctigiensis’ (Geraghty 1994)
PCP              ‘juvenile Liza vctigiensis’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan          kava           ‘fish like the kanade’
  Fij:   Wayan          kava           ‘L. vaigiensis’
PPn *kafa ‘Liza vaigiensis’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan         kafa-kafa      ‘L. vaigiensis’
  Pn:    E Uvean        kafa-kafa      ‘L. vaigiensis’
  Pn:     Samoan        ?afa           ‘fish similar to grey mullet’
  Pn:    Tokelauan      kafa           ‘Z. vaigiensis’
  Pn:    Mangarevan kaʔa               ‘L. vaigiensis’
  Pn:    Pukapukan ketwa               ‘L. vaigiensis’
>

    Geraghty 1994 (p.157) reconstructs PCP *jeqevo(o,tt), PPn *teqefd ‘juvenile mullet’. John
Lynch (pers. comm.) suggests that a number of New Caledonian reflexes, Fwai, Nemi, Jawe
thidp ‘mangrove mullet’, may be related, thus indicating PROc *jeqevo(o,u) .

    Hooper 1994 (p.204) reconstructs PPn * fna-fita ‘juvenile mullet’. With the addition of Wayan
Fijian vua-vua ‘small reef fish, 2-3 cm’ this reconstruction can be raised to PCP * vua-vua
‘k.o. small fish’.


2.19 Silversides, hardyheads (Atherinidae)

These are small silvery fishes occurring in large schools in shallow coastal waters and estuaries
where they can be netted. Munro (p. 171) lists a dozen or so species and describes them
as useful for bait. They are similar to sardines in appearance and behaviour.

<
POc *sara(Ra) ‘sardine-like fish, possibly Atherinidae’
  NNG: Yabem            (i)sala        ‘a small slippery fish’
  MM: Halia             sela           ‘sardine’
PCP *sard ‘k.o. small schooling fish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Rotuman       sard          ‘k.o. fish’
  Fij:    Bauan         sard          ‘small fish like daniva, but with round white body’
  Fij:    Wayan         sard          ‘Atherinidae sp,, small silvery fish in coastal waters
PPn *sara ‘small schooling fish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan        ha            ‘very small schooling fish, like whitebait’
  Pn:     Nukuoro       said          ‘flying fish’
  Pn:     Luangiua      said          ‘small blue fish’
  Pn:     Sikaiana      said          ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Takuu         sard          ‘k.o. small fish’
>

                                                                                                Fish    61


2.20 Barracudas, sea-pikes (Sphyraenidae)

Barracudas are fast-swimming, carnivorous, pike-like fish, elongated and slender, which
slash their prey with sharp dog-like teeth. Larger ones are regarded as dangerous because
they have been known to attack humans. Munro calls them good fighters. They have firm
delicate flavoured flesh and are a valuable food fish. They are normally caught by trolling.
Larger species occur in coastal waters over shoals and around reefs (Munro 1967: p.161).

    Growth stages of Sphyraena barracuda[12] and S. forsteri in Lau (SES) are ono, mamal-
ito, Hi (Akimichi 1978:308). Dye (1983:261) lists four growth stages for barracuda in the
Niuatoputapu dialect of Tongan: tupuŋa-lono, momoto, hapatii, ?ono.

    Five POc terms are reconstructable, with *qonos possibly the generic. Final *-s is indicated
by Nehan and the two Te Motu reflexes. Other reconstructions refer either to a particular
species or to particular growth stages.

<
POc *qonos ‘mature Sphyraena spp,, possibly generic for all barracuda’ (acd: POc *qono)
  NNG: Mangseng              ono    ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:  Motu                  ono    ‘Sphyraenella chrysotaenia. When young, these fish are tubiara, when adult they are ono’ (Oram)
  PT:   Lala         ono           ‘k.o. fish’
  MM Nehan            onoh          ‘barracuda, wahoo’
  SES:  Gela          ono           ‘S. barracuda, great barracuda’
  SES:  To’aba’ita    ono           ‘S. jello, pickhandle sea pike’
  SES:  Ulawa         ono   (nf a)  ‘S. jello’
  SES:  Ulawa         ono (sau)     ‘Agrioposphyraena barracuda’ [ʌ'. barracuda]
  SES:  Sa’a          ono           ‘a fish, the barracuda’
  SES:  Lau           ono           ‘S. picuda and S. forsteri at growth stage’
  SES:  Arosi         ono           ‘A. barracuda, S. jello’
  SES:  Bauro         ono           ‘A. barracuda’
  TM: Burna           onoro         ‘barracuda, Sphyraena genie’
  TM:   Tanema        onara         ‘barracuda, Sphyraena genie’
  NCV: Mwotlap        n-on          ‘Sphyraena spp,, barracuda, sea pike’
  NCV: Lakon          on            ‘barracuda’
PPn *qono ‘Sphyraena spp,, barracuda’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan        ?ono          ‘k.o. fish, the barracuda’
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu ?ono           ‘large growth stage of barracuda’
  Pn:   Tokelauan     ono           ‘a fish, the barracuda’
  Pn:   Tikopia       ono           ‘barracuda’
  Pn:   Hawaiian      ono           ‘Acanthocybium solandri, large mackerel type fish up to 3 metres in length’ (wahoo)
>

[12] The great barracuda or giant sea pike, Sphyraena barracuda, is sometimes referred to as Sphyraena picuda
or Agrioposphyraena barracuda.

62    Meredith Osmond


                          Figure 2.13    Sphyraena jello, slender sea pike

<
PMP *qalu ‘barracuda’ (ACD)
POc *qcilu ‘ Sphyraena taxon, incl. S. barracuda, great barracuda’
  Adm:      Titan        al              ‘Sphyraenapicuda, giant sea-pike’ [5. barracuda]
  Adm:      Nauna        kul             ‘thick-bodied barracuda sp.’
  Adm:      Penchai      kul             ‘thick-bodied barracuda sp.’
  Adm:      Lou          koi             ‘thick-bodied barracuda sp.’
  Adm:      Seimat       al              ‘thick-bodied barracuda sp.’
  Adm:      Wuvulu       alu             ‘thick-bodied barracuda sp.’
  PT:       Mi sima      anu(wal)        ‘Sphyraena spp., including giant sea-pike, chevron barracuda, striped seapike’
     SES:   Gela          alu            ‘S. putnamae, chevron barracuda’
     SES:   Langalanga    rain           ‘Agrioposphyraena barracuda, giant sea pike’
     SES:   ’Are’are      raru           ‘A. barracuda"
     SES:   Sa’a          salu           ‘barracuda’
cf. also:
   NNG: Bariai           kalu(bia)       ‘barracuda’
>

<
POc *malisa ‘barracuda’ [13]
  MM:       Patpatar    malisa           ‘k.o. fish, big, long, black and white’
  MM:       Kara (East) malesa           ‘barracuda’
  SES:      To’aba’ita ma-malita         ‘Sphyraena barracuda’’ (Barnett); ‘immature barracuda’ (Lichtenberk)
  SES:      Lau          ma-mahto        ‘S. picuda and S. forsteri at growth stage’
  Fij:      Wayan        sila-sila       ‘largest barracudas, S. barracuda and possibly other Sphyraena spp.’ (metathesis)
>

    The cognate set below points to a four-syllable reconstruction *b wara-wa(r,d,dr,R)a(q)
As the parentheses indicate, the reflexes do not agree as to the identity of the second liquid.
Admiralties and Papuan Tip languages reflect *d or * dr, Southeast Solomonic languages
and Pije (New Caledonia) reflect *r, and Tikopia (Polynesian) reflects *R. However, it is so
unlikely that this set of forms is the result of chance that we must infer that borrowing has
taken place at some point. We also note that the Papuan Tip terms are glossed ‘moray eel’.


[13] The term malisa ‘barracuda’ is quite widespread in Papua New Guinea, spread through Tok Pisin. which
 adopted it from Patpatar.

                                                                                   Fish    63


    John Lynch (pers. comm.) points out that a four-syllable reconstruction is likely to be
bimorphemic, i.e. *b w ara-wa(r,d,dr,R)a(q), and cites New Caledonian evidence in support of
this. Nelemwa b'ara-gom ‘moray eel’ seems to reflect the first morpheme, and Fwai walagan
‘barracuda’ perhaps contains the second.

<
POc *b wara-wa(r,d,dr,R)a(q) ‘Sphyraena sp,, possibly S. jello, the slender or pickhandle sea pike’
  Adm: Titan          palawar       ‘sea pike’
  Adm: Andra          palawadi      ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:    Kilivila      buliwada     ‘eel’
  PT:    Dobu          b'`ahiada    ‘moray eel’
  PT:    Molima        boluwada     ‘moray eel’
  PT:    Tubetube      b'`ahiada    ‘eel’
  SES: Longgu         paraura       ‘S. barracuda’’
  SES: Langalanga barauro           ‘S. jello’
  NCal: Pije           barewalak ‘barracuda’
  Pn:    Tikopia      paravao       ‘S. jello’
>

    The next reconstruction, POc *qutur, shares the same form as a reconstruction for a very
dissimilar fish, the jobfish, the latter reconstructable to PMP level (see §30). A competing
gloss, ‘Sphyraena sp,, barracuda’, is based on cognates from PT, NCV and Pn. These two
etyma appear to be homonyms rather than cognates. Niuean retains a reflex of both etyma.
PPT *qudur, rather than j* qutur, is reconstructable for both jobfish and barracuda.

<
POc *qutur ‘Sphyraena sp,, barracuda’
  PT:  Muyuw            kudu(wal)     ‘barracuda’
  NCV: Mota             utu           ‘large long fish with very sharp teeth and small scales:a sphyraenid, barracuda’
  NCV: NE Ambae         utu           ‘Sphyraena genie, blackfm barracuda’
  NCV: Raga             utu           ‘S. jello, pickhandle barracuda’
  Pn:  Niuean           utu           ‘Sphyraena spp., barracuda; Aprion virescens, grey jobfish’
>

    Hooper (p.203) identifies PPn * sao-sao as a growth stage for juvenile barracuda (see
also §13, p.52). As both Wayan and Niuatoputapu distinguish three stages of growth, another
growth stage can be identified as PCP *moto-moto.

<
PROc *moto ‘k.o. fish’
  Mic: Kiribati      moto          ‘k.o. fish’
PCP *moto-moto ‘growth stage of Sphyraena sp.’
  Fij: Wayan         moto-moto ‘juvenile of barracuda spp.’
PPn *moto-moto ‘Sphyraena sp., probably juvenile growth stage’
  Pn:   Tongan       moto-moto ‘k.o. swordfish’
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu mo-moto       ‘second growth stage of barracuda’
  Pn:     E Uvean        moto-moto      ‘k.o. Sphyraena’
  Pn:     Emae           moto-moto      ‘S. bleekeri ’ [ʌ'. putnamae]
  Pn:     Tikopia        moto           ‘k.o. fish, small, light-coloured, not eaten; like lizardfish’
>

64   Meredith Osmond



<
PMic Oaraw a ‘barracuda’ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic:    Kiribati      tdwa          ‘barracuda’
  Mic:    Chuukese      saraw         ‘barracuda’
  Mic:    Puluwatese    haraw         ‘great barracuda, S. picuda’’ [5. barracuda}
  Mic:    Carolinian    saraw         ‘barracuda’
  Mic:    Woleaian      sazawa        ‘barracuda’
  Mic:    Ponapean      saraw         ‘barracuda’
  Mic:    Mokilese      caraw         ‘k.o. barracuda’
>


2.21 Sand basses, giant perches, barramundis (Centropomidae (Munro: Latidae))

These fish inhabit coastal waters, often penetrating into fresh water. They are noted for brilliant
glassy eyes which glow at night. Although we have an apparent POc reconstruction,
*mata-pula, lit ‘eyes’ + ‘shine’ (§24), the most consistent references of its reflexes are to
Priacanthus cruentatus [now Heteropriacanthus cruentatus], ‘red globe-eye’ in Polynesian
languages. The single non-Polynesian reflex, Kove (NNG) matapula ‘large freshwater fish’,
may refer to Centropomidae.


2.22 Rock cods, reef cods, coral cods, groupers etc. (Serranidae)

These fish inhabit shallow coastal waters and estuaries, and are especially abundant around
coral reefs and shoals. Many are brilliantly coloured in shades of red to brown, some with
distinctive patterns. Nearly all are excellent eating. They are carnivorous and voracious, and one
species, Epinephelus lanceolatus, the Queensland grouper, which can grow to three metres in
length and up to 400 kg in weight, can be dangerous to divers (Munro 1967: p.264). Most, however,
are under a metre in length. Genera include Epinephelus, Cephalopholis and Plectropomus,
each with dozens of species. Oceanic languages typically distinguish many taxa.

    Six POc reconstructions are supported. *kuRapu seems reliably to refer to the most distinctive
member of the family, E. lanceolatus. Distinguishing the meanings of the other five
reconstructions has proved difficult. The lack of conformity in glosses may be due to the
possibility that the terms they represent are generic for particular groupings, with wordlists
naming only the most familiar members of the set.

<
PMP *kuRapu ‘Epinephelus sp.’ (Blust2002)
POc *kuRapu ‘rock-cod, Epiphenelus sp. or spp. including E. lanceolatus, Queensland grouper’
  Adm: Mussau        uou(na)      ‘giant black rock cod’
  Adm:      Titan           ap‘ eu           ‘Epinephelinae, rock cod, large’ (metathesis)
  NNG:      Tami            gula             ‘Cephalopholis urodeta, flag-tailed rock cod’
  NNG:      Numbami         kulawi           'Epinephelus spp.’
  MM:       Lihir           kuroh            'Epinepheluspolyphekadion, camouflage rock cod’
  SES:      Gela            yulavu           ‘sp. of large fish, young baŋa, a fish large enough to swallow a man’
  SES:      Longgu          yulava           'Cephalopholis argus, peacock rock cod’
  SES:      Lau             ?ulafu           ‘large fish, up to 2 metres long, brown or blue spots; grouper’
  SES:      Kwaio           ulafu            'Epinephelus sp., giant grouper’
  SES:      ’Are’are        urahu            ‘a fish, taboo for women and children’
  SES:      Sa’a            ulehu            ‘Oligorus gigas. Six kinds of ulehu are named’ \E. lanceolatus\
   SES:     Arosi       ?urahu               'Oligorus gigas, famous in tales’14
   NCV:     Namakir     kuav                 ‘grouper (generic)’
   SV:      Sye         uwop                 ‘grouper’
   NCal:    Iaai        oi                   'E. hoedti, adult/large grouper’ [E. cyanopodus]
   Mic:     Kiribati    kuau                 ‘generic for rock cods, groupers’
   Mic:     Mokilese    kiro                 ‘large sea bass’
   Mic:     Marshallese kiiro                'E. fuscoguttatus, grouper, rock cod’
   Fij:     Wayan       kwavu                'E. hoedti, E. merra, rock cod’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Kove            kaburu           ‘enormous freshwater fish’
   MM:      Teop            rovu             ‘rock cod generic’
   MM:      Marovo          rava             'E. lanceolatus, found in rivers and estuaries as well as reef, including outer dropoff’
>

                                                                                                   Fish     65



<
PMP *keRleij ‘kind of striped or spotted marine fish, Epinephelus sp.’ (ACD)
POc *koto(ij) ‘large rock cod or grouper, Epinephelus sp.’
  Adm:      Loniu          kot               ‘medium-sized rock cod or grouper’
  Adm:      Likum          ni kok            ‘large grouper, with marks like a snake’
  Adm:      Nauna          kot               ‘largest kind of grouper, spotted’
  Fij:      Wayan          koto              ‘largest kind of rock cod’
  Fij:      Kadavu         xoto              ‘k.o. large fish’
>

<
PMP *hcti]hcti] ‘fish sp.’ (ACD)
POc *baba(ij) ‘rock cod or grouper’[15]
  Fij:      Bauan     baba                   ‘large fish, like a snake, with a large mouth’
  Pn:       Pukapukan papa                   ‘Variola iouti, lunar-tailed rock cod’
  Pn:       Samoan    papa                   ‘Epinephelus sp,, grouper’
  Pn:       E Uvean   papa                   ‘ generic for some Cephalopholis spp.’
>

[14] Barnett (1978:57) names ten kinds of Purahu in Arosi, named for patterning or habitat or behaviour.

[15] Oceanic cognates justify a gloss of ‘rock cod’ only for PCP. However, Balinese baŋ-baŋ ‘k.o. large sea fish’
 may be external evidence for the gloss at POc level.

66     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *don(o,u) ‘spotted rock cod, taxon including Cephctlopholis and Plectropomus spp.’
  PT:     Motu          dono        ‘brown spotted rock cod’16
  SES: Longgu           ono(i)       ‘fish like a shark that can swallow a man’
PCP * donu ‘adult Plectropomus’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Rotuman       tonu         ‘Cephalopholis argus, peacock rock cod’
  Fij:    Bauan         donu         ‘Epinephelus maculatus, brown-spotted rock cod’
  Fij:    Wayan         donu         ‘generic for several Plectropomus spp.’
  Fij:    Kadavu        donu         ‘Erilepis zonifer’
PPn donu ‘rock cod, when large’ (Hooper: ‘Plectropomus leopardus, P. macu/atus, coral trout’)
  Pn:     Tongan        tonu         ‘k.o. fish, similar to ŋatala (rock cod)’ (tonupuku, tonu kuli, tonu Puno, tonu Puli, tonu faŋamed)
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu tonu          ‘growth stage of rock cod, bit larger than ŋatala, not as big as mala’
  Pn:     E Uvean       tonu         ‘Plectropomus spp.’
  Pn:     Samoan        tonu         ‘Epinephelus sp,, a metre or more long’
  Pn:     Tokelauan     tonu         ‘P. leopardus, red-spotted rock cod’
  Pn:     Tikopia       tonu         ‘P. leopardus, ŋatara when very large’
  Pn:     Tahitian      tonu         ‘P. leopardus’
>

    The gloss of ‘rock cod, grouper’ for the following reconstruction is based on reflexes
from Dobu (PT) and Fiji. In Gitua, Arosi, Woleaian and Hawaiian, apparent reflexes refer to
trevally, blenny, parrotfish or wrasse, while elsewhere in Polynesia they refer to the crescent
perch, Terapon jarbua (§35). Such fish have little in common, and the similarity of name
may be coincidental.

<
POc *kawa-kawa ‘rock cod, grouper’
     PT:    Dobu              kawa(tabuya) ‘rock cod, coral cod, reef cod, coral trout’
     Fij:   Bauan             kawa-kawa    ‘Serranidae, yellow-finned grouper’ (syn. gawa-gawa)
   Fij:     Wayan             kawa-kawa    ‘k.o. rock cod, poisonous’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Gitua             kawa-kawa          ‘golden trevally’
   SES:     Arosi             PaPawa             ‘blenny’
   Mic:     Woleaian          xawe-xaw           ‘Chlorurus spp.’ [parrotfish]
  Pn:     Tongan          kava-kava       ‘k.o. fish with small scales and longitudinal stripes, the scavenger fish’ [Lethrinus sp.? See *oka, §36]
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu kava-kava          ‘T. jarbua’
  Pn:     E Uvean      kava-kava          ‘T. jarbua’’
  Pn:     Samoan       ?ava-?ava          ‘Terapon sp.’
  Pn:     Hawaiian     ?aʔawa             ‘Bodianus bilunulatus, wrasse’
>

[16] Ross (1994:418) discounted the Motu term as cognate on the basis that the initial consonants of Motu dono
 ‘brown spotted rock cod’. Lala dono ‘k.o. fish’ and Roro tono 'k.o. fish' all reflect POc *s-. However Motu d-,
unlike the other two. also reflects POc *d.

                                                                                      Fish   67


<
POc *kalika ‘Epinephelidae, rock cod’
  Adm:    Wuvulu     alia             ‘grouper sp.’
  Adm:    Titan      kaliy            ‘Epinephelidae, rock cod’
  Adm:    Ere        kaliy            ‘grouper sp.’
  Adm:    Lindrou    kalik            ‘grouper sp.’
  Mic:    Satawalese yaniy            ‘Epinephelidae, rock cod (generic)’
>

   Distinctive markings are often reflected in compound terms such as the following:

__pre__
  MM:     Patpatar      mata girit        ‘k.o. fish’ (mata ‘face’, girit ‘to sketch, draw’)
  MM:     Halia         mata goumana      ‘giant chanda perch, freshwater fish’(go///w
                                          ‘marking, scar’)
  SES:    Gela          aŋora gere        ‘Cephalopholis sexmaculata, six spotted rock cod’
                                          (gere ‘to sketch, make lines’)
  SES:    Gela          kusele gere-gerea ‘Epinephelus quoyanus, longfin rock cod (gere-gere
                                          ‘to sketch, make lines’)

    Lower level reconstructions include Proto North Vanuatu *tab wale ‘grouper fish’ (Francois
2005:499), PCP *ifajala ‘Epinephelus spp.’, PPn ^ŋatala ‘Epinephelus, smaller stage’,
PCP/PPn * munua ‘large Epinephelus sp.’, PCP *drala ‘red Cephalopholis sp.’, PPn Call
‘red rock cod spp.’, PPn *fdpuku ‘Epinephelus sp., possibly E. polyphekadion. marbled sea
bass’, PPn *loi ‘Cephalopholis argus, peacock rock cod’, PPn * mataele ‘Serranidae’ (Geraghty p.149, Hooper pp.204-205)


2.23 Flagtails (Kuhliidae)

Munro 1967 (p.254) describes Kuhliidae as small to moderate-sized fishes, generally inhabiting
shallow coastal waters, with some species preferring brackish or fresh water, often in the
vicinity of mangroves. Salt-water species are a brilliant silver. Our only reconstructions are
lower-level: PCP *sere, PPn * sesele ‘immature Kuhlia rupestris’, PCP *drava ‘k.o. small
freshwater fish, possibly Kuhlia sp.’ (Geraghty p.150) and PPn *safole ‘Kuhlia spp., flagtail’
(Hooper 1994: p.206).


2.24 Bigeyes, bullseyes (Priacanthidae)

These are small to moderate-sized fishes of distinctive appearance. All are bright rosy with a
rough sandpapery skin. The eye is large, about half head size. They are nocturnal, typically
spending daylight in caves or under ledges (Munro 1967: p.284).

68   Meredith Osmond




                   Figure 2.14   Epinephelus lanceolatus, Queensland grouper


   The PPn term, * mata-pula ‘Priacanthus cruentatus, red globe-eye’ is a descriptive compound
(lit. mata ‘eye’ + pula ‘shine, glow’) (Hooper p.202). The same compound is found in
Kove (NNG), where the referent is a large freshwater fish, probably Centropomidae (§21).


2.25 Cardinalfishes (Apogonidae)

Cardinalfish are small carnivorous fishes. Many are vividly coloured, with striking patterns
of bands, stripes or spots. Most live in or around coral reefs and amongst weeds, and in
shallow tidal pools, although some prefer brackish water and others inhabit deeper water.
Like the Priacanthidae, they are nocturnal, hiding under ledges or in crevices during daylight.
The male usually carries the eggs and newly hatched young in its mouth (Munro 1967: p.241). No
reconstructions have been made.


2.26 Jacks, trevallies, scads, horse mackerels, kingfishes, darts, rainbow runners and leatherskins (Carangidae)

This is a large, widely distributed family of fast-swimming surface predators which generally
inhabit the coastal edge of the deep water. Larger species frequent edges of reefs. Most
congregate in schools, and can be caught along beaches with seines. Their flesh is of good
texture and flavour (Munro 1967: p.221). Oceanic languages typically distinguish many taxa.

    In Niuatoputapu, deep sea anglers take pride in withstanding the rigours of a dusk to
dawn session of lauPotule, fishing from an anchored boat in around 17 fathoms of water, and
using a pressure gas lamp to attract the fish (big-eyed scad, Selar crumenophthalmus) (Dye
1983:250).

    I have six POc reconstructions, but can be confident of matching terms with specific genera for only four,
POc *qatule ‘Selar spp,, scad’, POc *pilu ‘Caranx spp,, trevally’, POc *lasi
'Scomberoides spp., leatherskin’ and POc *kamaRi ‘Elagatis bipinnulata, rainbow runner’.
Other genera include Carangoides, Trachinotus, Gnathanodon, and Decapterus. Where the
reflexes cover a range of genera, the reconstructions are simply labelled carangid. The popularity
of these fish both as sporting fish and as food, and their role in places as appropriate
tribute for chiefs, are reflected by the number of terms for their growth stages. Here I can
reconstruct PPn terms for growth stages, *lupo-lupo for the smallest and * qulua for a large
caranx, (not necessarily the largest).

                                                                                        Fish    69


Figure 2.15   Left Gnathanodon speciosus, golden trevally. Right Alectis indica, plumed trevally.

<
PMP *qatulay ‘Trachurops crumenophthalmus, the big-eyed scad’ (ACD)
POc *qatule ‘Selar spp. including S. crumenophthalmus, big-eyed scad’
  Adm: Titan            ɑh//        ‘scad (generic)’
  PT:     Molima      Patune        ‘fish that looks like pilchard
  PT:     Muyuw         geytula     ‘trevally, scad’ (Damon)
  PT:     Misima        atuni       ‘generic for trevally, scad’
  Mic: Kosraean       cetol         ‘large mackerel’
  Mic: Sonsorolese adir             ‘caranx’
PCP *qatule ‘Selar crumenophthalmus'’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Rotuman      afule        ‘kind of fish (silver bream?)’
  Fij:    Wayan         atule       ‘S. crumenophthalmus’
  Fij:    Kadavu        dtule       ‘Caesio, Rastrelliger spp.’
PPn *qatule ‘Selar crumenopthalmus, silver scad’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu Polule       ‘S. crumenophthalmus’
  Pn:     Niuean       atule        ‘big-eyed scad’
  Pn:     E Uvean       Patule       ‘S. crumenophthalmus’
  Pn:     Anutan        ature       ‘type of small fish that comes into the shallow reef water in large schools. Ranges in size from about one to one and a half pounds’
  Pn:     Tahitian      ature       ‘horse-mackerel’
  Pn:     Hawaiian     akule        ‘big-eyed or goggle-eyed scad, S. crumenophthalmus’
>

<
PMP *bilu[bilu] ‘Caranx spp., trevally’ (ACD; Blust 2002: *pilu ‘Gnathanodon sp.’)
POc *pilu ‘Caranx sp. or spp., trevally’
  NNG: Gitua           pilu       ‘k.o. trevally’
  NNG: Gitua           pilu-pilu  ‘small trevally varieties’
  PT:     Mi sima      vilu       ‘Gnathanodon speciosus. golden trevally
  NCV: Lakon           vol        ‘Caranx ignobilis, giant trevally’
  NCV: Dorig           vol        ‘C.ferdau, blue trevally’
  NCal: Iaai           vine(sf1   ‘large Caranx sp.’
PCP *vilu ‘Gnathanodon, Trachinotus’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Bauan        vilu       ‘small deep-bellied fish like the saga (trevally, Caranx spp.), but dark in color and with no teeth
  Fij:    Wayan        vilu        ‘Gnathanodon speeiosus'
PPn *filu ‘Carangidae’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan      filu        ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     E Uvean     filu        ‘ Trachinotus’
  Pn:     Samoan       filu       ‘Carangoides’
  Pn:     Hawaiian     hilu       ‘various species of reef fishes of the genus Coris
>

70 Meredith Osmond



   Reflexes of the next set have consistent reference to larger species only in the Central
Pacific. Caranx ignobilis and C. sexfasciatus are among the largest of the trevallies.

<
POc *qulua ‘carangid’ (acd: ‘Caranx spp.’)
  NNG: Gedaged         ulua         ‘white marine fish about 20 cm long’
  PT:    Dobu          Puliya       ‘Decapterus macarellus, mackerel scad’
PPn *qu!ua ‘Caranx sp., probably mature phase of C. ignobilis’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan        Pulua        ‘very large fish: a full-sized lupo (trevally)’
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu Pulua         ‘largest growth stage of trevally’
  Pn:    Niuean        ulua         ‘C. ignobilis, C. sexfasciatus’
  Pn:    Samoan        ulua         ‘name given to two species of fish of genus Caranx when about a metre long, and considered to be a present fit for a chief’
  Pn:    Rennellese    Pugua        ‘generic name for some crevalles (or trevallies), e.g. plumed trevally, mirrorfish, long-finned trevally’
  Pn:    Tahitian      urua         ‘cavalla’ (Henry 1971:390)
  Pn:    Marquesan     uPua         ‘C. ignobilis’
  Pn:    Hawaiian      ulua        general name for Caranx spp.’
cf. also:
   Mic:     Kiribati          urua            ‘adult trevally’ (for Punua)
>

<
POc *mamula ‘carangid’
  NNG: Tami                 mamul           ‘Gnathanodon speciosus, golden trevally’
  PT:  Kilivila             mamila          ‘ Chorinemus tolooparah, queenfish’ [Scorn beroides lysan\
  MM:       Lihir           mamul           ‘Carangoides spp., small trevallies’ (mamul is generic for trevally in Solomons Pidgin)
  SES:    Gela          mamula        ‘k.o. small fish’
  SES:    To’aba’ita    mamula        ‘Caranx melampygus, bluefin trevally’
  SES:    Kwaio         mamula        ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:    Lau           mamula        ‘k.o. fish’ (=?eda-?eda)
  SES:    Arosi         mamura        ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:    ’Are’are      mamu          ‘C. melampygus‘
  Mic:    Woleaian      mam'vu(six)   ‘mackerel scad, Decapterus ’ (-six ‘small’)
>

[17] Iaai normally does not retain final consonants, so this may have been a compound (John Lynch, pers. comm.).

                                                                                    Fish   71



    Oceanic reflexes of the next set refer fairly consistently to Scomberoides spp. (=Chorine-
mus), fishes known variously as leatherskin, whitefish, queenfish, skinnyfish or giant dart.
They can grow to over a metre in length. Blust (ACD) has reconstructed PMP *lajih ‘dolphinfish’
and PMP *daRi ‘leatherskin’, with Oceanic reflexes of the former apparently referring
to the leatherskin. The two Mutu (NNG) terms below suggest that the dolphinfish may sometimes be
referred to as the leatherskin’s mother. For dolphinfish sets, see §27 below.

<
PMP *lajih ‘dolphinfish’ (ACD)
POc *laci ‘Scomberoides spp., leatherskin, including S. lysan‘
  Adm :   Ere           las        ‘flat fish found in river mouths’
  Adm :   Loniu         las        ‘flatfish fish similar to a mackerel’
  Adm :   Leipon        las        ‘k.o. flat, silvery fish’
  Adm :   Titan         las        ‘Scomberoides lysan, skinnyfish or giant dart’
  Adm :   Andra         las(ei)    ‘ ldua mandibularis,         [{/. menialis]
  NNG:    Mutu          las        ‘Scomberoides commersonnianus, leatherskin’
  NNG:    Mutu          las tina   ‘Coryphaena hippurus, dolphinfish’
  NNG: Gedaged          las        ‘whitish-grey marine fish about 2.5 metres long
  NNG: Bing             las        Teatherskin’
  PT:     Motu          ladi       '('horinemus spp., leatherskin’ [Scomberoides]
  MM Patpatar           lasis      ‘k.o. fish, big and white’
  MM Lihir              las        ‘S. lysan, double-spotted queenfish’
  MM Nehan              lah        Teatherskin, giant dart’
  MM Marovo             lasi-lasi  ‘S. commersonnianus, leather skin’
  SES:    Gela          lai-lahi   ‘Scomberoides generic’
  SES:    Arosi         rasi       ‘fish sp.’
  Mic: Kiribati         nari       ‘S. lysan‘
  Mic: Ponapean         lac        ‘Atule mate, yack"
  Mic: Mokilese         ldt        ‘fish sp., kind of skipjack’
PCP *ladi ‘Scomberoides sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fiji    Wailevu     laði         ‘Scomberoides tol‘
PPn *lai ‘Scomberoides ’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan      lai          ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Niuean      lai(loa)     ‘S. lysan, leatherskin or leatherback’ (loa ‘long’)
  Pn:     Samoan      lai          ‘Scomberoides sp.’
  Pn:     Hawaiian    lai          ‘Scomberoides sp.’
>

72     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *kamaRi ‘Elagalis bipinnulata, rainbow runner’
  Adm: Titan              kamei            ‘E. bipinnulata
  Adm: Nali               kemei            ‘E. bipinnulata
  Mic: Kiribati           karnd            ‘E. bipinnulata
>

    Malcolm Ross (vol.2, pp.49-50) reconstructs POc *mala ‘resembling’ which occurs in
plant names and occasionally, it seems, in fish names as well. Of the terms listed in the set
below, those consisting of a compound mala + modifier could all be considered ‘resembling’
examples. If this is the common meaning of *mala we would expect it to be reflected in terms
for fishes not necessarily related.18 The fact that the most frequent reference in this set is to
carangids suggests that a similar form was a POc fish name. However, because the carangid
examples are largely restricted to the Solomons (the only exception being Samoan), it may
be that *mala came to be used in the Solomons as a generic for carangids, as Hviding has
suggested for Marovo. For this reason no POc reconstruction is proposed.

__pre__
  MM: Patpatar              mala(la)         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM: Nehan                 mala(ŋuh)        ‘Trachinotus russelli, common dart’ (ŋuh ‘kiss’) [7.
                                             botla\
  MM: Marovo                mara             ‘generic for all Carangids (trevallies etc.)’ (15
                                             compound terms for kinds) (for ^mald)
     SES:   Gela            mala(boro)       ‘Selaroides leptolepis, smooth-tailed trevally’ (mala
                                             ‘as, like’; boro ‘bottom, keel of canoe’)
  SES: Gela           mala(hau)              ‘various kingfish and jack spp.’ (hau ‘old’)

<
PPn *mala ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   Tongan        mala                   ‘large serranid’
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu mala                    ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   Samoan        mala(uli)              ‘certain fish of genus Caranx (considered fit for chiefs) when about 30 cm long’ (uli ‘black’)
     Pn:    Tokelauan       mala(tea)        ‘Cheilinus undulalus' (tea ‘white’)
>

<
PEOc *taliku ‘Carangid’
  SES:      Gela          taliyu(mane)     ‘Caranx ignobilis, giant trevally’ (mane ‘male’)
  SES:      Arosi         ariu             ‘k.o. fish, kingfish’
  SES:      Kahua         ariu             ‘jack, Carangidae (generic)’
  NCV:      NE Ambae      taliu            ‘trevally, Carangidae’ (loss of k unexplained)
>

<
PROc *lubo ‘Caranx spp.’
  SV:   Anejom      ne-rop'                ‘Caranx melampygus’
PPn *lupo ‘Caranx spp. (Hooper 1994)
PPn *lupo-lupo ‘juvenile Caranx spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan        lupo          ‘mature Caranx‘
                       lupo-lupo     ‘juvenile Caranx"
  Pn:    Niuean        lupo-lupo     ‘juvenile Caranx spp.’
  Pn:    Pukapukan     lupo-lupo     ‘juvenile Caranx‘
  Pn:    Rennellese    gupo          ‘juvenile Caranx"
  Pn:    Tokelauan     lupo-lupo     ‘juveniles of all Caranx spp. ’
>

[18] Blust (1986:73) lists a number of fish names with prefix mala from Cebuano (WMP) (mala-patl 'k.o. fish’.
mala-sugi ‘swordfish, sailfish’, mala-tindiik ‘mackerel scad’), and one from Samar (WMP) (mala-punti ‘blue-
 spotted sea perch’), but there is insufficient information to identity a common meaning.

                                                                                  Fish      73



    Lower level reconstructions include Proto North Vanuatu *dilit(i,u) ‘Caranx spp.’ (Frangois
2005:494), PCP *i-kata,      PPn *kata ‘growth term for Caranx sp’, PCP/PPn *laweqa ‘Alectis
indicus, plumed trevally or mirrorfish’, PCP *jeu, PPn *teu ‘Carangid’, PPn * aseu ‘Caranx
sp.’, PPn *tafaquli ‘Caranx sp., possibly C. lugubris‘ and PPn * soke(lau) ‘Carangid’
(Geraghty 1994: pp.150-151, Hooper 1994: pp.206-210).


2.27 Dolphinfishes (Coryphaenidae)

Figure 2.16 Coryphaena hippurus, common
                                                              dolphinfish

Dolphinfish are large swift-swimming powerful fish, pelagic and mostly oceanic,
but sometimes found around reefs. They
are spectacular fighters which leap from
the water when hooked. They have brilliant colouration and excellent flesh. Munro
(pp.218-219) records two species for the
family, with Coryphaena hippurus being
larger and better known than C. equiselis.
They are not to be confused with dolphins,
cetaceans of the family Delphinidae, although some Polynesian dictionaries gloss their term
for C. hippurus as ‘dolphin’.

<
PMP *palata ‘fish sp.’ (acd: PWMP *pa!ata)
POc *palata ‘Coryphaena hippurus, dolphinfish’
  MM: Marovo          palata         ‘Coryphaena hippurus‘
  SES: Arosi          harata         ‘a fish sp.’
  Mic: Ponapean       palac          ‘fish, about 30 cm, longish nose, body light red, head salmon-pink, tail and fins dark red’ (Christian 1899)
cf. also:
   NNG: Kove           palaŋa        ‘dolphinfish’
   MM: Tolai           palataga      ‘k.o. fish’
>

   Hooper 1994 (p.210) reconstructs PPn *masi-masi ‘Coryphaena hippurus, dolphinfish’, but
we have found no non-Polynesian cognates.

74    Meredith Osmond


2.28 Ponyfishes, slimys (Leiognathidae)

Ponyfishes are all very small, with a highly protractile mouth, the feature which is reflected in
an alternative name, pouters. Slime is exuded in large quantities after capture. Large schools
can be caught along sheltered beaches and estuaries (Munro 1967, p.237). In Lau (Malaita) they
are freshwater fish, moving between the rivers and the lagoon (Akimichi 1978:310). Few
terms have been located and no reconstructions made.


2.29 Fusiliers (Caesionidae)

Most fusiliers are brilliantly coloured with iridescent blue and yellow. They can be taken
in great abundance near coral reefs and rocky shores. Very large schools migrate for long
distances. They swim with synchronised quick precision. Flesh is coarse but not unpalatable
(Munro 1967: p.300). Hooper quotes Lewis et al. as describing them as important tuna baitfish in
many areas (Hooper p.192). This may explain why the Tokelauan term for mackerel scad, a
different fish but also a tuna baitfish, is cognate with terms for fusilier species in the following
set.

<
PMP *sulig ‘Caesio sp., fusilier’ (Blust 2002)
POc *suli(k) ‘Caesionidae, fusilier’
   Adm: Loniu             (ha)eun       ‘fusilier’
  MM: Lihir               sil           ‘Caesionidae (generic)’
  Mic: Satawalese         tin                   ‘Caesio spp., fusilier’
 PPn *huli ‘fusilier sp. ’ (Hooper 1994: ‘fusilier or mackerel sp.’)
  Pn:     Tongan          huli          ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Samoan          uli(sega)     ‘Caesio sp.’
  Pn:     Tokelauan uli                 ‘Decapteruspinnulatus, mackerel scad’ (D. macarellus)
  Pn:     K’marangi uli                 ‘Caesio coerulaureus, gold-banded fusilier’
  Pn:     Pukapukan uli                 ‘large size of tikava, Pterocaesio tile, tricoloured fusilier’
>

     PCP/PPn *tikawa ‘Caesio sp.’ is reconstructed by Geraghty (p.152), Hooper (p.210).


2.30 Snappers or sea-perch, basses, jobfishes (Lutjanidae)

Snappers are rather large fish with a sheathed maxillary, typically red or yellow in colouring.
Although known largely as reef fishes inhabiting rocky bottoms, the family includes deep sea
snappers. Their flesh is highly esteemed, although a few have been implicated in ciguatera
poisoning (Munro 1967: p.288).

    There are many species of Lutjanidae, some quite distinctive in markings, and Oceanic
languages typically distinguish several taxa. I have seven possible POc reconstructions but,
except for POc *qutur ‘Aprion virescens, green jobfish’, it is difficult to give precise glosses.
Some are probably names of particular species, one or two are generic for two or more species,
others may be names of particular species at a certain stage of growth.

                                                                                              Fish     75



                          Figure 2.17    Lutjamis fulviflamma, Dory snapper


   The proposed gloss of POc *qutur is based on the agreement of non-Oceanic cognates
with those of the Central Pacific.19 Aprion virescens, the green jobfish, is found at depths that
vary from 0-180 metres (FishBase). See §20 regarding the homophony of this etymon with
POc *qutur ‘k.o. fish, possibly Sphyraena sp,, barracuda’ .

<
PMP *qutur ‘green job fish’ (Blust 2002: *qutun)
POc *qutur ‘Aprion virescens, green job fish’
  PT:     Mi sima      utul           ‘Aprion virescens, green jobfish
  MM: Tolai            ut             ‘k.o. fish’
  SES: Arosi           uu             ‘k.o. freshwater fish’
PCP * qutu ‘Aprion virescens, grey jobfish’ (Geraghty: * quto)
  Fij:    Wayan        otu            ‘grey  snapper, Aprion virescens‘
PPn *qutu ‘Aprion virescens, grey jobfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan       utu            ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Niuean       utu            ‘Sphyraena spp,, barracuda; Aprion virescens, grey jobfish’
  Pn:     E Uvean      Tutu          ‘A. virescens’
  Pn:     Rennellese Tutu            ‘large fish with a long body, probably green jobfish. A. virescens’
  Pn:     Pukapukan (pain) wutu ‘A. virescens, green jobfish’
  Pn:     Samoan       utu            ‘A. virescens‘
  Pn:     Tahitian     utu            ‘A. virescens"
  Pn:     Hawaiian     uku            ‘a deep-sea snapper, Aprion spp.’
>


[19] Pendau (WMP) utur ‘jobfish’ (Phil Quick pers. conun.) and Sangir utude ‘kind of deep-sea fish caught by
 line’ (ACD).

76    Meredith Osmond


    In the set below, the Andra, Kilivila and Temotu items reflect *b‘ apa rather than 'θi'awa.
I have no explanation for this variation. The Fijian and Polynesian reflexes show coalescence
of *-wa as -o.[20]

<
POc *bwa[p,w]a ‘Lutjanus spp,, snapper’
  Adm:     Andra          pwah             ‘L. ehrenbergi, snapper’
  Adm:     Titan          pwa              ‘Z. fulviflamma, blackspot sea-perch’
  NNG:     Yabem          (i)boa           ‘Terapon perch’
  PT:      Kilivila       bwava            ‘Z. fulviflamma’
  TM:      Burna          bavolo           ‘L. fuh`us`
  NCV:     Vera’a         bawa             ‘L. fulviflamma'’
  NCV:     Mwotlap        na-baw           ‘L. fulvus, L kasmira’
  NCV:     Olrat          paw              ‘L. monostigma’
  Fij:     Kadavu         bo               ‘Lutjanus adelii, yellow-banded snapper’
  Fij:     Wayan          bo               ‘Z. gibbus, paddletail’
  Pn:      Niuean         (palu) pb        ‘Aphareus furca, blue smalltooth jobfish’
cf. also:
   NNG: Bukawa            (i)bo?           ‘Terapon perch’
   NCV: Mota              pawa             ‘ Serranus’
>

    Lutjanidae and Lethrinidae are from the same sub-order of perch-like fishes. It is possible
that the next reconstruction included members of both families.

<
POc *sabutu ‘snapper (Lutjanus) or emperor (Lethrinus) sp. or spp.’
     Adm: Loniu           saput      'Lethrinus kallopterus, yellow-spotted emperor’ [Z. erythracanthus\
   PT:     Sinaugoro rabutu          ‘a reef fish’
   PT:     Motu        dabutu        ‘Acanlhopagrus berda, black bream’
PCP *(d,s)abutu ‘Lutjanus and Lethrinus spp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
   Fij:    Rotuman     saputu        ‘k.o. fish’
   Fij:    Wayan       ðdbutu        ‘generic for several species of Lutjanidae and Lethrinidae, including Lutjanus sehae, red emperor, and Lethrinus nebulosus, spangled emperor’
PPn * s(a,a)putu 'Lutjanus and Lethrinus spp.’ (Hooper: 'Lutjanus sp.’)
   Pn:     Tongan      hoputu        ‘Lethrinus miniatus, possibly also Lutjanus gibbus ’
   Pn:     Tikopia     saputu        ‘Lethrinus kallopterus ’ [Z. erythracanthus}
   Pn:     K’marangi hapoto          ‘Lutjanus rivulatus or Lethrinus ’
   Pn:     Tahitian    haputu        ‘L. rivulatus’
cf. also:
   MM: Teop            kabusi        ‘Lutjanus (generic)’
>

[20] For a another example of *-ira becoming -o see POc *maijewa (p.31).

                                                                                   Fish   77

<
POc *ta(Ra)qea ‘Lutjanus spp,, snapper, sea perch’
  Adm: Titan            dra          ‘Lutjanus rufolineatus, yellow-lined snapper, L. kasmira, yellow-and-blue seaperch’
  Adm:    Loniu         ta           ‘k.o. fish’
  Adm:    Lenkau        dak          ‘Lutjanus spp., seaperch’
  NNG:    Yabem         (i)te?       ‘k.o. snapper’
  NNG:    Bukawa        (i)ta?       ‘k.o. snapper’
  NOV:    Lakon         td-td        ‘L. kasmira'
PPn *taqea "Lutjanus sp,, probably L. gibbus' (Hooper reconstructs *taeqa)
   Pn:   E Uvean       tae?a          ‘L.fulviflamma, blackspot seaperch’ (metathesis)
  Pn:    Pukapukan tdea               ‘L. gibbus, paddle-tail snapper’
  Pn:    Tokelauan     tdea           ‘L. gibbus'
  Pn:    Tuvalu        taea           ‘L.fulvus, yellow-margined seaperch, L. gibbus, paddletail’
  Pn:    Mangarevan tdea              ‘L. gibbus'
  Pn:    Tahitian      tdea           ‘L. gibbus'
>

<
POc *tasiwa ‘Lutjanus spp.’
  Adm: Loniu           tus            ‘Lutjanus sebae, red emperor’
  PT:  Motu            tadiva         ‘ Lutjanus gib bus, paddle-tail’
  SES: Lau             ak ' asi (mai) ‘generic for four Lutjanus spp.’ (Akimichi) (reflects metathesised form *1awasi)
PCP *tasiwa ‘Lutjanus sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Rotuman       sasiva                            black spot seaperch’
PPn *tahiwa ‘L. monostigma, one spot seaperch’ (Hooper: *taqiwa)
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu tdiva            ‘Lutjanus sp.’
  Pn:    Pukapukan     tdiva           ‘L. monostigma'
  Pn:    Samoan        tdiva           "Lutjanus sp. when about 60 cm long
  Pn:    Samoan        taiva uli-uli ‘L. monostigma'
  Pn:    Tokelauan     tdiva           ‘L. monostigma, one spot seaperch’
  Pn:    Tahitian      tdiva-iva       ‘L. monostigma'
>

<
POc *p(a, e)ŋa ‘redLutjanus spp.’
  Adm: Titan          PeiJa             ‘Lutjanus .se/wc, red emperor, L. sanguineus, seaperch’
PPn *farja-mea ‘red Lutjanus spp., especially L. bohar, red bass or red snapper (-mea
  ‘reddish’) (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan      faŋa-mea          ‘L. bohar'
  Pn:     Niuean       (palu) faŋa-mea ‘Etelis carbunculus, ruby snapper’
  Pn:     E Uvean     faŋa-mea          ‘growth term of L. bohar'
  Pn:     Tokelauan faŋa-mea            ‘L. bohar'
  Pn:     Tuamotuan faŋa-mea            ‘L. bohar'
>

78     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *k(i,e)pV ‘Lutjanus spp,, sea perch’
  Adm:      Penchai      kip          ‘Lutjanus spp., sea-perch’
  Adm:      Lou          kip          ‘Lutjanus spp., sea-perch’
  Adm:      Lenkau       kep          ‘Lutjanus spp., sea-perch’
  Adm:      Andra        kih          ‘L. bohar, red bass’
  Adm:      Loniu        keh          ‘sea perch spp.’
  NNG:      Takia        kef-kef      ‘black reef fish’
cf. also:
   Pn:      E Uvean      kivi         ‘L. bohar ’ (for ``kifi)
>

    Also reconstructed are PCP *batisai ‘Lutjanus monostigma’, PCP *k wak(a,e) ‘Lutjanus
monostigma'’ (Geraghty pp. 152-153), PPn *sawane ‘Lutjanus kasmira, blue-lined sea perch’
and PPn * taqaqu 1 Lutjanus spp. including L. vaigiensis [L.fulvus] and probably other yellow
or yellow-red species’ (Hooper pp.210-211 and A. Hooper & Huntsman (1991:120).

    PPn *palu is included here with supporting evidence as an unusual case. Hooper and
Huntsman (1991:119-127) write that in Polynesia the two fishes which are associated most
strongly with the name palu are unrelated: the oilfish Ruvettus pretiosus and the deep sea
snappers (ruby snapper Etelis carbunculus, flower snapper Pristipomoides zonatus, big-eyed
snapper Pristipomoides argyrogrammicus, and the small-toothed jobfish Aphareus furcaj.
These fishes share deep water habitats, being caught at depths of 200 metres or more by
handline fishing, with the long line carrying a series of spaced hooks. The technique requires
great strength and skill, and Hooper quotes Roger Green as believing that it was probably
a late Samoic-Outlier innovation, depending as it does on suitable deepwater environments
where the fish can be found, calm water, adequate tackle and appropriate ocean-going canoe
skills. We have no evidence that POc speakers fished at this depth. See §56 for Gempylidae,
snake mackerels, oilfish.

<
PPn *palu ‘oilfish; deep-sea snapper’ (Hooper: ‘Ruvettuspretiosus, oilfish’)
     Pn:    Tongan        palu         ‘k.o. fish’
     Pn:    Niuean        palu         ‘generic for a number of fish spp., mainly snapper and jobfish’ (many compounds withpalu as first element)
     Pn:    Niuean        palu teh     ‘Ruvettuspretiosus, castor oil fish’ (lit. younger sibling of palu’)
     Pn:    Niuatoputapu palu          ‘deep sea snapper’
     Pn:    Pukapukan    palu          ‘Ruvettuspretiosus', also first element in terms for a number of mainly deep-sea fish spp. including snapper and jobfish’
     Pn:    Samoan        palu         ‘k.o. fish, Aphareus, up to a metre long’ (jobfish)
     Pn:    Tokelauan     palu         ‘Ruvettuspretiosus’ (oilfish)
     Pn:    K’marangi     palu         ‘Aphareus’
     Pn:    Tikopia       paru         ‘several kinds of large sea fish of reddish colour, including golden-lined sea perch and snapper’
>

                                                                                      Fish    79


2.31 Monocle breams, threadfin breams, sea breams, butterfly breams (Nemipteridae)

Most are brilliantly coloured, inhabiting sand and rubble areas around reefs. The flesh is of
good flavour (Munro 1967: p.308). One weakly supported reconstruction is proposed.

<
POc *marotV 'Nemipterus spp.’
  Adm: Titan           maros           'Nemipterus spp., butterfly bream’
  MM: Nehan            marot           ‘two-lined monocle bream; silver biddy’
>


2.32 Threadfins (Polynemidae)

These are a small family frequenting sandy shores and muddy estuaries, and at times, coral
reefs. They are known chiefly for the free filaments in the pectoral fin, a feature which is
reflected in its name as a reduplicated term for ‘beard’. They also have a projecting snout and
large adipose eyelids, which reflect adaptation to muddy environments where sense of touch
compensates for loss of vision. The flesh has excellent flavour and texture (Munro 1967: p. 189).

    Our only reconstruction is at PPn level, PPn *kumi-kumia 'Polydactylus sexfihs. P. ple-
beius`. threadfin’ (from POc *kumi ‘beard’ (Hooper p.204). Hooper notes that the Tokelauan
word for /1 sexfilis is ava-ava. also meaning ‘beard’.

    Misima (PT) has a term kum-kum ‘generic for damselfish, Chromis spp. and others’, considered a chance resemblance.


2.33 Moj arras, silver biddies (Gerreidae)

The moj arras are small silvery fish with very protractile jaws, superficially resembling pouters
(Leiognathidae). They move in large schools, mostly along sandy shores (Munro 1967: p.331).

<
PROc *matu 'Gerres spp., silver biddy’
  NCal: Iaai          (o)mok           'Gerres sp.’
  Mic: Marshallese mec-mec             'Lethrinus microdon. snapper
PCP * matu 'Gerres' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Rotuman     mafii         ‘k.o. fish’
  Fij:    Wayan       matu          'Gerres spp.’
  Fij:    Bauan       matu          ‘Gerridae’
PPn *matu 'Gerres spp., mojarras’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan       matu           ‘k.o. fish like a silver bream’
  Pn:   Samoan       matu           'Gerres sp., when about 15 cm
  Pn:   W Uvean      matu           'Gerres sp.’
>

80   Meredith Osmond


2.34 Sweetlips, javelinfishes (Haemulidae, formerly Plectorhynchidae and Pomadasyidae)

These moderate-sized fish inhabit coastal waters around coral reefs. Some, particularly the
juveniles, are strikingly marked and brightly coloured, but colour pattern varies greatly with
age. The flesh flavour is good (Munro 1967: p.315).

    Some of the following forms attributed to POc *(k,q)umutuR show loss of the first syllable.
The only languages which disambiguate *k- from *q- are Nakanai, where *k is reflected
and Wayan, where *q is reflected. The Gela term is apparently borrowed from a Northwest
 Solomonic language as it retains final consonant with echo vowel.

<
POc *(k,q)umutuR ‘Plectorhinchus spp., sweetlips’
  Adm:      Penchai     kumut         ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  Adm:      Lenkau      kumut         ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  Adm:      Lou         kumut         ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  Adm:      Titan       kamot         ‘Pomadasyidae, sweet lip (generic)’
  Adm:      Nali        konrwet       ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  NNG:      Mutu        umut          ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  NNG:      Kove        mutur(iŋo)    ‘P. chaetodonoides, harlequin sweetlip’
  MM:       Patpatar    a-umut        ‘many kinds spotted sweetlips’ (a article)
  MM:       Nakanai     kumu          ‘demoiselle’
  MM:       Nehan       mutur         ‘sweetlip’
  SES:      Gela        kometulu      ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
  SES:      Lau         mumu          ‘Plectorhinchus spp., sweetlip’ (for ^lunni)
  Fij:      Wayan       umotu         ‘P. flavomaeulalus'
>

<
POc *lau ‘Plectorhinchus spp., banded sweetlips’
   Adm:     Lenkau      lou           ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
   Adm:     Lou         lo            ‘sweetlip’
   Adm:     Loniu       low           ‘sweetlip or sea bream’
   NNG:     Manam       lau           ‘banded sweetlip’
cf. also:
   Adm:     Titan       loloi         ‘Plectorhinchus spp.’
   NCV:     NE Ambae    lulu(kala)    ‘oriental sweetlip’
>


2.35 Grunters, terapon perches (Teraponidae)

Teraponidae are small Indo-Pacific fish occurring in shallow tidal, brackish or fresh water.
Species differ greatly in proportions and colour, some plain and others conspicuously banded.
Some species make grunting noises (Munro 1967: p.320).

    There is a PPn reconstruction, * kawa-kawa ‘Terapon jarbua, crescent perch’, based on
Niuatoputapu and E Uvean kava-kava, Samoan ?ava-?ava, all ‘Teraponjarbua but none for
a higher order interstage. POc *kawa-kcrwa ‘rock cod, grouper’ (§22) is considered unrelated.

                                                                                                 Fish     81


2.36 Emperors and large-eyed breams (Lethrinidae)

  Figure 2.18 Lethrinus variegatus,
           variegated emperor

Emperors inhabit shallow coastal waters
around rocky outcrops and coral reefs, moving
in schools. Most are fairly brightly coloured
in shades of red and green. Their flesh is excellent (Munro 1967: p.324). Four genera are identified, Lethrinus, Gnathodentex, Gymnocra-
nius and Monotaxis. We have seven POc reconstructions, but in a number of instances
their reflexes have come to be applied to
different referents in daughter languages. In
such cases reconstructions are simply labelled
Lethrinidae ox Lethrinus spp.

     In the following set there has been confusion with reflexes of POc * (k,q)ulapi) ‘parrotfish’ (§47) in Tokelauan.

<
PMP *kulambar ‘Gnathodentex, Scolopsis’ (Blust2002: PWMP)
POc *kulabo ‘Lethrinidae’
  Adm: Lenkau           kulom               ‘Lethrinidae, emperor’
  Adm: Lou              kulom               ‘Monotaxis grandoculis, hump-nose sea bream’
  Adm: Titan            kulap               ‘Lethrinidae, sea bream’
  Fij:   Lau            kulabo              ‘Lethrinidae sp.’
PPn *kulapo ‘fish sp. ’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan        kulapo             ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Niuean         kulapu             ‘Paracaesio sp., k.o. snapper’
  Pn:    E Uvean        kulapo             ‘Lethrinus nematacanthus, threadfin emperor’ [/.. genivittatus]
  Pn:      Tokelauan       kulapo          ‘Scants harid, juvenile’ [Hipposcarus harid]
cf. also:
   Fij:   Rotuman          ulapu            ‘k.o. fish’ (0- for f?-)
   Pn:    Samoan           ulapo            Tighter coloured species of genus Scams (parrotfish) when about 15 cm long’ (0-for f?-)
>

    Western Oceanic reflexes in the next set show unexpected loss of final syllable.

<
POc *kasika ‘large emperor, Lethrinus sp.’
  Adm:     Titan           Aaw             ‘L. miniatus21
  Adm:     Andra           Aaw             ‘emperor, five Lethrinus spp.’
  PT:      Sinaugoro       an              ‘a reef fish’
  PT:      Motu            adia            ‘Aprion virescens, green jobfish, Lethrinus microdon, small-tooth emperor’ (Oram)
  MM:      Teop           ahi-ahi        ‘Lethrinella miniata, long-nosed emperor [Lethrinus miniatus or Z. olivaceus]
  SES:     Kahua      yas i ya           "L. elongatus" [Z. olivaceus]
  NCV:     Mwotlap    na-wawsɪ           "L. harak" [thumbprint emperor]
  NCV:     Dorig      wawsiy             ‘Z. harak"
  Mic:     Mokilese   katek              ‘k.o. emperor’
  Mic:     Satawalese yoetik             ‘Lethrinus sp.’
  Fij:     Rotuman    ?asiʔa             ‘snapper’
  Fij:     Wayan      kaðika             ‘L. variegatus"
>

[21] Lethrinus miniatus is the trumpet emperor, a different fish from L. olivaceus. the long-nosed emperor, al beit one with which it is often confused. L. elongatus is a synonym for L. olivaceus, 'long-nosed emperor’
 [Lethrinus miniatus orL. olivaceus!].

82    Meredith Osmond

<
POc *surup ‘Lethrinus spp.’
  MM:      Tolai          urup            ‘k.o. large fish’
  MM:      Lihir          euru(bian)      ‘Lethrinus harak'
  SES:     Gela           huru            ‘k.o. fish with scarlet splashes on fins, head and snout’ (Fox); ‘Lethrinus harak and L. obsoletus’ (Foale)
     SES:  Lau            suru            ‘small sp. of reef fish (Lethrinidae); generic for Lethrinidae? (Akimichi)’
     SES:  Kwaio          sulu            ‘k.o. fish used in ritual’
     SES:  Longgu         suru            ‘Z. elongatus, long-nosed emperor’ \L. olivaceus]
     SES:  To’aba’ita     suru (k'' atoa) ‘L. elongatus" (sum generic; k''atoa ‘digging stick’ The shape of L. elongatus is distinctive and the specific names often refer to the pointed snout.)
     SES:  ’Are’are       sum (horau) ‘Z. elongatus‘ \L. olivaceus]
     SES:  Ulawa          suru (wotola) "L. elongatus" \L. olivaceus]
>

    Despite their similarity to items reflecting POc *surup, members of the set below
apparently reflect a separate etymon, since the sound correspondences of the two sets cannot be
reconciled.

<
POc *susul ‘Lethrinus spp.’
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) susul                   ‘emperor’
  NNG: Mutu         sul(ŋab)                ‘Lethrinus variegatus, variegated emperor’
  NNG: Mutu          sul(xil)                ‘L. elongatus [Z. olivaceus ], Z. ramak [L. obsoletus], L. nematacanthus [Z. genivittatus]"
  NCV:     Vera’a           (wu)sulo        ‘L. harak’22
  NCV:     Dorig            (w)sol          ‘L. miniatus’
  NCV:     Lakon            (wo)hol         ‘L. miniatus’
  NCV:     Uripiv           no-jil          ‘emperor’
  NCV:     S Efate          n-sul           ‘emperor’
  SV:      Anejom           ni-θiθ           ‘Z. mahsena’
  NCal:    Nemi             diruk           ‘L. miniatus"
  NCal:    Nyelayu          dim             "L. miniatus"
   Fij:   Wayan               ðuðu              "L. variegatus"
cf. also:
   Mic: Carolinian            ulu-ul            ‘L. elongatus, long-nosed emperor’ [/.. olivaceus]
>

[22] NCV items are due to John Lynch (pers. comm.)

                                                                                                      Fish     83

<
POc *[oka]oka ‘k.o. fish, possibly Lethrinus spp. (ACD)
  PT:      Bwaidoga         oka               ‘fish sp.’
  MM:      Tolai            ok                ‘fish sp.’
  Mic:     Kiribati         oka-oka           ‘reef fish, scavenger fish, Lethrinus obsoletus
  Pn:      K’marangi        oko-oko           ‘scavenger fish, Lethrinus miniates‘
>

<
POc *koraij ‘emperor, Lethrinidae’
  Adm:     Titan            kolaŋ             ‘emperor, Lethrinidae’
  Adm:     Nali             kolan             ‘emperor, Lethrinidae’
  Adm:     Loniu            walaŋ             ‘emperor sp.’
  Adm:     Andra            oleŋ              ‘Lethrinus semicinctus, reticulated emperor’
  MM:      Marovo           kora-koraŋa       ‘small emperor’
>

    It is possible that the items in the set below are related to those above through a borrowing
in early Oceanic.

<
POc *kawaijo ‘k.o. fish, probably Lethrinus sp.’
  MM: Nehan           aŋ-uaŋ13
  SES: Lau            dik'`'aŋo      ‘k.o. large fish’
  SES: Sa’a           awaŋo          ‘k.o. fish eaten only by older men’ (0- for f?-)
PCP * kawaijo ‘Lethrinus nebulosus ’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Wayan        kawaŋo         ‘L. nebulosus, spangled emperor’
  Pn:    Tongan       koaŋo          ‘k.o. fish like snapper, but bluish in colour’
  Pn:    E Uvean      kuaŋo          ‘L. xanthocheilus, yellowlip emperor’
>

<
PEOc *n(u,o)sct ‘Lethrinus sp.’
  SES: Kahua    nuta                          ‘L. miniates"
  NCV: NE Ambae noha                          ‘Lethrinus spp.’
>

    Also reconstructed are PCP *ijujula ‘Lethrinus elongates", PCP *kabatiko "Lethrinus
sp.’, and PCP *(m,b)u, PPn *mu ‘Monotaxisgrandoculis, large-eyed sea bream’ (Geraghty
p. 153, Hooper p.212). POc *sabutu ‘Lutjanus oxLethrinus sp.’ has also been reconstructed
(see cognate set in §30)


[23] Nehan aŋ-uaŋ is a reduplicated reflex. As POc *ir is lost in NW Solomonic languages, I infer that -uaŋ reflects
 an earlier interstage *kuarjo ‘emperor’.

84   Meredith Osmond


2.37 Goatfishes (Mullidae)

 Figure 2.19 Parupeneus signahis,
           black-spotted goatfish

The Mullidae have large scales and two barbels
at the chin. Small to moderate in size and usually red or gold, they are bottom-dwellers, often
occurring in large schools (Munro 1967: p.334). Genera include Mulloidichthys, Parupeneus, Upeneus
and Pseudupeneus. Both in Andra (Adm) (McEldowney 1995) and Kapingamarangi (Pn) (Lieber 1994),
goatfish are reported as particularly numerous in stone fishtrap catches. Most species
are considered good eating. We have five POc reconstructions, one of which is traceable with
consistent referent back to PAn, and one which probably refers
to a growth stage.

<
PAn *Ciqctw ‘goatfish’ (Zorc 1994, Blust 2002)
PMP *tiqaw ‘goatfish’ (ACD)
POc *tiqo ‘goatfish sp. or spp.’
  Adm: Loniu            //h’         ‘goatfish sp.’
  Adm: Seimat           tio-ti       ‘barbelled fish four to five feet in length’
  NNG: Gedaged          tik          ‘k.o. goatfish’ (Mueller 1985)
  NNG: Bing             tiy          ‘goatfish, commonly found in shallow waters and bays’
  PT:    Motu          sio           ‘Parupeneus spp.’ (Oram n.d.)
  PT:    Roro          sio           ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:    Gumawana siwo-siwo          ‘goatfish’
  MM: Nehan            tio           ‘k.o. goatfish’
  MM: Teop             sio           ‘Parupeneus spp.’
  SES: Gela            tio           ‘Parupeneus spp.’
  SES: Arosi           si?o          ‘k.o. fish with barbels’ (for f,sz`o)
  NCV: Mota            tio           ‘k.o. fish with barbels’
  NCV: Mwotlap         tɪ            Mulloidichthysflavolineatus, y el 1 owstri pe goatfi sh
  NCV: Raga            sio           M. flavolineatus ’
  Mic: Kiribati        tewe          ‘k.o. barbelled fish, goatfish’24
  Mic: Marshallese co                ‘Parupeneus barberinus, goatfish’
  Mic: Mokilese        ce            ‘k.o. goatfish’
  Mic: Carolinian sow                ‘lagoon fish, perhaps goatfish’
  Mic: Woleaian        sowe          ‘k.o. fish’
PCP *teu ‘k.o. goatfish’ (Geraghty 2010)
  Fij:   Nadroga       sen           ‘goatfish
  Fij:   Bauan         deu           ‘goatfish
>

[24] Bender et al. reconstruct PCMic *tawu ‘a fish', but add 'the WOL and KIR forms are incompatible and
 probably both do not belong in this set'.

                                                                                                     Fish     85

<
PPn *wete ‘k.o. goatfish, including Miulloidichthys’ (Geraghty 2010)[25]
  Pn:       Tongan          vete              ‘goatfish, Mulloidichthys’
  Pn:       Rennellese      bete              ‘goatfish’
  Pn:       Tikopia         vete              ‘goatfish’
  Pn:       Hawaiian        weke              ‘Mulloidichthys sp.’
>

<
POc *mwacasi ‘goatfish’ [26]
  Adm:     Lou              m''arase         ‘goatfish’
  Adm:     Nali             m‘ alasei        ‘goatfish’
  Adm:     Loniu            m''asas          ‘goatfish sp.’(-5- for f-2-)
  Adm:     Penchai          nParacei         ‘goatfish’ (Akimichi) (-r- for f-/-)
  Adm:     Lenkau           m''asei          ‘goatfish’ (-0- for f-/z-)
  MM:      Lihir            mawis            ' Parapeneus bifasciatus, doublebar goatfish’ [P. trifasciatus] (-u - for f-s-)
  MM: Nehan                 maheh            ‘goatfish’
  SES: ’Are’are             matasi           ‘mullet fish’ (goatfish are sometimes known as red mullet)
  SES: Lau        matasi                     ‘goatfish (generic)’
  SES: Sa’a       matasi                     ‘small shore fish’
  NCV: Vera’a     m''asa                     ‘AL flavolineatus, yellow-stripe goatfish’
  NCV: Lakon      mwah                       ‘AL flavolineatus’
  Mic: Kiribati   mdwa                       ‘goatfish’
PCP *v aðaðiLParupeneus sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij: Rotuman    vasasi        ‘fish with small eyes and two beard-like antennae under its mouth’
>

<
POc *suci-suci ‘goatfish’
  NNG:      Manam           sua-sua           ‘goatfish, catfish’
  MM:       Marovo          sua(ra)           ‘generic for goatfish’
  NCV:      S Efate         sus               ‘goatfish’
  SV:       Kwamera         (ie)su            ‘goatfish’
  NCal:     Iaai            (wa)si            ‘AL flavolineatus'’
  Fij:      Wayan           ðii-ðu            ‘Parapeneus spp,, goatfish’
>

    The PPn reconstruction in the next set appears to be an old compound, but the meaning
of *-ama is unknown.


[25] Geraghty (2010) argues that PPn *wete may be a regular reflex of PCP *teu involving the following changes:
 (i) lowering of the final vowel to *o. (ii) breaking of the vowel o as we, and (iii) metathesis to *wete. He has
 tracked the same series of changes in PCP *deu ‘unravel’ > PPn *wete ‘untie’.

[26] Admiralties terms apparently reflect Proto Admiralty *m wacasei with some irregularities. Most other items
 reflect POc *m wacasi.

86   Meredith Osmond

<
POc *kalo ‘growth stage of goatfish’
  Adm: Andra             kale-el    ‘Upeneus, goatfish’ (unexplained vowels)
  MM: Nakanai            kalo-kalo  Tittle fish’
  Pn:  Tuvalu            kalo       ‘Mulloides auriflamma'’ (golden-banded goatfish) [Mulloidichthys vanicolensis]
PPn *kaloama ‘growth stage of goatfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan      kaloama        ‘young goatfish’
  Pn:   Niuean       kaloama        ‘yellowstripe goatfish’
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu kaloama        ‘middle growth stage of goatfish’ (tusia ?)
  Pn:   Pukapukan    kaloma         ‘young goatfish’
  Pn:    Samoan      ?aloama        ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Tikopia     karoama        ‘small stage of goatfish’
>

   The zero reflex of initial *5- in the Ponapean, Mokilese and Lau Fijian reflexes below
suggests that they are borrowings from a Polynesian language.

<
POc *sapulu ‘goatfish spp.’
   PT:    Motu        dahuru        ‘k.o. fish’ (-r- for f-/-)
   Mic: Ponapean      epil          ‘M. vanicolensis, yellowfin goatfish
   Mic: Mokilese      opil          ‘goatfish’
   Fij:   Lau         yavulu        ‘Mulloidichthys vanicolensis'
PPn *hafulu ‘growth stage of goatfish’ (Hooper: ‘goatfish, most likely Parupeneus and Upeneus spp.’)
   Pn:    Niuean      hafulu        ‘goatfish’
   Pn:    Samoan      afulu         ‘M. vanicolensis, juvenile’
   Pn:    Tuvalu      afulu         ‘yellow-banded goatfish’
   Pn:    Tikopia     afuru         ‘goatfish, larger stage of vete ’
   Pn:    Tahitian    ahum          ‘goatfish spp.’
   Pn:    Hawaiian    ldhulu-hulu ‘ Upeneusporphyreus, juvenile’
cf. also:
   MM: Marovo         ululo         ‘Parupeneus spp., small types’
>

<
PWOc *p wi(r,R)itu(r,R,s) ‘k.o. goatfish’
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) biritou             ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:  Mi sima      pilihid             ‘generic for goatfishes, Mulloidichthys spp., Parupeneus spp., Upeneus spp.’
  MM:     Patpatar        birite        ‘Parupeneus jansenii. rosy goatfish’
>

    Also reconstructed are Proto North Vanuatu *taijitaiji ‘goatfish’ (Francois 2005:500),
PCP *oje ‘Mullidae’ and PCP *matu-xurau ‘Parupeneus sp.’ (Geraghty p. 154). Hooper
(1994: p.214) lists PPn *memea Mulloides sp., goatfish’ (mea ‘reddish’), *malili ‘goatfish taxon’
and PNPn '^moaŋa ‘Parupeneus spp.’.

                                                                                     Fish   87


2.38 Sweepers (Pempheridae)

Sweepers are a small family of nocturnal fishes that spend daylight hours in caves and crevices
of the reef. They sometimes form large aggregations which disperse after dusk and feed on
zooplankton during the night (Allen & Swainston 1993:58). They are dusky silver or bright
red, most with very large eyes (Munro 1967: p.349).

    No POc reconstruction has been made. A lower level reconstruction includes PCP *manivi
‘Pempheris sp.’ (Geraghty p.155), PPn *manifi ‘Pempheris oualensis' (Hooper p.213) (cf.
POc * manipis ‘thin’- vol.2, p.202).


2.39 Drummers, rudderfishes (Kyphosidae)

      Figure 2.20   Kyphosus
  cinerascens, ashen drummer

Drummers or rudderfishes are a small family. Fishes
are typically small, finely and closely scaled, and dull
in colour. Most species are pelagic, often found under
floating medusae. They are herbivorous fish, feeding
chiefly on algae and seaweed. The flesh is regarded as
edible but of poor quality (Munro 1967: p.352).

<
POc *maka(o, u)r ‘Kyphosidae, drummer’
  Adm:    Titan         makao         ‘Kyphosidae’
  Adm:    Penchai       makau         ‘drummer’
  Adm:    Nali          makao         ‘drummer’
  NNG:    Kove          makau         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:     Nakanai       makau         ‘bream-like fish’
  NCV:    S Efate       (wak)makur    ‘Kyphosidae’ (yvak ‘pig’)
>

    In the next set, PPn *ranue is proposed rather than * nanue. This would have become anue
in Pre-Tongic (where r > 0), with later loss of initial a-. In PNPn *ranue > *lanue by regular
sound change, then *nanue by assimilation.

<
PROc *r(a,e)nu(a,e) ‘Kyphosus, rudderfish’
  Mic: Marshallese rənna             ‘Kyphosus vaigiensis, Waigeu drummer
  Mic: Carolinian rel                ‘rudderfish’
  Mic: Satawalese rən                ‘Kyphosus spp., drummer’
PCP *r(a,e)nu(a,e) ‘Kyphosus ’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Lau          renua          ‘Kyphosus’
PPn *ranue ‘Kyohosidae’
  Pn:    Tongan       nue            ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Niuean       nue            ‘rudderfish or drummer, Kyphosus sp.’
  Pn:    E Uvean      nue            ‘Kyphosus vaigiensis ’ (possibly loan from Tongan)
  Pn:    Pukapukan nanue             ‘Kyphosus sp.’
  Pn:    Samoan       nanue          ‘Kyphosus sp.’
  Pn:    Tokelauan nanue             ‘K cinerascens, ashen drummer’
  Pn:      Tikopia        nanue        ‘K. cinerascens'
  Pn:      Tahitian       nanue        ‘Kyphosus sp.’
  Pn:      Hawaiian       nanue, nenue ‘rudder or pilotfish’
>

88   Meredith Osmond


2.40 Silver batfishes, diamondfishes (Monodactylidae)

These are small, deep-bodied, compressed fishes, distinguished by their diamond shape and
silvery colour and superficially resembling the juveniles of batfishes. They inhabit shallow
coastal waters, preferring brackish water and sometimes penetrating into fresh water (Munro
p.348). No widespread cognate sets have been found.


2.41 Batfishes (Ephippidae (formerly Platacidae))

Allen & Swainston (1993:58) describe the batfishes of the genus Platax as among the most
graceful of coral reef fishes. They are characterised by long, flowing fins, particularly in their
juvenile and sub-adult stages. Adults have almost round bodies. Young ones resemble a leaf
in colour and can sink inertly through the water, becoming difficult to see. Batfish are often
extremely tame and curious. They are found both on sheltered inshore reefs and on outer
 slopes.

<
PMP *buna ‘batfish’ (Blust 2002)
POc *bunaR ‘batfish, Platax sp. or spp,, possibly Naso sp. or spp.’ [27]
  Adm:     Seimat         pun              ‘large flat white pelagic fish’
  Adm:     Aua            puna             ‘large flat fish sp.’
  Adm:     Andra          (ku)punu-pun     ‘Platax’ (irregular vowel)
  NNG:     Mutu           bunar            ‘'Platax spp.’
  NNG:     Kove           buna-buna        ‘batfish’
  PT:      Gumawana       bunali           ‘batfish’
  PT:      Motu           buna             ‘Psenes arafurensis, eyebrowfish’ (Oram)
  MM:      Nehan          bunar            ‘Platax teira, round-faced batfish’
  MM:      Teop           burara           ‘batfish (generic)’ (-r- for f-w-: consonant assimilation)
  TM:      Burna      bunero               ‘batfish, Platax sp.’
  Mic:     Mokilese   pwun                 ‘batfish’
  Pn:      Rennellese puna                 ‘general name for Moorish idols, batfish and some high, flat coral fish with extended fins’
  Fij:     Wayan          vuna-vuna        ‘juvenile phase of seabat or angelfish, Platax pinnatus ’ (for f buna)
>


[27] Disambiguated from POc *buna(r,R) by evidence from Palauan bits and Pendau bunag (R. Blust pers. comm.)

                                                                                     Fish   89


2.42 Butterflyfishes, coralfishes (Chaetodontidae)

Butterflyfish are among the most readily recognised of coral reef fishes due to their graceful
shapes and wide range of brilliant colour patterns. Colours are usually combinations of
black, red, orange, yellow and white. The fishes are diurnal and some species are extremely
territorial, inhabiting one or more heads of plate coral. At dusk they retreat to reef crevices
where they remain motionless until dawn (Allen & Swainston 1993:60).

Figure 2.21 Chaetodon sp., coralfish

     Both Hooper (1994: p. 188) and Hviding (1996:192)
have commented on the fact that in Oceanic languages butterflyfish, coralfish and angelfish are
sometimes lumped together under one generic
term, although angelfish belong in a separate
family, Pomacanthidae. Chaetodontidae are of
little value for food, and there is apparently little
point in distinguishing species or growth stages.
I have two POc reconstructions, which presumably contrasted in meaning, but reflexes of both
 *bebek and *tipi-tipi have in some languages
been used as the generic form for butterflyfish,
coralfish, and perhaps others, and I have been
unable to differentiate between their meanings. Although the final * -k of bebek is not
supported by the evidence given here, there can be no doubt that the same word in POc referred
to both ‘butterfly’ and ‘butterflyfish’.

<
POc *bebek ‘generic for Chaetodontidae, coralfish and butterflyfish’ (also ‘butterfly’; ch.7, §3)
  Adm: Penchai       pwep          ‘Chaetodontidae, coralfish’
  Adm: Nali          pep           ‘Chaetodontidae, coralfish’
  PT:    Motu         bebe         ‘Chaetodon spp.’ (Oramn.d.) (kau-bebe ‘butterfly’)
  MM: Bola            bebe         ‘butterflyfish’
  MM: Nakanai         bebe(o)      ‘k.o. fish’ (bebe ‘butterfly’)
  SES: Kwaio          bebe         ‘tropical reef fish, including several species such as Moorish idol’
  SES: Lau            bebe         ‘generic for coralfish, Chaetodon', butterfly’
  NCV: Mwotlap        bem          ‘Chaetodon lineolatus, lined butterflyfish’
  NCV: Lakon         pep           ‘Chaetodon (generic)’
  Mic: Kiribati       (i)pwa-pwa   ‘generic for coralfish, butterflyfish and some batfish’
>

<
POc *tipi-tipi ‘Chaetodontidae’
  MM: Teop             (ke)tepe-tepe ‘coralfish (generic)’
  NCV: Mota            tivi-tivi      ‘Chaetodon"
  NCV: Dorig           tiv-tiv        ‘Chaetodon spp.’
PCP * tivi-tivi ‘Chaetodon spp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:      Way an     tivi-tivi      ‘butterflyfish (generic)’
PPn ^tifi-tifi ‘butterflyfish (generic)’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Niuean          tifi-tifi       ‘Chaetodon sp., butterflyfish, edible’
  Pn:     Samoan          tifi-tifi       ‘general name for Chaetodontidae’
  Pn:     Tikopia         tifi-tifi       ‘angelfish or butterflyfish’
  Pn:     K’marangi tihi-tihi             ‘Chaetodon spp., Heniochus spp., butterflyfishes’
>

90   Meredith Osmond


2.43 Angelfishes (Pomacanthidae)

Angelfish are small to moderate-sized marine fish, frequenting coral reefs. They are close
relatives of butterflyfish and the two families are sometimes included within the same term in
local nomenclature. Like butterflyfish, they have extremely brilliant colours and complicated
patterns. However, they can be distinguished by possession of a prominent cheek spine which
can inflict a painful wound if handled carelessly. Some undergo astonishing changes in colour
and markings with age. Larger ones are valued as food (Munro 1967: p.371).

<
POc *buRi-buRi ‘k.o. fish, possibly angelfish’
  NNG:    Gedaged        bid-bid       ‘bluish-grey marine fish about 10 cm long’
  PT:     Molima         bidi-bidi     ‘emperor angel fish’
  SES:    Gela           bidi-bidi     ‘fish sp.’
  NCV:    Uripiv         ni-Bi         ‘angelfish, Pomacanthus sexstriatus'
>


2.44 Damselfishes or demoiselles, anemonefishes, sergeant-majors, pullers (Pomacentridae)

  Figure 2.22 Adudefduf sp., sergeant-major

These are very active brilliant little fishes of the
coral reefs, seeking shelter among branches of
coral and in crevices. They are often left in tide
pools. They are trim and shapely, greatly suggesting butterflyfish in mode of life. Coloration
is highly variable, ranging from grey to yellow to
blue. Genera include Pomacentrus (damselfish),
Amphiprion (anemonefish, clownfish), Abudef-
duf (sergeant-majors) and Chromis (pullers), and
there are dozens of species. Two POc tenns are
reconstructed, the second one, ^taku-takuŋ, possibly the term for juveniles, those of many species
being distinctively marked by a yellow body with bright blue stripes (Allen & Swainston 1993:74).

<
PMP *mutu ‘damselfish’ (ACD)
POc *mutu ‘Pomacentridae, particularly Abudefiduf
  MM:    Nakanai       mutu        ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:    Bola          mutu        ‘k.o. fish’
  SV:    Anejom       n-m‘ ot(anyat)             ‘Abudefduf sp.’
  Mic:   Satawalese    mmæs        'Abudefduf and Amblyglphidodon spp sergeant-majors’
PPn *mutu[mutu] ‘Pomacentridae’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan      mutu-mutu      ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   Niuean      mutu-mutu      ‘small grey fish with dark vertical bands, also known as kdmuta ’
  Pn:   E Uvean     mutu-mutu      ‘ Abudefdufsordidus ’
  Pn:   Rennellese mutu            ‘general name for sergeant majors and pullers (damselfish)’
  Pn:   Samoan      mutu           ‘Abudefduf sp.’
  Pn:   Tikopia     mutu           ‘Pomacentridae, coralfish, small, striped, edible
  Pn:   Anutan      mutu           ‘Pomacentridae (generic)’
  Pn:   Maori       mutu-mutu      ‘fish prized for its delicacy’
>

                                                                                    Fish    91


    Reflexes of POc *taku-takui], reconstructed below, have been reduplicated in various
ways. Gumawana and PPn both reflect *t(o,u)kukuij, where the first syllable, *t(o,u)- is per
haps itself a reduction of *taku-. Bing and Takia both reflect full reduplication after loss of
*-k- Only Teop reflects the more usual Oceanic reduplication in ^taku-takuŋ. Central Pacific
terms show assimilation of the first vowel *a > u.

<
POc *taku-takwj ‘small coral fish, damselfish or similar’
  NNG: Bing            tuŋ-tuoŋ           ‘sergeant-major, green and white’
  NNG: Takia           doŋa-doŋ           ‘Pomacentrus littoralis. brown demoiselle
  PT:     Gumawana     tokuku             ‘angelfish’
  MM: Teop             tagu-tagun         ‘angelfish (generic)’
PCP * dukuku ‘Pomacentridae’ (Geraghty: *duku)
  Fij:    Rotuman      tu-tulu            ‘small black fish’
  Fij:    Kadavu       duxi-duxi          ‘Abudefduf’
PPn *tukuku ‘Pomacentridae’
  Pn:     Tongan       tukuku             ‘k.o. fish, very small’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu tukuku (or tokuku) ‘Abudefduf Pomacentrus and Chromis’
  Pn:     Pukapukan    tutuku             ‘Dascyllus spp.’
  Pn:     Samoan       tu?u?u             ‘certain small queer fishes of genera Ahiidefduf., Pomacentrus and Chromis ’
  Pn:     K’marangi    takuku             ‘Abudefduf sp., blue-banded damselfish’
>


2.45 Hawkfishes (Cirrhitidae)

Many Cirrhitidae are richly coloured and abundant about coral reefs and rocks. They are
solitary and sedentary, frequently seen sitting on top of coral heads, from which they make
quick short darts for food (Munro 1967: p.442). Two reconstructions are possible at PPn level,
*patuki (Geraghty p.157) and *qulu-tuki (Hooper p.206). Their association with *tuki ‘to
beat, pound’, is not understood.

92   Meredith Osmond


                 Figure 2.23   Cheilinus undulatus, double-headed Maori wrasse


2.46 Wrasses, tuskfishes (Labridae)

There are over 400 species of Labridae, falling into some 60 genera which include Anampses,
Bodianus, Cheilinus (Maori wrasse), Choerodon (tuskfish), Coris, Epibulus, Gomphosus,
Halichoeres and Thalassoma. Wrasses are brilliantly coloured, living around coral reefs and
amongst weeds. Juvenile wrasses often differ from adults, and in some the sexes differ in
colour and pattern. Some change colour and pattern with great rapidity (Munro 1967: pp.402, 405).
They are active during daylight hours, retiring to the shelter of the reef at night. Some species,
such as members of the genus Coris, bury themselves in the sand. Most are medium sized
fishes (about 20-40 cm), but the double-headed Maori wrasse, Cheilinus undulatus, is notable
for its size, growing to over two metres in length. Oceanic languages typically distinguish
many wrasse taxa. Although I have a number of POc reconstructions, there is little consistency
of reference within cognate sets, other than within Polynesia. So, although in each case
the POc meaning may have been restricted to one or more species, or even to growth stages,
I am obliged to reconstruct in very general terms. In the following set, the Rotuman reflex of
*mamin refers not to the Maori wrasse, but to the largest parrotfish, the hump-headed parrotfish,
Bolbometopon muricatum, which resembles it. Although Geraghty (p.159) reconstructs
PCP * mami ‘Bolbometopon, hump-headed parrotfish’, he does so presumably on Rotuman
evidence alone.

<
PMP *mamin ‘wrasse, Cheilinus spp.’ (ACD)
POc *mamin ‘Cheilinus undulatus, double-headed Maori wrasse and possibly other wrasse SPP-’
  Adm: Nali        mam           ‘C. undulatus'’
  Adm: Titan            mam           ‘C. undulatus’
  Adm: Loniu            mam           ‘wrasse’
  NNG: Mutu             mam(lau)      ‘Coris aygula, hump-headed wrasse; C. diagrammus, violet-lined Maori wrasse’ [Oxycheilinus digramma]
  PT:     Gumawana      mamina        ‘wrasse fish’
  PT:     Kilivila      mamila        ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:     Motu          mami          ‘various k.o. wrasse’
  MM:     Lihir         mamil         ‘Cheilinus undulatus, Maori wrasse’ (-/ for ʌ-//)
  MM:     Tolai         mamin         ‘ Anampses pterophthalmus, ocellated chi sei-tooth wrasse’ [A. geographicus]
  MM:     Maringe       mamini        ‘salt-water fish, incl. various wrasse, esp. Cheilinus sp.’
  MM:     Marovo        mimina        ‘wrasse, prob. C. undulatus’
  NCal:   Iaai          mem           ‘large C. undulatus’
  Mic:    Chuukese      mæmi          ‘large wrasse’
  Mic:    Puluwatese    mæm           ‘k.o. fish, large, perhaps wrasse’
  Mic:    Carolinian    mæm           ‘C. undulatus’
  Mic:    Satawalese    mæm           ‘C. undulatus’
  Fij:    Rotuman       mami          ‘Bolbometopon, k.o. blue-green fish’
>

                                                                                     Fish      93


   Both POc * mamin and POc *taijapa(R,r) have reflexes which refer specifically to
Cheilinus undulatus. It is possible that both POc terms referred to growth stages.

<
POc *taijapa(R,r) ‘large wrasse, including Cheilinus sp.’
  Adm: Andra             draŋah        ‘wrasse’
  Adm: Titan             draŋ          ‘wrasse, Bodianus spp.’
  NNG: Gitua             taŋavaru      ‘k.o. fish’ (-u unexpected)
  MM: Ramoaaina          taŋara        ‘k.o. fish’
  NCV: Vera’a            laŋava        ‘Cheilinus undulatus’
PCP *taijava ‘ Cheilinus undulatus' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:     Wayan          taŋava         ‘C. undulatus’
  Fij:     Rotuman       fahaŋa          ‘k.o. fish’ (metathesis)
PPn *taijafa ‘Cheilinus sp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan       taŋafa       ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu (meai)taŋafd ‘wrasse’
  Pn:     Samoan       taŋafa       ‘name given to fishes of genus Cheilinus when three feet long or more’
  Pn:     Tuvalu       taŋafu       ‘C. undulatus’
  Pn:     Tikopia      taŋafd       ‘sea fish, apparently a wrasse’
>

<
POc *babu ‘Cheilinus spp,, Maori wrasse’
  Adm: Titan            papu(niu)     ‘C. trilobatus, tripletail Maori wrasse, medium’
PPn *papu ‘Cheilinus sp.’ (Hooper: PNPn *pap(o,u)')
  Pn:   Rennellese papu           ‘several kinds of dark brown wrasse’
  Pn:       Pukapukan papo                  'C.fasctalus'
                      papo-papo             ‘ C. fasciatus, j uveni 1 e ’
  Pn:       Tuvalu    papo                  ‘C. lrilobalus'
  Pn:       Tokelauan papo                  ‘ C. fasciatus‘
  Pn:       Luangiua  papu                  ‘Maori wrasse’
cf. also:
   NCV: S Efate            (a)fam           ‘C. tiitdii talus'
>

94     Meredith Osmond


<
POc *merari ‘wrasse or parrotfish’
  NNG: Kove                 lali      ‘parrotfish, bright blue-green fins and tail’ (irregul. loss of first syllable)
  NCV: Ambae         mwera (mavute) ‘checkerboard wrasse?’ \Halichoeres hortulanus] (mavute ‘white’) (loss of final *-ri unexpected)
  NCV: Mota          mera            ‘k.o. fish’ (loss of final *-ri unexpected)
  Mic: Marshallese   meræ             ‘parrotfish;  wrasse ’
  Mic: Ponapean      merer            ‘wrasse’
PCP *m[e,a]rari ‘Novaculichthys, wrasse’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Rotuman      marari           ‘smooth-bodied fish with thin soft scales, grey-brown with whitish spots’
PPn *'m[e,a]rari ‘wrasse or parrotfish’ (Hooper: * m(a,o)lali)
  Pn:    Tongan        meai               ‘k.o. fish like parrotfish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan malali                 ` Che Hinns lrilobalus. trilobed Maori wrasse
  Pn:    Luangiua      malali             ‘rainbow fish, k.o. Labridae’
  Pn:    Tokelauan     molali             ‘C. trilobatus‘
  Pn:    K’marangi malali                 ‘omated wrasse’
>

<
POc *tapu ‘Labridae sp.’
  PT:    Iduna       tafu-tafufu    ‘small coloured fish on the reef’
  Mic: Satawalese (yce)sdp          `( 'romphosus varius. clubnosed wrasse’
PCP *tuvu ‘Labridae sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)28
     Fij:   Wayan          tuvu(masi)       ‘scribbled wrasse’ \Novaculichthys taeniourus\
     Fij:   Wayan          tuvu(keli)       ‘wrasse taxon’
PPn *tufu ‘Thalassoma sp.’
  Pn:     Tongan     tufu                   ‘ Thalassoma‘
  Pn:     Niuean     tufu                   ‘k.o. parrotfish, edible’
  Pn:     Samoan     tufu                   ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     K’marangi tuhu                    ‘ Thalassoma sp., fire wrasse’
>

<
PEOc *lapi ‘wrasse’
     SES:   Lau            (mae)lafu          ‘wrasse’
  NCal: Nyelayu        nabi            ‘Cheilinus undulatus’
  Mic: Kiribati        (ari)nai        ‘rainbow family or wrasse’
PPn *la-lafi ‘wrasse or parrotfish spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan         la-lafi          ‘Scams sp.’
  Pn:    E Uvean        la-lafi          ‘Cheilinus spp.’
  Pn:    Pukapukan la-law i              ‘C. undulatus’
  Pn:    Samoan         la-lafi          ‘Cheilinus sp., under 30 cm’
  Pn:    Tokelauan lalafi, lafi-lafi ‘juvenile growth terms for C. undulatus’
cf. also:
   NCal: Jawe               nami               ‘C. undulatus’
>

[28] PCP *tuvu reflects the same assimilation of *-a- to *-u- as PCP *tukuku (< POc *takuij) (§44).

                                                                                                  Fish    95


   Lower-level reconstructions include PCP *labe, PPn *lape [29] ‘Labridae, wrasse’, PPn
*suijale ‘Labridae’ and PPn *ijutuloa ‘Epibulis insidiatop slingjaw wrasse, or other long-
nosed wrasse’ (ŋutu-loa lit. ‘long nose’) (Geraghty p.159, Hooper pp.217-218).

[29] The formal similarity to PEOc *lapi is probably coincidental.


2.47 Parrotfishes (Scaridae)

Figure 2.24 Bolbometopon muricatum, double-headed parrotfish

Parrotfish are closely related to the wrasses, although
the latter are carnivorous. Parrotfish are herbivorous,
typically large, the jaws with a bony beak. They are reef
dwellers, feeding chiefly on vegetable matter, but their
strong beaks easily crush molluscs and coral. Most pass
through one to three colour phases. Juveniles are usually plain, with mottling; immatures usually patterned
with red, brown or purple, adults with blue, green, yellow, orange or red patterns (Munro 1967: p.431). Like the
wrasses they retreat into holes in the coral at night to sleep. Genera include Scams, Hipposcarus and Bolbometopon.

<
PMP *[(k,g)]ulapi ‘parrotfish’ [30]
POc *(k,q)ulapi ‘parrotfish spp., incl. Hipposcarus longiceps, long-nosed parrotfish’
  Adm:     Lou              FeZ              ‘blue-speckled parrotfish’ [Leptoscarus vaigiensis]
  Adm:     Nali             kuwei            ‘blue-speckled parrotfish’ (Akimichi)
  Adm:     Penchai          kwil             ‘blue-speckled parrotfish’
  Adm:     Andra            ulah             ‘H. harid [31]
  Adm:     Loniu            uleh             ‘long-nosed parrotfish’
  Adm:     Lenkau           ulep             ‘Scaridae, parrotfish’
  Adm:     Titan            ula              ‘Scaridae’
  PT:    Iduna          ulahi         ‘k.o. fish, large’ (for ^unavi)
  MM:    Patpatar       uleh          ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:    Kara (East)    uləfi         ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:   Gela           ulavi         ‘H. longiceps, longnose parrotfish’
  NCV:   Dorig          lov           ‘Cheilinus undulatus‘
  NCV:   Uripiv         n-uliv        ‘H. longiceps"
  Mic:   Kiribati       inai          ‘Scams ghobban (blue-barred or yellowscale parrotfish)’
  Mic: Mortlockese ilef               ‘k.o. fish’
  Mic: Satawalese wilef               ‘parrotfish’
PCP *qulavi ‘Hipposcarus longiceps‘ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan           ulavi         ‘Scarus sp,, red parrotfish’
  Fij:   Wayan           ulavi         ‘generic for certain Scarus spp
PPn *qulafi ‘ Scaridae spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    E Uvean         ?ulafi        ‘S. brevifdus' [A altipinnis]
  Pn:     Tokelauan      ulafi         ‘Scarus sp.’
  Pn:     Tuvalu         ulafi         ‘Scarus spp.’
  Pn:     Tikopia        urdfi         ‘Scarus sp.’
>

[30] Reconstructed on the basis of Pendau (WMP) lape? ‘parrotfish’ (Phil Quick pers. comm.), together with the
 Oceanic evidence.

[31] H. harid is an Indian Ocean species closely related to H. longiceps (Kailola:377, FisiiBase)

96   Meredith Osmond



    The double-headed or hump-headed parrotfish, Bolbometopon muricatum, is distinguished
by its size and the hump on its forehead. While most species of parrotfish are under 50 cm in
length, the hump-headed parrotfish can reach 120 cm or more. The Admiralties forms below
indicate that there was a final POc consonant, probably *-q.

<
POc *kam(a,i,u)tuq ‘Bolbometopon, double-headed parrotfish’
  Adm:    Andra           kamidu          ‘Bolbometopon‘
  Adm:    Titan           kamatu          ‘Bolbometopon, double-headed parrotfish’
  Adm:    Drehet          komusu          ‘parrotfish’
  NNG:    Lukep (Pono)    kamatu          ‘large bottom-feeding reef fish that swims in groups and has a large protrusion on its head’
  NNG: Kove               amatu           ‘double-headed parrotfish’
  NNG: Bing               kamtuw          Tike double-headed parrotfish, up to 1.8m long, larger than maham variety’
  MM: Patpatar         amatu              ‘k.o. fish, big and green’
  MM: Ramoaaina        kamit              ‘k.o. shiny fish’
  Mic:  Woleaian       xemasu(xur)        ‘k.o. parrotfish’
PCP *kam(o,u)tu ‘female Scctrus sordidus' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Kadavu         kdrnotu          ‘female Scarus sordidus‘
PPn * kamulu ‘Scarus sp. " (Hooper 1994)
   Pn:    Tongan         kamutu            ‘Scarus sp.’ (Geraghty. Not in Churchward)
   Pn:    Tokelauan      kdrnutu           ‘S.jonesi, female, green parrotfish’
cf. also:
  PT:      Gumawana         motu-motu(ya) ‘k.o. fish’
  SV:      Anejorn          n-aumat       ‘k.o. small parrotfish’
>


                                                                                               Fish     97

<
POc *kosa ‘k.o. parrotfish’
  PT:      Bunama          osa (ala alwa)    ‘k.o. parrotfish’
  PT:      Misima          kosa              ‘generic for certain coloured parrotfish spp.’
  PT:      Kilivila        kola-la           ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:     Langalanga      kosa              ‘parrotfish (generic): Cetoscarus (kosa bulu (black), kosa abu (red); kosa marak'' a (green); kosa mara (multicoloured) ’
   SES:    To’aba’ita      kosa              ‘parrotfish (generic). Five kinds are named according to colour’ (Barnett 1978)
  Mic:     Carolinian      osa               ‘large sp. of parrotfish’
>

    The exact form of the next reconstruction is unclear, as (i) the vowels have switched places
in some reflexes, and (ii) Gapapaiwa -n- reflects both POc *-l- and *-n-. *-l-is reflected in
the Bauro and Rapa reflexes, *-n- in the remaining Polynesian reflexes.

<
POc *me[l,n]aya~*ma[l,n]eija ‘k.o. parrotfish’
  PT:      Gapapaiwa    mena-menaya            ‘parrotfish’
  SES:     Bauro (West) mareŋa                 ‘parrotfish’ (Barnett 1978)
  Pn:      Niuatoputapu meneŋa                 ‘Scarusjonesf
  Pn:      Tongan       meneŋa                 ‘parrotfish, greenish-blue’
  Pn:      Niuean       moneŋa                 ‘bluish parrotfish, Scarus sp.’
  Pn:      Pukapukan    maneŋa                 ‘Chlororus microrhinos, blunt-headed parrotfish’
  Pn:      Rapa         ma-mariŋa              ‘S. ghobban, blue-barred parrotfish’
  Pn:      Tuamotuan    maneŋa                 ‘S. gibbus [C. microrhinos]’[32]
>

    The colour term green/blue has been reconstructed as POc *[ma]karawa, PEOc *maraw a
(see vol.2, p.207). This is no doubt the source of the following term for the green parrotfish.
The Motu term can carry a number of modifiers which are also colour terms: karava vaiuri
(vaiuri = purplish), karava kaka kaka (red), karava labora (yellow) (Nigel Oram n.d.). The
Micronesian forms reflect *maRawa, not *marciwa.

<
POc *[m,k]arawa ‘green parrotfish spp.’
  PT:      Motu           karava (gira-gira) ‘parrotfish: Chlorurus sirangylocephalus, (purple-headed parrotfish); Callyodon formosus, (Kellogg’s parrotfish); Scarus microrhinos (blunt-headed parrotfish). Giragira refers to colour. Face is bent with large forehead’ (Oram n.d.)
  PT:      Hula           rawa               ‘k.o. blue fish’
     PT:    Misima      aldwa                    ‘Scams flavipectoralis, yellowfin parrotfish”
     PT:    Molima      ?ala-?alawa              ‘parrotfish’
     MM:    Lihir       mar                      ‘Scams spp. esp. S. microrhinos’ [Chlorurus microrhinos}
     SES:   Gela        mara                     ‘parrotfish generic’ (loss of *-wa unexplained)
     SES:   Lau         mara                     ‘parrotfish’ (loss of *-wa unexplained)
     SES:   Arosi       marawa                   ‘k.o. fish; green’
     SES:   Arosi       marawa-rawa              ‘small green fish with crimson markings like a skeleton’
     Mic:   Kiribati     mdwa                    ‘ Scarus frontalis, green parrotfish’ [Chlorurus frontalis] (mow aw a ‘green, blue’)
     Mic:   Ponapean     maw                     ‘any blue parrotfish’
cf. also:
   NCV: Mota             mera                   ‘k.o. fish’
   NCV: Dorig            mer                    ‘ Scamsfrenatus’
>

[32] The species complex comprises Chlorurus gibbus in the Red Sea. Chlorurus strongylocephalus in the Indian
 Ocean and Chlorurus microrhinos in the west-central Pacific (FishBase).

98     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *(ma)manu 'Scorns spp.’
  NNG: Kove        manu(kaikai) ‘k.o. parrotfish’
PPn *mamanu 'Scams spp.’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan     mamanu         ‘parrot fish’
  Pn:   E Uvean    mamanu         ‘ Choerodon transversalis’ [C. graphicus]
  Pn:   Samoan     mamanu         ‘reddish-brown species of genus Scarus when about 30-60 cm long’
  Pn:   Tokelauan mamanu          ‘S. chlorodon, ocean parrot fish’ [S. prasiognathos]
  Pn:   Tuvalu     mamanu         ‘Scams spp.’
cf. also:
   Adm: Loniu            manaw              ‘purple-headed parrotfish’
>

   The Patpatar and Burna reflexes in the following cognate set indicate a monosyllable. The
PCP form is probably the outcome of *b‘'os + an unknown morpheme.

<
POc *b wos 1 Scorns sp., k.o. parrotfish’
     MM: Patpatar        pos                ‘long-nosed parrotfish’
     TM: Burna           boro               ‘Scorns blochf
PCP *bose 1 Scorns sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Lau            bose                ‘Scorns sp.’
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu pose                  ‘parrotfish’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Pukapukan      moye               ‘k.o. wrasse, Stethojulis bandanensis`
>

    Lower-level reconstructions include Proto North Vanuatu * saum wa ‘parrotfish, Scorns
sp.’ (Frangois 2005:499), PCP *bobo ‘Scorns sp.’ (Geraghty p. 160) and PPn *qufn ‘wrasse
or parrotfish’ (Hooper 1994: p.217).

                                                                                     Fish   99


2.48 Sandperches, Grubfishes (Pinguipedidae, and also Mugiloididae, Parapercidae)

Fijian iko-tokoto-nivosai and PNPn * takoto (E Uvean and Samoan), although evidently similar,
are both independently derived from the verb PCP *(ta)kolo ‘lie down’, which is typical
sandperch behaviour (Geraghty p. 160). Samoan ta?oto is glossed ‘saury’, a fish from a different
family, but one which also tends to lie on the bottom, sometimes burying itself in sand.
No widespread cognate sets have been located.


2.49 Gobies, including mudskippers (Gobiidae), blennies (Blenniidae)

Gobies are very small sluggish fishes abundant about reefs and coral. They are usually found
sheltering among weeds, under stones or in crevices, in rock pools and quiet water (Munro
p.493). They constitute the largest family of marine fishes worldwide with several hundred
species in New Guinea alone, but the paucity of terms in dictionaries for gobies suggests they
are of little importance. There are some freshwater species. Mudskippers or land gobies can
leave the water and hop or crawl over rocks or mud in search of food. They were formerly
classified as Periopthalmidae, but are now considered a sub-family of Gobiidae. Blennies are
small carnivorous fishes, living mainly in rock pools in the intertidal zone. They rarely swim
free and spend most of their time concealed. Oceanic languages often group them with gobies
which inhabit similar environments.

<
POc *kakawa ‘goby, blenny’
  PT:     Muyuw         k''eik       ‘gobies’ (Damon 1990)
  SES:    Gela          kakau (pilo) ‘blennies generic, particularly incl. rockskippers’ (pilo ‘to wave about’)
  SES:    Lau           akwa-ak‘ a   ‘sp. of walking fish in the mangroves’ (for] ?akwa-?akw a)
  SES:    Arosi         ?a?ciwa      ‘blenny’
  SV:     Anejom        ne-koa       'Ecsenius sp., blenny’
  Mic:    Woleaian      xawe-xaw     'Chloriirus spp,, wrasse’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      ?a?ciwa      ‘Bodianus bilunulalus. wrasse’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Rennellese    kagapa        ‘small inedible rock-climbing black fish, prob. blennies’ (reflects a hypothetical *kalawa)
>

   Lower level reconstructions include PCP *(m,p)anoko ‘generic for gobies, mudskippers, blennies’,
and PPn * l(o,a)kuya ‘blenny’, PNCV *lavo ‘skipper, blenny’, PPn *talae ‘mud
skipper’ (Geraghty p.160, Clark 2009:125, Hooper 1994: p.218).

100   Meredith Osmond


2.50 Sleepers, gudgeons (Eleotridae)

These fish are similar to gobies in their habit of lying on the bottom and rarely moving. Some
species hover in cloud-like swarms over coral heads. Most are small and insignificant but
there are some fresh water species which grow larger and are valued food fish in inland areas
(Munro 1967: p.512).

<
PEOc *bakopu ‘k.o. fish, possibly Eleotris sp.’
  SES:    Gela         bayovu        ‘sp. of freshwater fish, flat head, remains alive in mud’
  SES:   Kwaio      bakofu           ‘needlefish’
  SES:   Arosi      bdtohu           ‘k.o. fish found in swamps, taboo to children’
  Fij:   Wayan      bnkovu           ‘freshwater fish, gudgeon’
  Pn:    Samoan     pa?ofu           ‘Eleotrisfused
  Pn:    Rennellese paghabu          "Eleotrisfusea, highly prized goby fish at the Lake and in waterholes elsewhere’
>

   Two lower-level reconstructions are PCP *uvi ‘k.o. fish, poss. Eleotridae’ and PCP
*vo(q)o ‘k.o. small fish’, PFij *vd ‘Eleotridae’ (Geraghty p.168).


2.51 Whitebait

English folk taxonomies evidently use the term ‘whitebait’ for a range of very small silver
schooling fishes from various families including Eleotridae, Atherinidae, Engraulidae, Clu-
peidae and Galaxiidae (smelts).

<
POc *jnjana ‘whitebait’
  MM: Roviana          ziŋana            ‘whitebait’
  NCV: Uripiv         jb]aŋ              ‘whitebait’
  Fij:    Bauan        diŋana            ‘whitebait’
 PPn *(h)inaŋa ‘whitebait’
  Pn:     Samoan       inaija or iŋaŋa   ‘whitebait of the pei'd)fu, Eleotris fused
  Pn:     Maori        inaŋa             ‘whitebait, Galaxias’
>


2.52 Flatheads (Platycephalidae)

These moderate-sized fish are adapted for life on the bottom where they bury themselves in
sand with only the eyes exposed. Most are excellent eating (Munro 1967: p.526). Thus it is
surprising that few terms have been recorded from contemporary languages and no reconstructions
made.


2.53 Moorish idols (Zanclidae)

                                                                                Fish   101

Moorish idols superficially resemble butterflyfish, with strongly marked bands of black,
white and yellow, but have a distinctive protruding snout. They are found around coral reefs
in shallow water. Formerly two species were recognised, Zanchis canescens and Z. cornutus,
but the former is now considered the juvenile form of the latter (Kailola p.459, FishBase).
Hooper (p.215) has reconstructed PNPn * laulau-fau ‘Zanclus canescens, Moorish idol’.


2.54 Unicornfishes, surgeonfishes, bristletooths, tangs (Acanthuridae)

 Figure 2.25 Naso unicornis, long-snouted unicornfish

All Acanthuridae are herbivorous coral
reef fish, scraping algae with their fine
teeth. Genera include Naso, Acanthurus,
Zebrasoma and Ctenochaetus. They have
thick leathery skin and a spine with one
or more knife-like barbs on the tail which
are capable of severe wounding. Surgeonfish are so named because of these lancetlike spines, unicorn fish because of the
horn-like projection on the forehead. Juveniles differ greatly and are usually separately named in vernacular nomenclatures
(Munro 1967: p.482). More POc reconstructions have been made for Acanthuridae than for
any other family. Three refer to the genus Naso ‘unicornfish’, but only one, *qume, clearly
refers to a single species, Naso unicornis.

<
PMP *qumay ‘unicorn fish, Naso spp.’ (ACD)
POc *qume ‘Naso unicornis, long-snouted unicornfish’
  PT:    Hula           yume         ‘Naso unicornis'’
  SES:   Kwaio          ume          ‘Alutera sp. (prob. A. monoceros, the unicorn leatherjacket)’
  SES: To’aba’ita      umea          ‘N. unicornis"
  SES: Langalanga      ume           "N. unicornis"
  SES: Lau             ?ume          ‘k.o. black flattish fish, good eating’
  SES:  Ulawa          ume  (totoro) ‘N. unicornis" (totoro ‘crest’)
  SES: Arosi           ume           ‘N. unicornis"
  NCV: Mota            ume           ‘large fish with a lump on the forehead’
  NCV: Vera’a          om            ‘N. tuberosus" [hump-nosed unicornfish]
  NCV: Lewo            me            ‘unicorn fish’
  Mic:  Woleaian       xium          ‘k.o. fish with long snout’
  Mic: Sonsorolese gume              ‘N. unicornis"
  Mic: Satawalese      kirn          "N. unicornis"
PPn *qume ‘Naso sp,, unicornfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan         ?ume          ‘N. unicornis"
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu ?ume            ‘Naso spp.’
  Pn:   Samoan         ume           ‘name given to mature fishes of the genus Naso when about 30 cm long and over’ (ume-lei ‘Naso when about 15 cm long’)
  Pn:     Rennellese      ?ume          ‘k.o. large fish, similar topunoŋi, perhaps a unicorn fish or parrot fish’
  Pn:     Rennellese      ?ume (kan)    ‘a unicorn fish’ (kanu ‘patterned’)
  Pn:     Rarotongan      lime          ‘fish sp., leather-jacket’
  Pn:     Tikopia         lime          ‘N. unicornis’’
cf. also:
   PT:    Kilivila        gum           ‘k.o. fish’ (g- for fA>)
>


102     Meredith Osmond


    In the next set, PNPn languages have added reflexes of PPn *tifi ‘tip, point, extremity’ to
the reflex of POc *taRat.

<
PMP *taRat ‘Naso spp,, unicornfish’
POc *taRat ‘Naso spp,, incl. N. brevirostris, short snouted unicornfish’
  NNG:     Lukep (Pono)   tare          ‘tang’
  PT:      Gumawana       (ia) tala     W. brevirostris, short snouted unicorn fish’
  PT:      Lala          (iʔa) Iaka    ‘k.o. fish’ (metathesis)
  PT:      Motu           tara          ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:      Marovo         tarasi        ‘generic for several species of large surgeonfish (for f taratd)
PCP *ta ‘Naso sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan          Id              Teatheijacket or unicorn fish’
  Fij:   Way an         td(tovu)        W. tuberosus, humpnose unicorn fish
  Pn:    Tokelauan      td(tifi)        ‘unicorn fish’
  Pn:    Tikopia        td(tivi)        W. unicornis’
  Pn:    Tahitian       ta(tihi)        ‘N. brevirostris, short-nosed unicorn f
>

<
POc *m(a,o)nuRV ‘Naso sp., unicornfish’
  Adm:     Titan        mwanoi         LN. unicornis, long-snouted unicornfish’
  Adm:     Lenkau       manoi          ‘unicornfish’
  Adm:     Loniu        monoy          W. unicornis’
  Adm:     Mussau       manoi          ‘unicornfish’
  NNG:     Bing         manur          ‘N. lituratus, poll unicornfish’ (Also known as stripe-face or orange-spine unicornfish)
  Mic:     Satawalese   mono           ‘k.o. surgeonfish, Naso sp.’
  Pn:      Pukapukan    maono          ‘Acanthurus guttatus, white-spotted surgeonfish’ (p unexpected)
>

    A number of terms for surgeonfish have been reconstructed. The following reconstruction,
POc *piRa(q), is identical in form with the term for Alocasia, swamp taro, which, like
Zebrasoma ve liferum, is unpalatably acid unless the skin is carefully removed (Geraghty
1990:78). A parallel development is found in Rotuman, where ?apea means both ‘swamp
taro’ and ‘sailfin tang’.

                                                                                   Fish      103

<
PMP *biRctq 'Zebrasoma vehferurri (also 'Alocasia, wild taro’) (Blust 2002)
POc *piRa(q) 'Zebrasoma vehferum, sailfin tang’
  Adm: Titan        pa-pai       'Acanthurus spp.’ (metathesis)
  MM: Maringe        (baba)fra   ‘k.o. surgeonfish’
  SES: Gela          (iga) vila  'Zebrasoma veliferum, sailfin tang
  NOV: Lewo         piya(ewa)    ‘fish with tough skin, sharp tail’
PFij >ia 'Zebrasoma vehferum` (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan       via         ‘k.o. fish, broad with large breast fins’
>

<
POc *bi[r,R]apa 'Acanthurus hneatus, blue-lined surgeonfish’
  PT:       Kilivila   bilawa-wa    ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:       Nehan      berau        'A. triostegus, convict surgeonfish’
  MM:       Nduke      be-bera      'A. lineatus, blue-lined surgeonfish’
  SES:      To’aba’ita belafa       'A. hneatus’’
  SES:      Longgu     be lava      'A. hneatus’
  SES:      Arosi      biraha       'A. hneatus’
  NCV:      Dorig      brav         'A. hneatus’
  NCV:      Lakon      pirav        'A. hneatus’
  Mic:      Satawalese parapar      'A. guttatus’ [white-spotted surgeonfish]
  Fij:      Rotuman    poraha       ‘k.o. fish with sting in its tail, longitudinal yellow and blue stripes, A. lineatus’
>

<
POc *maRa 'Acanthurus sp,, possibly A. xanthopterus, yellowfin surgeonfish’
  Adm:      Andra       ma           'A. xanthopterus’
  Adm:      Loniu       may          ‘surgeonfish or similar poison-spined fish’
  NNG:      Mutu        mara         'A. xanthopterus’
  Pn:       Pukapukan   ma           'Ctenochaetus striatus, bristle-toothed surgeon-fish’
  Pn:       Tikopia     ma           'A. bleeckeri, dark colour, about 30 cm.’ [A. mata]
cf. also:
   PT:      Kilivila    mawa         'A. xanthopterus’
>

<
PMP *katawan ‘fish sp.’ (ACD)
POc *katawan 'Acanthurus taxon, surgeonfish’
  PT:       Misima      tayan       'A. dussumieri, ornate surgeonfish’
  SES:      Arosi       ?dwa        ‘fish sp.’
  Mic:      Kiribati    katawa      'A. hneatus, bluebanned surgeonfish’
>

<
PMP *paliR ‘surgeonfish’ (Blust 2002: PWMP)
POc *[qa]paliR 'Acanthurus, surgeonfish’
  PT:       Misima      havani       'A. nigricauda, blackstreak surgeonfish’ (initial h- for |0)
  MM: Marovo            valiri       ‘generic for several medium sized dark surgeonfish’
  TM:       Buma            waviliro       ‘A. lineatus, lined surgeonfish’
PCP *qavali ‘Acanthurus sp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Rotuman     alahi           ‘Acanthurus sp.’ (metathesis)
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu lafali         ‘A. bloehii'
  Pn:   Rennellese pahaŋgi          ‘Acanthurus sp.’
cf. also:
   Fij:   Wayan             bali-bali      ‘possibly A. lineatus'
>

104     Meredith Osmond

      Figure 2.26   Left Zebrasoma veliferum, sailfɪn tang. Right Acanthurus lineatus, blue-lined
                                             surgeonfish.

<
POc *[s,j]abiq ‘Acanthurus spp., incl. A. guttatus, white-spotted surgeonfish’
  Adm: Loniu               eapaŋ     ‘possible tang or surgeonfish’
  Mic: Kiribati            rz/itz    ‘Acanthurus, surgeonfish generic’ (vowel metathesis)
PCP *(s,d)abi ‘Acanthurus guttatus, spotted surgeonfish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Lau           sabi          ‘A. guttatus'
PPn *hapi "Acanthurus guttatus' (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan       hapi           ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:     Niuean       hapi           ‘A. guttatus, surf surgeonfish’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu hapi           ‘A. guttatus'
  Pn:     Rennellese api              ‘some species of surgeonfishes’
  Pn:     Tokelauan    api            ‘surgeonfish’
  Pn:     Tikopia      api            ‘surgeonfish’
>

      The transfer of meaning in Micronesian languages in the next set is unexplained.

<
PMP *qaroqo ‘Acanthurus spp.’ [33]
POc *qaroqo ‘surgeonfish, Acanthurus sp.’
  Adm: Titan                kaloŋ          ‘Ctenochaetus .str/z/ft/.v, orange-dotted hair-tooth surgeonfish’
  NNG: Takia             aroŋ          'A. bleekeri, yellowmask surgeon-fish’ [A. mata]
  SV:  Anejom            n-araŋ        'A. gahhm’\\A&<At surgeonfish]
PMic *aroijo ‘Carangid fish, pompano, skipjack’ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic: Kiribati         (te)aoŋo       ‘a jackfish’
  Mic: Chuukese         aroŋ           ‘k.o. fish’
  Mic: Carolinian       aroŋ           ‘fourth of five growth stages of the skipjack’
  Mic: Ponapean         əroŋ           ‘bluejack crevally’
PPn *qciloi]()'Acanthurus sp,, probably H. lineatus, blue-lined surgeonfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan        ?aloijo        'A. /inealus'
  Pn:     E Uvean       ?aloijo        'A. lineatus’
  Pn:     Rennellese    letgoŋo        ‘surgeonfish, probably A lineatus’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu aloŋo           ‘surgeonfish’
  Pn:     Samoan        aloŋo          ‘Acanthurus, when full grown’
  Pn:     Tikopia       aroŋo          'A. lineatus'’
>

[33] Based on Pendau (WMP) aroŋo ‘Acanthurus leucosternon, surgeonfish’ (Phil Quick pers. comm.) together
 with the Oceanic cognates.

                                                                                   Fish    105

<
POc *kir[i,au] ‘Acanthuridae’
  Adm: Andra           kirau          ‘surgeonfish’
  NNG: Tami            gilau          ‘A. bleekeri’, k.o. surgeonfish: [A. mata] (g- for exp æ-)
  NNG:    Bing         kir            ‘surgeonfish’
  NNG:    Kove         kiri           ‘fish, unicornfish?’
  MM:     Patpatar     kilo           ‘surgeonfish’ (-/- for f-r-)
  Pn:     Samoan       ?ili(u)        ‘name of certain fishes of genera Zebrasoma and Acanthurus, the skin of which is said to be poisonous’
  Pn:     Samoan       ?ili-?ilia     ‘name of fishes of genus Naso when about 5 cm long’
  Pn:     K’marangi    kili(u)        'Zebrasoma sp,, tang’
>

    The Loniu (Adm) reflex (hd)pon below could reflect either POc *bolo or *bone. Both
reconstructions refer to small, dark Acanthuridae.

<
POc *bolo ‘small dark surgeonfish, possibly Ctenochaetus’
  Adm: Loniu           (ha)pon        ‘surgeonfish’
  MM: Nehan            bo-bol         'Acanthurus sp,, tang’
  SES: Gela            bolo-bolo      ‘Ctenochaetus binotatus, twospot bristletooth’ (a small dark fish)
  SES: Lau             bolo           ‘k.o. small black surgeonfish’
  SES: Arosi           boro (i asi)   ‘k.o. fish’
  NCV: Mwotlap         no-p'`o[       'Acanthurus olivaceus, surgeonfish with white band on tail’
  NCV: Mwotlap        pol-p'ol        'A. leucopareius?, smaller thanp' oT
  NCV: Vera’a         p‘Nl            'Ctenochaetus striatus, lined bristletooth’
  Fij: Rotuman        polo            ‘young blackfish’
  Pn:  Rennellese     pogo            ‘some kinds of surgeonfish and tangs’
>

106      Meredith Osmond

<
PEOc *bon(e,a) ‘generic for various small Acanthuridae’
   SES:     Gela           bo-bona          ‘generic for various spp. incl. A. nigrofuscus (dusky surgeonfish), Ctenochaetus striatus (lined bristletooth) and Zebrasoma scopas (blue-lined tang)’
  Fij:  Lau         pone                   ‘A. nigrofuscus’
PPn *pone ‘Acanthurus sp. or Ctenochaetus striatus’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan      pone           ‘k.o. fish, small, black, nearly circular; C. striatus and Acanthurus sp.’
  Pn:   E Uvean     pone           ‘generic for some Acanthurus spp.’
  Pn:   Samoan      pone           ‘Acanthurus spp. when about 15 cm long’
  Pn:   Tikopia     pone           ‘Acanthurus spp., dark-coloured, said by Tikopia to be younger growth stage of ma (A. mala) .
  Pn:   Tokelauan pone             ‘name given to C. striatus (aloŋo) when it forms schools at spawning season’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Rennellese ponoŋi                 ‘general name for unicomfish’
>

<
POc *ma(k,q)eto ‘a dark fish, possibly Ctenochaetus striatus’ (POc *maqeto(m) ‘black’; cf. vol.2, p.206)
  MM Lihir            (mats)maket ‘C. striatus’
  MM Bola             meto           ‘k.o. fish’ (for ^mayeto)
  SES Lau             mae(iʔa)       ‘k.o. fish’
  SES ’Are’are        make           ‘black’
  SES Arosi           maeo           ‘black’
  NCV: Uripiv         (ni)met        ‘Acanthurus blochii’
  NCV: Paamese        na-meto        ‘k.o. black fish’
  Fij:    Rotuman     vaefa          ‘Acanthurus triostegus’ (y- < POc */w w-)[34]
PPn *maqito ‘Acanthuridae, possibly Ctenochaetus striatus, lined bristletooth’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Niuean      meito          ‘A. xanthopterus, yellowfin surgeonfish, edible’
  Pn:     E Uvean     malito         ‘C. striatus’
  Pn:     Pukapukan maito            ‘C. hawaiiensis’
  Pn:     Rennellese malito          ‘Acanthurus sp.’
  Pn:     Tahitian    maito          ‘C. striatus’
  Pn:     Rapa        maito          ‘C. striatus, A. nigrofuscus’
cf. also:
   Mic: Kiribati           mako             ‘A. xanthopterus’
>

   The distribution of the reflexes below strongly supports POc *balaki and a seemingly
innovative PROc * balaqi.


[34] The Rotuman is in some doubt because of the irregular initial and the specific definition, though the final
vowel is regular (Geraghty 1994:161).

                                                                                   Fish     107

<
POc *bala(tj,k)i ‘Acanthurus and Naso spp.’
  Adm: Mussau         balai         ‘k.o. fish’
  NNG: Gedaged        balai         ‘fish about 60 cm long, red color’
  PT:   Motu          bai           ‘fish sp.’
  SES: Lau            bala?i        ‘Epinephelus areotatus, yellow-spotted rock cod
  NCV: Namakir        paraŋ         ‘k.o. surgeonfish’
  Mic:  Mokilese      p'ilak        ‘unicorn fish’
  Mic: Marshallese piuilak          ‘Naso lituratus (poll unicomfish)’
  Mic: Ponapean       pwu!ak        ‘N. unicornis’
  Mic: Kiribati       pwdpwd        ‘A. guttatus, spotted surgeonfish’
PCP *balaijt ‘Acanthurus spp.’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Bauan         balaŋi        ‘Teuthis sp.’ (spinefoot sp.)
  Fij:  Wayan         balaŋi        ‘generic for Acanthurus spp., surgeonfish, tangs and unicorns’
  Fij:  Kadavu        balaŋi        ‘Acanthurus and Naso spp.’
PPn *palai]i ‘Acanthurus sp. of large size and elongate shape’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan       palaŋi          ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Samoan       palaŋi          ‘name given to certain fishes of the genus Acanthurus (surgeon fishes) when about 30 cm long’
  Pn:    Rennellese pagaŋi            ‘k.o. surgeonfish, perhaps ring-tail surgeonfish: A xanthopterus’
  Pn:    K’marangi palaŋi             ‘A. xanthopterus, black-barred surgeonfish’
  Pn:    Tikopia      paraŋi          ‘surgeonfish’
  Pn:    Tahitian     parall          ‘A. xanthopterus’
  Pn:    Hawaiian     palani          ‘A. dussumieri, a surgeonfish famous for a strong odor’
cf. also:
   NNG: Kove            balaŋu-ŋu     ‘large fish’ (Z>- for fv-)
   NNG: Manam           bela-bela     ‘N. lituratus, poll unicorn fish’
   MM: Nehan            lake-lak      ‘Naso lituratus’ (no /k/ in Nehan?)
>

<
PROc *manini ‘Acanthurus triostegus, convict tang’
  NCV: Raga            manini         ‘Acanthurus spp. incl. A. triostegus’
  NCV: Namakir         manin          ‘k.o. surgeonfish’
  Fij: Lau             manini         ‘Acanthurus triostegus’
  Pn:  Tongan          manini         ‘A. triostegus’
  Pn:  E Futunan       manini         ‘A. triostegus’
  Pn:  Samoan          manini         ‘A. triostegus’
  Pn:  Tikopia         manini         ‘A. triostegus’
  Pn:  Tahitian        manini         ‘A. triostegus’
>

   Geraghty (pp. 161-162) adds further PCP reconstructions: PCP*tW57     ‘Acanthurus sp.’
(PPn *tusi ‘mark, stripe’); *masa ‘a small dark Acanthuridae, possibly Zebrasoma scopas.
blue-lined tang or A. pyroferus, mimic surgeonfish’ and *ma(c,s)i-ma(c,s)i ) ‘Naso sp.’.

108     Meredith Osmond


                      Figure 2.27   Siganus punctatus, gold-spotted spinefoot


2.55 Rabbitfishes, spinefeet (Siganidae)

Rabbitfish or spinefeet are herbivorous fish, inhabiting grassy shallow waters. Their fin spines
are very sharp and can inflict painful stings. They have characteristic rabbit-shaped heads.
Their flesh is edible. Oceanic languages usually distinguish several taxa. Two Polynesian
terms in the next set refer instead to Epinephelidae which resemble the Siganidae in having
dangerous spines.

<
PMP *kiteij ‘rabbitfish’ (Blust 2002)
POc *kitoij ‘Siganus sp,, possibly ‘Siganuspunctatus, gold-spotted spinefoot’
  PT:      Kilivila      kitiga         ‘S. chrysospilos’ [5. punctatus}
  PT:      Misima        kiton          ‘S. punctatus, S. lineatus’
  MM:      Teop          sitono         ‘S. fuseeseens, mottled spinefoot’ (< * titof)
  MM:      Marovo        itoŋo          ‘rabbitfish, possibly S. corallinus’ [ocellated orange spinefoot]
  MM:      Marovo        it-itoŋo       ‘spotted spinefoot, poss. S. stellatus’
  NCV: Mwotlap           ya             ‘S. doliatus'
  Fij: Rotuman           kifo           ‘S. rostratus’ (rabbit-faced spinefoot) [5. argenteus]
  Fij: Wayan             kito           ‘prob. S. chrysospilos [S. punctatus], black fish with orange spots’
PPn *kito ‘Epinephelus spp.
  Pn:    Samoan       tito              ‘S. punctatus’ (< *titoi]T)
  Pn:    Tuamotuan kito                 ‘Epinephelus microdori [camouflage grouper] [A. polyphekadion]
  Pn:      Rapa          kito           ‘E. tuamotuensis’ [reticulate grouper]
cf. also:
   NCV: Nahavaq         n-ataŋ          ‘rabbitfish’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
>

                                                                                   Fish   109

<
PMP *muquij ‘k.o. fish’ (ACD)
POc *muqu(ij) ‘Siganus taxon, poss. S. spinus'
  Adm: Loniu            mu            'Siganus spinus, pearl-spotted spinefoot’
  NNG: Gedaged          mu            ‘marine fish about 30 cm long, front part yellowish brown, shading off to yellowish toward the rear’
  NNG:    Bukawa        (i)-mbu?      ‘k.o. spinefoof
  NNG:    Yabem         (i)-mu?       ‘k.o. spinefoof
  PT:     Bunama        mu-mu(ya)     ‘k.o. spinefoof
  PT:     Mi sima       mu-mu(ya)     'S. canaliculatus, smudgepot spinefoot’
  PT:     Motu          mi-mi         'S. spinus’
  MM:     Vitu          muyu          ‘rabbitfish’
  SES:    Lau           mu            ‘k.o. white reef fish, good eating; spinefoot’
  SES:    Langalanga    mu            ‘black spinefoot’
>

<
POc *roRo ‘growth stage of Siganus spp.’
  Adm: Andra             dro(ŋ)        'S. rostratus, S. argenteus’ [ʌ'. rostratus is a junior synonym of S. argenteus]
PCP *rd i ‘juvenile Siganus’ (Geraghty 1994)
   Fij:    Rotuman       ro            ‘small silvery fish’ (poss. loan from Samoan)
PPn *ro 'Siganus sp.’ (Hooper has *o ‘tuna baitfish, such as fry of Siganus or Caesio spp.’; pp.192, 227)
   Pn:     Tongan        d             'S. vermiculatus’
   Pn:     Niuatoputapu  6             ‘growth stage of Siganus’
   Pn:     Samoan        Id            'Siganus sp.’
   Pn:     Tokelauan     ld(tala)      ‘fry of Siganus’
cf. also:
   Pn:     E Uvean       6             'Siganus sp. (expect lo)
   Pn:     Tikopia       6             'S. rostratus [5. argenteus], S. punctatus, spotted rabbitfish’ (expect rd)
   Pn:     Tokelauan     6             ‘tiny fish which form dense, spherical schools outside the reef during dark phases of the moon’ (Hooper p.192)
>

   The Admiralties languages below reflect *pajal(a), and it is possible that the POc form
was *pajala, not *palaja.

<
POc *palaja 'Siganus spp., rabbitfish’ (acd: POc *(p,b)ala-(p,b)ala ‘fish sp.’)
  Adm:   Penchai       pacal          ‘rabbitfish’ (metathesis)
  Adm:   Titan         pacal          ‘spinefoot (generic), Siganidae’ (metathesis)
  Adm:   Lou           posowe         ‘rabbitfish’ (-ir- for f-/-)
  MM:    Lihir         plats          'S. lineatus, S. guttatus, S. corallinus’
  MM:    Tolai         pala-pala      ‘fish sp.’
  SES:   Lau           falata         'Siganus sp.’ (Akimichi)
  SES:   Arosi          harata        ‘k.o. fish’
  SES:    Kahua        farata         'S. rostratus' [ʌ'. argenteus]
  NCV:    Vera’a        basara        'S. canalieulatus' (metathesis)
  NCV:    S Efate      fser           ‘forktail rabbitfish’ (metathesis) [ʌ'. argenteus]
  Mic:    Ponapean     pala-pal       'S. punetatus' [gold-spotted spinefoot]
  Fij:    Wayan         volaða        'S. lineatus' [golden-lined spinefoot]
>


110   Meredith Osmond

<
POc *muroR 'Siganus argenteus, silver or rabbit-faced spinefoot’
  Adm:   Nali          m``ilou        'Siganus, rabbit-faced spinefoot’
  Adm:   Andra         muleo          'S. javus, rabbitfish’
  Adm:   Lenkau        mulow          ‘rabbit-faced spinefoot, Siganus' (-l- for f-r-)
  MM:    Nehan         mur            ‘spinefoot, rabbitfish’
  MM:    Maringe       morora         ‘rabbit fish with yellow colouring’
  Pn:    Rarotongan    muro           ‘k.o. fish caught at night with hand net’ (Buck)
>

<
POc *marawa ‘spinefoot sp.’
  NNG: Kove           malava         ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:   Motu          maraua         ‘k.o. fish’
  Mic: Mokilese       mar            ‘k.o. spinefoot’
  Mic: Ponape         mar            'S.puellus' [blue-lined spinefoot]
PPn *marawa ‘rabbitfish, S. rostratus' [ʌ'. argenteus]
  Pn:   Rennellese maŋgau            ‘general name for some squirrelfish
  Pn:   Samoan        malava         ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   Pukapukan malava             'S. rostratus'
  Pn:   Rarotongan marava            'S. rostratus'
  Pn:   Tokelauan malava             'S. rostratus'
  Pn:   Tahitian      marava         'S. rostratus'
  Pn:   Marquesan malava             'S. argenteus'
>

   Two terms similar in form to *marawa, PCP/PPn *maqawa 'Siganus rostratus' and PPn
*paqaua 'Siganus spinus', have also been reconstructed (Geraghty pp. 163-164).


2.56 Snake mackerels, oilfishes (Gempylidae)

Snake mackerels (Gempylus serpens, Promethichthys prometheus, Ruvettus pretiosus) inhabit deeper 
coastal and oceanic waters, and are sometimes found at depths as great as 600
metres. The flesh is edible but oily. Davis (1999:164) writes that Ruvettuspretiosus is so oily
that eating even a small amount of its flesh has a strongly laxative effect. In some parts of
Polynesia R. pretiosus is known by reflexes of PPn *palu, whose range of reference may also
include jobfish and other deep-sea snappers. Both oilfish and deep-sea snappers are found at
great depths (§30). As mentioned earlier (p.78), the ability to fish water at these depths was
probably a late Samoic-Outlier innovation. Some local terminologies group snake mackerels
with barracudas, also elongated and slender with powerful dentition. In places they may also
be identified with catfish (Pukapukan and Tokelauan kapoa 'Promethichthysprometheus' >
POc * kaboRa ‘catfish’). P. prometheus has also been known as Bermuda catfish. Hooper has
reconstructed PPn *maija ‘k.o. fish’ with meaning in Eastern Polynesian languages ‘Prome-
thichthysprometheus, snake mackerel’.


                                                                                   Fish    111

                        Figure 2.28   Katsuwonuspelamis, skipjack tuna


2.57 Skipjacks, Spanish mackerels, mackerels, tunas, tunnies, albacores, wahoos (Scombridae)

Munro recognised distinct families: Katsuwonidae (skipjack and dogtooth tuna), Scombero-
moridae (Spanish mackerel), Scombridae (mackerel), Thunnidae (albacore, tunnies, big eye,
bluefin and yellowfin tuna), and Acanthocybidae (wahoo), but these have now been combined
as one family, Scombridae (Kailola (1987:467, FishBase). These fish are mostly large, fast
surface predators, highly regarded both for food and sport. There is considerable variation
in English glosses within cognate sets, due possibly to variable popular usage of terms like
tuna, bonito, tunny and mackerel by wordlist compilers. In particular, although the English
vernacular term bonito typically refers to Katsuwonuspelamis (skipjack), it is sometimes
extended to include any pelagic fish caught by trolling from fast canoes, including Katsuwonus, 
Gymnosarda and Thunnus. Reflexes of POc *qatun may be similarly applied in both
narrow and extended senses. Katsuwonus (skipjacks) and Gymnosarda (dogtooth tunas) are
generally distinguished from Thunnus (true tunas) by the former’s apparently scaleless body.
Most skipjacks (bonito) are school fishes, found around the outer edges of reefs where they
can be taken by trolling. They travel in large schools offshore along the coast at certain 
seasons, the schools often boiling at the surface. These fish have a special role in many parts
of the Oceanic world. Simbo speakers in the NW Solomons divide fin fishes into three categories: 
bayea ‘sharks’, iso ‘bonito’ and iyana ‘generic for all fish other than sharks and
bonito’ (Bill Palmer pers. comm.). Ivens (1927:130) writes that “to the Melanesian of the
Southeast Solomons the catching of the bonito is one of the things for which he exists. To
him it is the king of fish”. Solomon Islanders incorporate them in initiating ceremonies and
associate them with various taboos (1927:130-131, 314, 329-330). Many different names
are used for bonito in particular roles, a reflection of their importance in these communities.
In similar vein, bonito fishing in Kapingamarangi is described by local fishermen as “their
sport of kings” (Lieber 1994:77). In Tonga also, the bonito is considered the king of fish (Dye
1983:251-2).

112   Meredith Osmond

<
POc *qalun ‘Katsnwonus pelamis, skipjack tuna’ (ACD)
  Adm:    Wuvulu        a?u           ‘skipjack tuna, or bonito’
  Adm:    Seimat        at            ‘skipjack tuna, or bonito’
  NNG:    Manam         atuŋ          ‘skipjack tuna, or bonito’
  NNG:    Kove          atunu         ‘tunny’
  PT:     Molima        ?atune        ‘bonito’
  MM:     Tangga        atun          ‘large fish, too large to catch with ordinary fishing gear’
  MM:     Tolai         atun          ‘fish sp. of the order Scombridae, a bonito’
  MM:     Tolai         tun-tun       ‘k.o. small bonito’
  MM:     Lihir         atun          ‘A. pelamis and Thunnus albacares, skipjack and yellowfin tuna’
  MM:     Nehan         atun          ‘bonito (tuna)’
  MM:     Halia         atun          ‘tuna, albacore or bonito’
  MM:     Teop          asun          ‘generic for all Scombridae other than wahoo and Spanish mackerel’
  SES:    Bugotu        atu           ‘bonito’
  SES:    Gela          atu           ‘ i) Katsnwonus pelamis; ii) generic for Scombridae’
  SES:    Tolo          atu           ‘bonito’
  SES:    Lau           sau, hau      ‘tuna, skipjack, marlin, wahoo’ (includes more than 10 sub-categories, most correspond to Linnaean spp.) (Akimichi)
  SES:   Kwaio          lau           ‘bonito’
  SES:   ’Are’are       rau           ‘tuna fish’
  SES:   Sa’a           sau           ‘bonito’
  SES:   Arosi          sau           ‘bonito’
PMic *atu ‘bonito’
 Mic: Kiribati         ati           ‘Katsnwonus pelamis, bonito’
 Mic: Kiribati         atu-ati       ‘a big bonito fish’
  Mic: Carolinian asil(lə)           ‘small sp. of tuna’
PCP * qatu ‘possibly generic for Thunnus and Katsnwonus spp.’ (Geraghty: Katsnwonus
 pelamis, skipjack tuna’)
  Fij:    Bauan        yatu          ‘the yellow-finned tunny, locally called bonito: Neothunnus, Macropterus‘
  Fij:    Wayan        atu           ‘ Thunnus albacares, yellow-finned tunny; generic for Thunnidae'
PPn *qalu ‘Katsnwonuspelamis, skipjack tuna’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan     ?atu          ‘k.o. fish, the bonito’
  Pn:    Samoan    atu           ‘a fish, the bonito: Katsnwonus sp.’
  Pn:   Rennellese ?atu          ‘probably bonito, but usually called sau1
  Pn:   Nanumea    atu           ‘skipjack or bonito tuna’
  Pn:   Tikopia    atu           ‘tunny and other large scombroids incl. bonito, of Thunnus and Neothunnus type, esp. skipjack tuna, Katsnwonus pelamis'
  Pn:    Rarotongan atu              ‘bonito, skipjack’
  Pn:    Hawaiian   aku              ‘bonito, skipjack, Katsuwonuspelamis, an important food item’
>

                                                                                  Fish   113


                 Figure 2.29   Scomberomorus commerson, Spanish mackerel


    Blust (2002:130) notes that Tagalog is the only non-Oceanic language known to have a
presumptive cognate, atun ‘tunny fish’, albeit with an unexpected high vowel, and concludes
that ‘ *qatun probably was a lexical innovation in POc and that the early Spanish explorers in
the Pacific borrowed the term from an Oceanic language (most likely in the western Solomon
Islands) that preserved final consonants, and then introduced it into the Philippines’.

<
PROc *tawa-tawa ‘growth stage of skipjack or dogtooth tuna’
   Mic: Kiribati       faira-toira ‘Euthynnus affinis, mackerel tuna’
   Mic: Puluwatese yawo(ropw) ‘large growth stage of skipjack’
PPn * tawa-tawa ‘Euthynnusyciito [£. affinis], black tuna, or Gymnosarda unicolor, juvenile, dogtooth tuna’ (Hooper: PNPn)
   Pn:    Pukapukan tava-tava       ‘G. unicoloF
   Pn:    Samoan       tava-tava    ‘name given to bonito when about 30 cm long’
   Pn:    Tokelauan tava-tava       ‘G. unicolor when 40-60 cm’
   Pn;    Maori        tawa-tawa    ‘ Scomber australasicus’
   Pn:    Hawaiian     kawa-kawa 'Euthynnus yaito’ [E. affinis]
cf. also:
   Pn:    Tongan       kava-kava    'Euthynnus yaito’ (wrong initial)
>

    Scomberomorus (Spanish mackerels) are moderate to large predatory fishes occurring in
schools in coastal waters. Larger ones are caught by trolling near the surface in the vicinity 
of coral reefs, rocky headlands and sunken shoals. Flesh is white, sweet, rather boneless
and highly esteemed. There are perhaps four species of Scomberomorus. The largest, S. commerson, 
the narrow-barred Spanish mackerel, has been known to grow to over two metres,
although average size is considerably smaller (Munro 1967: p.200). Although the following PMP
reconstruction is glossed \S’. commerson, Spanish mackerel’, Oceanic cognates do not support
a species-specific gloss for POc.

114    Meredith Osmond

<
PMP *tarjiRi ‘Scomberomorus commerson, Spanish mackerel’ (ACD)
POc *tai]iRi ‘ Scombridae spp,, prob. incl. Scomberomorus commerson, narrow-barred
  Spanish mackerel, and Acanthocybium solandr i, wahoo’
  Adm: Mussau          taŋini         ‘Spanish mackerel’ (-n- by assimilation)
  Adm: Titan           taŋini         ‘Scomberomorus niphonius. Spanish mackerel’ (-/z- by assimilation)
  NNG: Gedaged         taŋil          ‘white marine fish about 75 cm long, like a mackerel’
  NNG: Bing            taŋir          ‘tuna sp., albacore’
  NNG: Gitua           taŋir          ‘mackerel, wahoo’
  NNG: Mutu            taŋir          ‘wahoo, mackerel’
  NNG: Bukawa          (i)daŋi        ‘k.o. Spanish mackerel’ (i ‘fish’)
  MM: Patpatar         taŋir          ‘k.o. fish that leaps from the water’
  MM. Lihir            taijir         ‘Scomberomorus commerson, Acanthocybium solandri, Grammatorycnus bicarinatus, Spanish mackerel, wahoo and double-lined mackerel’
  MM: Teop             tanini         ‘wahoo, barred Spanish mackerel’
  MM: Roviana          taŋiri         ‘fish generally got by trolling, k.o. kingfish’
  MM: Maringe          taŋiri         ‘kingfish’
  MM: Marovo           taŋiri         ‘kingfish’
  SES: Arosi           aŋiri          ‘shoal of porpoises’
  Mic: Kiribati        tani           ‘yellowfin tuna’
  Mic: Chuukese        seŋir          ‘large Thunnus albacares, yellowfin tuna’
  Mic: Puluwatese hæŋir               ‘yellowfin tuna’
  Mic: Woleaian        taŋizi         ‘king-size tuna’
  Mic: Satawalese sæŋir               ‘the largest tuna, Thunnus sp.’
  Pn:     Samoan       taŋi           ‘k.o. fish’
cf. also:
   MM:      Nehan        taŋili       ‘striped tuna, skipjack’ (-/- for exp. -/'-)
   MM:      Marovo       ta-taliŋi    ‘small yellowfin tuna’ (metath.) (-/- for exp. -r-)
   SES:     Gela         Hi           ‘wahoo’
   Pn:      Pukapukan    tani         ‘ Thunnus alalunga, Albacore’
   Pn:      Rennellese   taŋili       ‘the large wahoo or jack mackerel’ (probably borrowed from a Solomons language)
>

<
POc *walu ‘Scombridae sp. or spp.’
  PT:       Motu         vai(na)-vai(na) ‘Australian Spanish mackerel’
  SES:      Gela         alu             ‘barracuda’
  Mic:      Ponapean     weli-wel        ‘tuna’
PCP *walu ‘k.o. pelagic fish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:  Wayan         walu             ‘generic for Spanish mackerel and wahoo’
PPn *walu ‘Scombridae’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan        valu             ‘general name for tuna spp.’ (valu louniu ‘wahoo’)
  Pn:   Niuean        valu             ‘Gymnosarda unicolor, dogtooth tuna’
  Pn:       E Uvean     vatu             ‘genus Thunnus (generic)’
  Pn:       Tokelauan   vatu             ‘G. unicolor when large’
  Pn:       K’marangi   walu             ‘Gymnosarda sp,, dogtooth tuna
  Pn:       Marquesan   va?u             ‘Scombridae’
>

                                                                                   Fish    115


   Scomber and Rastrelliger (mackerels) are small to moderate pelagic fishes, typically under 
a metre in length, which migrate in schools and comprise some of the more important
food fishes of the world. Munro (p. 197) reports that they inhabit shallow coastal New Guinea
waters where they are caught by seines or fixed traps.

<
POc *jalala ‘'Rastrelliger, k.o. small mackerel’
  NNG: Bing             daldl        ‘tuna-mackerel family, small’
  PT:      Roro         rae          ‘k.o. fish’
  PT:      Motu         dae          ‘Scomber ox Rastrelliger spp.’
  SES: ’Are’are         tarara       ‘k.o. fish’
  NCV: Uripiv          jelel         ‘Rastrelliger kanagurta‘
  NCV: Neve’ei          (ni)silal    ‘Rastrelliger‘
PCP * salala ‘Rastrelliger’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:     Bauan        salala       ‘mackerel’
  Fij:     Way an       salala       ‘small grey schooling fish, prob. Rastrelliger sp.’
  Pn:      Tuvalu       salala       ‘Decapteruspinnulatus, mackerel scad’ [Z>. macarellus]
cf. also:
   PT:      Mi sima     dayaya        ‘Rastrelliger kanagurta, long-jawed mackerel’
>

   Thunnus (bluefin and northern bluefin tuna, yellowfin tuna, albacore, bigeye tuna) are  ;
heavy-bodied pelagic school fish. Most belong to deeper waters, but some inhabit the s
over the continental shelf and may be taken by trolling around reefs. Flesh, usually dark,:, is
excellent, one species dubbed ‘chicken of the sea’ (Munro 1967: p.200).

<
POc *taku(a,o) ‘Thunnus albacares, yellowfin tuna’
  Adm: Titan          drou          ‘Thunnus sp., tuna’
  Adm: Nali           drou          ‘ T. albacares, yellowfin tuna’
  Mic: Chuukese       toku          ‘T. albacares, yellowfin tuna’
  Mic: Woleaian       taxuw         ‘yellowfin tuna’
PPn *taku(a,o) ‘large tuna or skipjack’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Niuean       takua         ‘skipjack tuna, bonito’
  Pn:    Tongan       takuo         ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan takuo            ‘pelagic fish caught by noosing (obsolete term known from chants)’
  Pn:    Samoan       ta?uo         ‘large bonito’
  Pn:    Rennellese takua           ‘k.o. very rare porpoise or fish, no longer seen’
  Pn:    Tokelauan    takuo         ‘yellowfin tuna when very large’
  Pn:    K’marangi takua            ‘T. albacares, yellowfin tuna’
  Pn:    Tikopia      takua         ‘Xiphias gladius, swordfish; Makaira indica, black marlin’
>

116   Meredith Osmond


    Frangois (2005:499) reconstructs Proto North Vanuatu *rowou ‘bonito, Thunnus sp.’.
Hooper has PNPn *kakasi ‘ Thunnus albacares, yellowfin tuna’, possibly related to the Marovo
and Roviana terms for bonito, makasi. The wahoo, Acanthocybium solandri, is the sole member of 
its genus. It is solitary, pelagic, has fine sweet flesh and is rated a splendid sporting
fish. The only reconstruction, PPn *paqala 1 Acanthocybium solandri, wahoo’ is from Hooper
(p.222). In Wayan and Tongan the term for a wahoo is a taxon of PCP *walu.


2.58 Marlins and sailfishes (Istiophoridae); swordfishes (Xiphiidae)
                                                       
                                                       Figure 2.30 Istiophorus platypterus,
                                                                   Pacific sailfish

The Istiophoridae are identified by an upper jaw in the form of a long sword. They
are big-game fish, large, fast and powerful,
and pelagic in open waters. Three marlins are
recognised, Makaira indica (black marlin),
M. mazara (blue marlin) and Tetrapturus au-
dax (striped marlin). The sailfish (Istiophorus
platypterus) has an extremely elevated dorsal
fin forming a sail-like structure which folds
into a groove. The swordfish (Xiphias gladius) is readily known by its particularly long blade-like rostrum. The adult swordfish differs
from the marlin and sailfish in having no scales. The name for the sailfish in PMP and POc,
 *saku-layaR, is a compound, derived from *saku ‘needlefish, garfish, long toms’ (§13) plus
 *layaR ‘sail’ (see vol.l, p. 194). Referential range in reflexes often includes swordfishes and
marlin as well as sailfishes, although the first two lack the sail-like dorsal fin.

<
PMP *saku-layaR ‘sailfish, swordfish’ (ACD)
POc *saku-layaR ‘sailfish’
  Adm: Loniu          colay             ‘sailfish, marlin, possibly also swordfish’
  Adm: Titan          colay             ‘generic for swordfish, marlin’
  Mic: Chuukese       tekuldr           Makaira sp., marlins; Istiophorus sp., sailfish
  Mic: Mokilese       tak-lar           ‘swordfish’
  Mic: Puluwatese tdki-ldr              ‘sailfish, swordfish’
  Mic: Ponapean       teki-ldr          ‘swordfish, sailfish, blue marlin’
PCP *saku-laya ‘swordfish, sailfish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan        saku-laya         ‘the saw-fish proper’ (saku Asxox&XAy Makaira spp.)
PPn *sakula ‘swordfish, sailfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan      hakula            ‘swordfish’ (haku ‘young hakuld)
  Pn:    Niuean       hakuld            ‘true swordfish (compare hakupin ‘sailfish’, haku taŋata ‘marlin’)
  Pn:    E Uvean      hakula            Makaira mazara, blue marlin’
  Pn:     Samoan      sa?uld            ‘name given to sword-fish and saw-fish’
  Pn:     Tokelauan hakuld              ‘Xyphias gladius and other swordfish spp.’
  Pn:     Tikopia     sakura            ‘sailfish’
  Pn:    K’marangi     hakula (tuakua) ‘Makaira sp,, marlin’
  Pn:    K’marangi     hakula-hakuld 'Istiophorus sp,, sailfish’
>


                                                                                  Fish    117


   The following reflect only the first element, *sakw.

__pre__
  NNG: Wogeo           sak barema            ‘sailfish’
  NNG: Lukep           sau-rere              ‘sailfish’
  NCV: Paamese         me-sau koaa sesali    ‘Tetrapturus audax, marlin’ (lit. ‘fish which
                                             spears’)
  SV:     Ura          yayo                  ‘marlin’
  Fij:    Wayan        saku vorowaga         ‘generic incl. most Istiophoridae, marlins
                                             and sailfishes’ {vorowaga ‘boat-eating’)
                       saku vorowaga tdŋwane ‘blue marlin’ (lit. male boat-eating marlin’)
  Pn:     Hawaiian     a?u                   ‘swordfish’ {a?u-lepe ‘sailfish’, a?u-kii
                                             ‘marlin’) (for `'``ha'lu)

    There is a second term which probably refered to a particular species or subgroup of
Istiophoridae in POc. In some languages of the Solomons it has replaced *sakulciyaR as the
name for the sailfish. This may be a reduplicated form of POc *piRu(q) ‘fan palm’ (vol.3,
p.222), whose fronds resemble the large dorsal fin of the sailfish.

<
POc *piRu-piRu ‘Istiophoridae’
  MM:    Nakanai        vilu-vilu    ‘sawfish’
  MM:    Marovo         viru-viru    ‘Istiophorusplatypterus, sailfish’
  MM:    Roviana        viru-viru    ‘k.o. swordfish, smaller than ikutaina’’
  SES:   Gela           vilu-vilu    ‘swordfish’
  SES:   Lau           filu-filu     ‘Istiophorus orientalis, Indo-Pacific sailfish’
  SES:   ’Are’are       (ia)hiru     ‘marlin’
  SES:   Kwaio         fi-filu       ‘blue marlin’
  SES:   Arosi          hiru-hiru    ‘large fish which swims in circles and is the sign of a shark being near’
  SES:   Longgu      (koi) vilu-vilu ‘sailfish’
  SES:   Langalanga filu-filu        ‘sailfish’
  SES:   Owa         (aiga)firu      Tong-bill swordfish, sailfish’
  Mic:   Kiribati    ir-iri          ‘sailfish’
>


2.59 Flounders and soles: left-eye flounders (Bothidae), toothed flounders (Paralichthyidae), right-eye flounders (Pleuronectinae), soles (Soleidae)

Flatfishes are poorly represented in tropical waters in comparison with their abundance in
cooler regions. Flounders, toothed flounders and soles are bilaterally asymmetrical, adapted
for life on the bottom where they bury themselves in sand or mud. Most inhabit shallow
coastal waters and estuaries. Larger ones are good eating (Munro 1967: p.124). Flatheads have a
similar habit of burying themselves in sand, but lack the distinctive oval shape of flounders
and soles. Many contemporary languages have a generic term for flatfishes. We have two
reconstructions, both with generalised gloss. In the next set both POc *alali and *lalali are
reflected.

118      Meredith Osmond

<
PCEMP *alali ‘halibut, flounder’ [35]
POc *[l]alctli ‘flatfish incl. flounders, soles’
     Adm:     Seimat          alal            ‘flounder, Platichthys spp.’
     Adm:     Wuvulu          alali           ‘flounder, Platichthys spp.’
     PT:      Dobu            nenai           ‘flounder, sole’
     PT:      Kilivila        (bu)lali        ‘fish the shape and size of a dinner plate’ (Lawton)
     MM:      Patpatar        lei             ‘sole’
     MM:      Lihir           lei             ‘Bothidae, Pleuronectidae and Soleidae, flounders and soles’
  MM: Sursurunga lai                          ‘left-eye flounder’
  MM: Nehan              lalen                ‘halibut, flounder, sole’
  MM: Halia              lai                  ‘flounder, halibut’
  MM: Marovo             lali                 ‘generic for flounders’
  SES: Owa               rarari               ‘a flat fish’
  NOV: Mwotlap           lei                  ‘flat fish’
  SV:      Anejom        n-acac               ‘flatfish, adapted for life on sand’
  NCal: Iaai             nhen                 ‘Bothus sp.’
PCP *lalali, *ali ‘flatfish’ (Geraghty
  Fiji    Bauan          lalali        ‘large flounder’
PPn *ali ‘Bothus spp,, flounder’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Niuean       ali          ‘Bothus sp., flatfish, flounder’
  Pn:     Tongan       ali          ‘flounder’
  Pn:     Rennellese agi            ‘general name for flatfishes, flounders, soles etc
  Pn:     Samoan       ali          ‘name given to flatfish, esp. some flounders’
  Pn:     Tokelauan ali             ‘Bothus sp., flounder’
  Pn:     W Futunan ari             ‘Bothus sp., flounder’
>

<
POc *lapaq ‘various flat fishes incl. sole and flounder’
   Adm:       Titan           lapa             ‘flathead, Platycephalidae’
   Adm:       Loniu           lapak            ‘sole spp.’
   NNG:       Mutu            lab-lab          ‘various sole and flounder spp.’
   PT:        Iduna           nafaya           ‘flatfish’
   PT:        Gumawana        napai            ‘flounder’
   PT:        Kilivila        napai            ‘Bothus pantherinus’
   MM:        Maringe         glapi            ‘flounder’ (final vowel unexplained)
   Mic:       Chuukese        lippə(r)         ‘all flatfishes’
   Mic:       Satawalese      nippæ(r)         ‘left eye flounder’
cf. also:
   Pn:        K’marangi       pai-pai          ‘Arnoglossns. flounder’
>

[35] Reflected by Ambon (ɑ/)ɑ// ‘halibut, flounder’ and the Oceanic data.

                                                                                    Fish     119


2.60 Stonefishes (Synanceiidae)
                                                      
                                                      Figure 2.31 Synanceia verrucosa, reef
                                                                      stonefish

Scorpionfishes and lionfishes were formerly included with stonefishes as Scorpaenidae, but
stonefishes have now been classified as a separate family, Synanceiidae. The latter are 
shallowwater fishes, very sluggish, spending most of
their life concealed in mud or among rocks
and coral. Most have grotesquely misshapen
heads and bodies covered with rough warty
skin. If trodden on, they can inject an extremely
painful neurotoxin which, in some cases, has
proved fatal to man (Munro 1967: p.538). Reflexes of
POc * [h,n]opu(q) are numerous and widespread.
Most Oceanic languages have merged /n/ and
n/, so provide no evidence for choosing between
competing reconstructions, but Sudest reflects
only, while Titan, Loniu and Wayan reflect n
only. Lynch (pers. comm.) suggests the i of the Naman term (ni)niv might be evidence supporting 
initial *»-. Although the referent is consistent throughout almost all Western Oceanic
languages, it has apparently become a generic for fishes with poisonous spines, including at
least some scorpionfishes in Micronesia, Wayan Fijian and parts of Polynesia.

<
PMP *hepuq ‘stonefish’ (ACD)
POc *(h,n)opu(q) ‘Synanceia spp., stonefishes’
  Adm:    Mussau     nou              ‘stonefish’
  Adm:    Titan      no               ‘stonefish, Synanceiidae’
  Adm:    Loniu      noh              ‘k.o. poisonous fish’
  NNG:    Kove       nou              ‘stonefish’
  NNG:    Tuam       nov              ‘stonefish’
  NNG:    Malai      nob              ‘stonefish
  NNG:    Tami       no?              ‘stonefish’
  NNG:    Takia      nou              ‘stonefish’
  NNG:    Kaiep      nou              ‘stonefish’
  NNG:    Manam      nou              ‘stonefish’
  PT:     Duau       nohu             ‘stonefish’
  PT:     Misima     nou              ‘generic for lionfishes, firefishes and stonefishes’
  PT:     Molima        novu          ‘stonefish’
  PT:     Sudest     ho               ‘stonefish’
  PT:     Motu       nohu             ‘stonefish, Synanceia trachynis'’ [5'. horrida]
  PT:     Kilivila      lou, nou      ‘stonefish’
  MM:     Vitu       novu             ‘stonefish’
  MM:     Bulu       novu             ‘stonefish’
  MM:     Patpatar   nuh              ‘stonefish’
  MM:     Halia      nohu             ‘poisonous stonefish’
  MM:     Marovo       novu         ‘Synanceia verrucosa, reef stonefish’
  SES:    Gela         novu         ‘most species of the family Scorpaenidae’
  SES:    Kwaio        nofu         ‘stonefish’
  SES:    ’Are’are     nohu         ‘small black fish with poisonous spikes on head and back, a prick causing severe pain for several days’
  SES: Arosi          nohu          ‘k.o. fish with spiny ridge’
PNCV *novu ‘scorpion, venomous fish’ (Clark 2009:158)
  NCV: Tam ambo       novu          ‘stonefish, up to 20 cm, changes colour and has poisonous fins’
  NCV: Raga           (bv ati)novu 'Synanceiu spp,, prob. S. verrucosa, stonefish’
  NCV: Nam an         (ni)niv       ‘stonefish’
  NCV: Kiai           novu          ‘scorpion’
  SV:   Anej orh      ne-no         ‘S. verrucosa’’
  NCal: Voh-Kone neuk               ‘stonefish’
  NCal: Pije          neuk          ‘S. verrucosa’
  Mic: Kiribati       nou           ‘Scorpaenidae’
  Mic: Chuukese       nou           ‘S. verrucosa, stonefish’
  Mic: Puluwatese now               ‘scorpionfish’
PCP *novu ‘ Synanceja verrucosa, stonefish’ (Geraghty: PCP *hovu)
  Fij:  Rotuman       nohu          ‘fish that buries itself in the sand and can inflict a poisonous sting with its fin’
  Fij:  Bauan         novu          ‘fish of an ashen colour, resembling a stone, very rough horny skin’
  Fij:  Wayan         novu          ‘generic for all stonefish and certain scorpionfish which resemble stonefish in appearance and deadly sting’
PPn *nofu ‘Synaceja verrucosa, Scorpaenidae spp.’ [now Synanceiidae] (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Tongan       nofu         ‘k.o. fish with poisonous spikes’
  Pn:    Niuean       nofu         ‘scorpionfish; stonefish’
  Pn:    E Uvean      nofu         \S'. verrucosa’
  Pn:    Rennellese nohu           ‘k.o. poisonous fish’
  Pn:    Pukapukan nou (watu) ‘S. verrucosa’ (watu ‘stone’)
  Pn:    Samoan       nofu         ‘k.o. fish with poisonous spines, Scorpaenopsis and Synanceia’
  Pn:    Tikopia      nofu         ‘stonefish’
  Pn:    Hawaiian     nohu         ‘scorpionfish’
>


120   Meredith Osmond



2.61 Triggerfishes (Balistidae); filefishes and leatherjackets (Monacanthidae)


                                                                                                  Fish     121


                         Figure 2.32     Monacanthus sp,, scribbled leatherjacket


Triggerfishes (Balistidae) are characterised by a football shape, leathery skin, and small
mouth with powerful jaws. They are feeble swimmers, herbivorous, generally solitary in
habit, seeking shelter among coral heads and weeds. The flesh of many is poisonous, although
others are used for food (Munro 1967: p.557). Closely related to Balistidae are the Monacanthidae
(formerly Aluteridae), leatherjackets and fdefishes. They differ from triggerfish in skin texture,
leatherjackets having a leathery skin while that of filefish is rough and velvety (Munro
p.564). Four POc terms are reconstructable, with *jumu the most likely candidate for a generic
term. *bubu and *[b waRu\bv aRu may, like * lio-lio, have had more specific reference.
Variability of gloss frequently indicates only variability of common names for the same species.
For instance, common names for Pseudobalistesfuscus include the yellow-spotted triggerfish
(Allen & Swainston) or brown triggerfish (Kailola). Although juveniles have yellow lines and
spots, adults have overall dark coloration.

<
POc *jumu ‘Balistidae, triggerfish and possibly Monacanthidae, leatheijackets’ [36]
  NNG: Tami                   sum              'Pseudobalistesftavimarginatus` [yellow-margin triggerfish]
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) dum                        ‘triggerfish, leatherjacket’
  PT:    Motu            dumu                  ‘k.o. triggerfish’
  NCV: Tam ambo         jumu                   ‘k.o. big fish with strong skin’
  NCV: Namakir           him                   ‘triggerfish’
  SV:    Anejom          ne-θom``              ‘Rhinecanthus sp,, triggerfish’
  NCal: ɪaai             (wa)jimii             'Batistes sp.’
PCP *cumu ‘Balistoidei, triggerfish’ (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Rotuman         S7//7W        ‘leather jacket’
  Fij:   Bauan           sumu-sumu ‘fish like the porcupine fish, but with no prickles. Tetrodon spp.’
  Fij:   Wayan           ðum           ‘generic for Balistidae and some or all Monacanthidae’
  Fij:   Kadavu          dumu          'Batistes and Cantherhines spp., smaller than gau
PPn *sumu ‘Balistidae’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:   Tongan          humu           ‘k.o. fish’
  Pn:   Niuatoputapu humu              ‘Balistidae, Rhinecanthusaculeatus’ [black-barred triggerfish]
  Pn:      Niuean         humu      ‘triggerfish’
  Pn:      E Uvean        humu      ‘Batistes spp.’ (humu-humu ‘generic for Balistidae’
  Pn:      Samoan         sumu      ‘triggerfish of genera Batistes and Balistapus’
  Pn.      Tokelauan      humu      ‘triggerfish’
  Pn:      Tikopia        sumu      ‘triggerfish and related types, Balistidae and Monocanthidae’
  Pn:      Hawaiian       humu-humu ‘triggerfish (generic)’
>

[36] Also listed are a number of terms supporting PNCV *(s,t)umu(s,t)(V) ‘rabbitfish. Siganus spp.’ (Vera'a 2u-
 mus, Dorig smut. Lakon tumuh, all Siganus doliatus, the last two also S. canaliculatus, Mota sumut 'k.o. fish'.
 Uripiv sunius. S Efate smwos, both ‘rabbitfish’. If these are related to POc *jumu, the PNCV reconstruction is
 *sumut-i and a final POc consonant *-/ is indicated (Alex Francois. John Lynch, pers. comm.).

122     Meredith Osmond

<
POc *bubu ‘Batistes taxon, triggerfish’
  Adm : Titan           bupw         ‘triggerfish, Balistidae’
  Adm : Seimat          pup          ‘k.o. reef fish with one large thorn on the back and several by the tail, good to eat’
  NNGr: Mangap          bubu         ‘k.o. fish’
  NNGr: Manam           bubu         ‘triggerfish’
  NNCr: Gedaged         bub          ‘Pseudobalistes flavimarginatus’ [green triggerfish] (Mueller)
  NNG:     Takia         bub         ‘ P. flavimarginatus’ (Mueller 1985)
  PT:      Ubir         fofo         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:      Sursurunga    bobo        ‘triggerfish’
  MM:      Lihir         bombo       ‘B. viridescens, P. flavimarginatus, larger triggerfishes’
  MM:      Lihir        bum          ‘Batistopus undulatus, orange-lined triggerfish, a notorious bait-stealer’
  MM:      Ramoaaina    bubu         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:      Teop         bobo         ‘some triggerfish spp.’
  SES:     Lau          bubu         ‘triggerfish’
  SES:     Kwaio        bubu         ‘reef triggerfish’
  SES:     ’Are’are     pupu         ‘small fish’
  SES:     Arosi        bubu         ‘k.o. fish, Batistes’ (also bubu baru-baru)
  SES:     Bauro        pupu         ‘ Balistoides viridescens ’
  NCV:     Vera’a       bum          ‘Balistidae’
  Mic:     Satawalese   p‘ up"       ‘triggerfish (generic)’
  Mic:     Kiribati     p‘'upwu      ‘generic for triggerfish’
  Mic:     Chuukese     p"’upw       ‘family name for triggerfishes’
  Mic:     Carolinian   bwubw        ‘triggerfish, Balistidae’
  Mic:     Mokilese     p`'up`'      ‘triggerfish’
  Mic:     Ponapean     p"’upw       Teatherjacket’ (Christian 1899)
>

<
POc *[b'' aRu]b‘aRu ‘Batistes taxon, triggerfish’
  PT:      Sinaugoro    balu              ‘Balistoides conspicillum, big-spotted triggerfish’
  PT:      Motu         baru-baru         ‘triggerfish, general term’
  PT:      Lala        balu-balu         ‘k.o. reef fish’
  PT:      Roro         paru-paru         ‘k.o. fish’
  MM:      Lihir        pial-pial         ‘Odontus niger, redtooth triggerfish’
   MM:      Marovo     baru-baru           ‘small triggerfish, prob. Rhinecanthus acideatus’
   SES:     Longgu     balu-balu           ‘Balistoides viridescens’
   SES:     Langalanga balu-balu           ‘B. viridescens’
   SES:     Arosi      (bubu)baru-baru     ‘a large sp. of Batistes’
   SES:     Kahua      paru-paru           "B. viridescens’
   NCV:     Dorig      pwar-pwar           "B. viridiscens, B. conspicillum1
   NCV:     Namakir    buru-bar            ‘triggerfish’
   NCV:     S Efate    pwar-pwor           ‘triggerfish’
   SV:      Anejom     na-p'`ou            ‘k.o. triggerfish’
   NCal:    Nelemwa    fa                  ‘Batistes sp.’
   Fij:     Nadroga    gwau                ‘large Balistidae’
   Fij:     Lau        gau                 ‘large Balistidae’
   Fij:     Kadavu     gau                 ‘Batistes spp,, larger thancumu.1
cf. also:
   Adm:     Titan      p'`atus             ‘triggerfish’
   Adm:     Penchai    pulot               ‘triggerfish, Balistidae’
   Adm:     Drehet     pwalap              ‘archerfish, 30-40 cm with alternating black and white triangle pattern’
  Mic:      Chuukese   p'`ini-uii          ‘B. viridescens, moustache triggerfish, Titan triggerfish’
  Mic:      Satawalese pæn                 ‘Pseudobalistes fuscus, brown triggerfish’
>

                                                                                   Fish    123


    The Titan and Penchai forms above reflect *b‘'alusV, which may resemble POc *b waRu
either through chance or by borrowing.

<
POc *lio-lio ‘Pseudobalistes fuscus, brown triggerfish’
  MM: Marovo            (makoto) ti-tio ‘k.o. large triggerfish’
  MM: Nehan             lio             ‘triggerfish (generic)’
  Mic: Ponapean         lio-li          ‘large dark blue species of leatherjacket’ (Christian 1899)
  Mic:      Mokilese    lio-li          ‘yellow-spotted triggerfish’
  Mic:      Kiribati    nuo-nuo         ‘fish with poisonous darts on tail, Batistes fuscus’
  Fij:      Rotuman     lio-lio         ‘large leatherjacket, called when young sum fea’ (fea ‘pale’)
>


2.62 Boxfishes, trunkfishes, cowfishes (Ostraciidae)

Members of this family are bottom dwellers in shallow water often around coral reefs. Normal scales have been replaced by bony plates fused into a hard box-like carapace. Mouth,
eyes and fins are the only movable parts. All are extremely shy, feeble swimmers, but some
are beautifully coloured. Some are reputed to have toxic flesh (Munro 1967: p.571). The next reconstruction is suspiciously similar to POc *[b‘aRu]b‘'aRu ‘Batistes taxon, triggerfish’, on
page 122, but this seems due to chance, as the glosses clearly allow a separate reconstruction.

124     Meredith Osmond

                       Figure 2.33   Ostracion nasus, shortnosed boxfish

<
POc *b waReu ‘Ostracion, boxfish’
  PT:     Misima      bwale(loga)     ‘Choerodon anchorago, anchor trunkfish’
  SES: Lau            kwaleu          ‘k.o. fish’
PROc * b war(o)-*bwar(o) ‘Ostracion, boxfish’ (Lynch: PSO *bwar(o)-*bwar(o))
  NCV: Mwotlap        na-p‘ay-pnay ‘O. meleagris, white-spotted boxfish’
  NCV: Uripiv         (da)pur-pur    ‘Ostracion, boxfish’
PCP *g wao-gw ao ‘Ostracion' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Rotuman     kao-kao        ‘k.o. fish. When young, called mod
  Fij:    Wayan       g"’d-gwd       ‘generic for boxfish’
>


    The next two reconstructions, *toqa and *moa, are problematic. Lynch (pers. comm.) has
suggested Proto Central Vanuatu *m‘atoqu ‘boxfish, Ostracion' (Paamese (u)matou, Namakir
m"’a-mwatoq, Nguna mwatou) which has echoes of both. There is also the possibility of
parallel development, an outstanding characteristic of this fish being its resemblance in taste
and texture to chicken, PCP *moa or */orz (Geraghty p. 166).

<
POc *toqa ‘k.o. fish with toxic flesh, probably Ostracion'
  PT:     Iduna        (sisi)tola     ‘pufferfish’
PFij *toa ‘Ostracion' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:   Bauan        toa             ‘a round fish like the sumu-sumu, trunkfish or Ostraciidae’
>

<
POc *moa ‘boxfish’
  MM: Marovo        moa (idere)     ‘Ostracion spp., boxfish’
PNCV *m"’a(toqu) ‘boxfish’ (Lynch pers. comm.)
  NCV: Paamese      (u)ma(tou)      ‘boxfish’
  NCV: Namakir tri'a-m‘'a(toq) ‘boxfish’
  NCV: Nguna        m''a(tou)       ‘boxfish’
PCP *moa(moa) ‘Ostracion' (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij: Rotuman      moa             ‘young kao-kao' (see above)
PPn *moa-moa ‘Ostraciidae, boxfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:  Tongan       mo-moa           ‘cowfish’
  Pn:  Pukapukan moa-moa             ‘Ostracion or Lactoria (cowfish) spp.’
  Pn:  Tokelauan moa-moa             ‘Ostracion oxLactoria spp.’
  Pn:  Rennellese moa-moa            ‘generic for boxfish, coffinfish, trunkfish, cowfish
  Pn:   Samoan      moa-moa          ‘trunkfish, genera Ostracion’
  Pn:  Hawaiian     moa              ‘k.o. trunkfish, pahu'
>

                                                                                  Fish    125


2.63 Puffers, toadfishes and blowfishes (Tetraodontidae); porcupinefishes and balloonfishes (Diodontidae)

Puffers are sluggish fish which fill the belly with air when disturbed, and then float to the
surface. They are feeble swimmers. Closely related are porcupine fish which are also selfinflating,
but distinguished by having moveable spines on head and body. Both are bottom
dwellers, and the flesh of both is toxic (Munro 1967: pp.545, 548). Although acd glosses PMP
*taRutum as ‘porcupinefish, puffer fish, Diodon sp.’, the WMP and CMP reflexes listed refer only
to porcupinefish, and the reference to pufferfish is no doubt to the spiny puffer, an
alternative name for porcupinefish. In Ambon (CEMP) a reflex is the term for a durian and
in Ponape (Mic) a term for both the fish and a soursop (also a fruit with prickles), while in
languages of Borneo (Kelabit, Katingan) and the Lesser Sundas (Manggarai, Lamaholot) reflexes mean
‘porcupine’. Both emphasise the semantic connection with porcupinefish rather
than the smooth pufferfish. Blust (2002:130) considers that because porcupines (the mammals) are
not found in the Philippines where PMP was presumably spoken, the term’s original
reference was to ‘porcupinefish’.

<
PMP *taRutu[m,i]/ ‘porcupinefish, Diodon sp.’ (acd includes puffers)
POc *taRutu(m,ij) ‘Diodon spp,, porcupinefish’
  MM:     Nakanai        talitu       ‘pufferfish, blowfish’
  MM:     Lihir          tarut        ‘Diodon spp., porcupinefishes (generic)’
  MM:     Patpatar       tarut        ‘French porcupinefish’
  SES:    Lau            an           ‘porcupinefish’ (shows loss of R before high vowels)
 NCV: Mota              terit         ‘Diodon spp.’
 NCV: Dorig             trit          ‘Diodon holocanthus, D. liturosus’
 NCV: Uripiv            daut          ‘porcupinefish’
 NCal: Nelemwa          dot           ‘porcupinefish’
 NCal: Iaai             kdt           ‘porcupinefish’
PMic *tautu ‘porcupine fish’ (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Kiribati          tauti         ‘puffer fish, Diodon’
 Mic: Puluwatese        həwi          ‘large growth stage of edible long-spined puffer fish’
 Mic: Carolinian        sow           ‘species of lagoon fish, poss. goatfish?’
 Mic: Ponapean          sey           ‘porcupine fish; soursop, Annona muricata’
 Mic: Mokilese         joy            ‘porcupine fish’
PCP *tautu ‘Diodon sp.’ (Geraghty 1990)
  Fij:   Rotuman       faufu          ‘fish which inflates itself when caught: covered with spikes like a porcupine’
PPn *tautu ‘Diodon spp,, porcupine fish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu toutu           ‘adult growth stage of porcupinefish’
  Pn:    E Uvean        tautu         ‘Diodontidae (no distinction of genera or species)’
  Pn:    Rennellese     tautu         ‘general name for balloon fish (porcupine fish)’
  Pn:    Samoan         tautu         ‘fish, Diodon sp., with very sharp spines’
  Pn:    Tokelauan      tautu         ‘Diodon sp.’
  Pn:    Tikopia        tautu         ‘Diodon sp.’
>

126    Meredith Osmond


                         Figure 2.34     Arothron leopardus, leopard pufferfish


   The next reconstruction is a semantic extension of POc *poto(k) ‘thorn’ (vol.3, p. 125).
PCP *voto, PPn *foto refer to the barb of a stingray.

<
POc *[poto]poto ‘pufferfish, porcupinefish’
  Adm: Titan           (buli)poto-poto ‘porcupinefish’
  MM: Marovo           poto             ‘generic for all boxfish and pufferfish’ (poto mariu ‘porcupinefish, Diodon spp.’)
  MM: Maringe          p''o-poto        ‘k.o. pufferfish or blowfish, such asArothrori
  NCV: Mwotlap         wtst-wot         ‘Arothron hispidus, porcupinefish’ [white-spotted puffer][37]
  NCV: Dorig           vvt-vot          ‘A. nigropunctatus’ [black-spotted puffer]
  NCV: NE Ambae (totoro) woto           ‘porcupinefish’
  Fij:   Wayan         voto             ‘spike or spines of a fish; prickle, thorn’
PPn *foto ‘barb of stingray’ (pollex) (see §66.6)
>

[37] Alex Francois (pers. comm.) points out that these North Vanuatu languages (+ other reflexes) unambiguously
 point to a sequence of vowels *u-o, indicating Proto North Vanuatu *vutovuto.

                                                                                Fish     127

<
POc *bwoe-b‘oe ‘pufferfish’
  MM:       Tab ar       pu-pui   ‘pufferfish’
  SES:      Gela         boe-bote ‘generic pufferfish, Tetradontidae’ (-f- unexpected)
  SES:      Longgu       boe (sina) ‘Diodon hystrix, porcupinefish’ (sina ‘his/her younger sibling’)
   SES: To’aba’ita boe (ni asi) ‘Arothron hispidus, pufferfish’ (lit. ‘inflated thing? of the sea’)
   SES: Langalanga boe            M. hispidiis' [white-spotted puffer]
   SES: Lau         boe           ‘toadfish’
   SES: ’Are’are   poe            ‘puffer fish’ (poe ha?u ‘porcupine fish’)
   SES: Sa’a       poe            ‘porcupine fish’
   SES:   Arosi     boe           ‘k.o. fish, very poisonous’
PNCV *bue-bue ‘pufferfish’ (Clark 2009:87)
   NCV: Lewo       pue-pue        ‘k.o. fish, sometimes poison, can puff itself up
   NCV: Namakir     bue-bu        ‘spineless puffer’
   NCV: S Efate    p'`u(nopun) ‘Tetradontidae, pufferfish’
   SV:    Anejom    (nu)pupou     ‘pufferfish’
   NCal: Fwai      fu(rehd)       ‘Arothron meleagris’ [guineafowl puffer]
   NCal:  Nemi     [)hl(reŋa)     M. meleagris’
cf. also:
   Fij:   Wayan     bu(te)        ‘generic for some Tetraodontidae, small to moderate-sized puffers’
>

<
POc *buli ‘pufferfish’
   Adm:     Titan        buli         ‘puffer, leatherjacket
   Adm:     Loniu        pwili        ‘toadfish or puffer’
   Mic:     Kiribati     buni         ‘Tetraodontidae’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Manam        bulai        ‘pufferfish’
   NNG:     Takia        bului        ’pufferfish’
   NNG:     Bing         bulu(luy)    ‘toadfish’
>

    There is a term from Roro (PT) with form apparently cognate with PCP *jexejexe ‘Arothron’,
but its gloss rules out an upgrading to a POc reconstruction.

<
PCP *jexejexe ‘Arothrori (Geraghty 1994)
  Fij:    Wayan       seke-seke    ‘Canthigaster margaritata, ocellated puffer’
PPn *teqe-teqe ‘Arothron and Canthigaster spp,, pufferfish’ (Hooper 1994)
  Pn:     Tongan      te?e-te?e    ‘k.o. fish that inflates itself when caught
  Pn:     Rennellese te?e-te?e     ‘toadfish, balloonfish, puffers’
  Pn:     Samoan      tete         ‘immature globe fish’
  Pn:     K’marangi tete           ‘Arothron stellatus, starry toadfish’
  Pn:     Tokelauan tete           M. meleagris, guineafowl puffer’
  Pn:     Hawaiian    keke         M. hispidus' [white-spotted puffer]
cf. also:
   PT:    Roro         tele             ‘jellyfish’
   Mic: Chuukese       sekun            ‘Canthigaster spp,, smooth puffers’
>


128   Meredith Osmond

<
PROc *bwakaRe ‘porcupine fish’ (Clark 2009:93, PNCV)
  NCV:   Mota          pwayare         ‘urchin fish’
  NCV:   Vera’a        pwayar          ` Diodon spp.’
  NCV:   Mwotlap       (na-)p‘yciy     ` Diodon holacanthus, porcupine fish’
  NCV:   Namakir       bwaka           ‘spiny puffer’ [Diodon holacanthus]
  NCV:   Nguna         pwakae          ‘Diodon hystrix, spiny puffer’ [spot-fin porcupinefish]
  SV:     Kwamera    p"’ei             ‘spiny puffer’
  SV:     Anejoth    no-pwyai          ‘£>. histryx, porcupinefish’
  Mic:    Satawalese pokære(ŋ)         ‘Pleuranacanthus sceleratus, puffer’ [Lagocephalus scleratus]
cf. also:
   MM: Halia            burukari        ‘southern puffer’
>


2.64 Flying gurnards (Dactylopteridae)

Flying gurnards are semipelagic, with lesser powers of flight than the true flying fish. They
are heavily armoured, with enormous wing-like pectorals. Essentially bottom dwellers, they
are capable of short clumsy glide-like flights (Munro 1967: p. 541). Geraghty (p. 149) proposes PFij
*lulu, but no higher-level reconstruction has been made.


2.65 Remoras (Echeneididae)

Remoras (Echeneis naucrates and Remora remora), also known as suckerfish, have a modified
adhesive disk on the upper surface of the head with which they attach themselves to large
floating objects, frequently sharks. The Gela (SES) term for remoras is rao-rago bagea,
literally ‘joined to sharks’. I have no POc reconstruction for remora. I noted in §4 that the Motu
reflex of POc ^maŋew a ‘k.o. shark’ and the PCP reflex of *bakewa ‘shark (generic)’ denote
the remora, not the shark. Hooper (p.216) proposes PPn *tali-tali-quli ‘Echeneis sp,, remora,
and Naucrates ductor, pilot fish’ with suggested etymology * tali-tali ‘wait upon’ and *quli
‘to steer’.


                                   Figure 2.35   Remora remora

                                                                                 Fish   129


2.66 Fish parts

2.66.1 Roe

<
PAn *biRaS ‘roe, fish eggs’ (ACD) (dbl. *piRa)
POc *biRa ‘roe, fish eggs’ (acd: *piRa)
  NNG:       Lukep (Pono) bira         ‘crayfish eggs’
  PT:        Dobu         bila         ‘fish roe’
  PT:        Tawala       bile         ‘roe’
  PT:        Tubetube     bile(na)     ‘fish internals’
  PT:        Gapapaiwa    hire         ‘roe’
  PT:        Hula         pila         ‘roe’
  MM:        Tolai        bira         ‘fat’
  MM:        Marovo       bira         ‘fish eggs’
  MM:        Roviana      bira(na)     ‘the hard roe of fish’
  SES:       Gela         bila         ‘organ of a fish’
  SES:       Longgu       bila(na)     ‘fish eggs’
  SES:       Lau          bila         ‘roe of fish, yolk of egg’
  SES:       Kwaio        bila(na)     ‘roe’
  SES:       Sa’a         pile(na)     ‘roe of fish, yolk of egg; to spawn’
  SES:       ’Are’are     pira(na)     ‘roe of fish’
  SES:       Arosi        bira(na)     ‘roe of a fish, yolk of an egg’
  Mic:       Kiribati     bia          ‘growth, tumor, gland, knob, excresence, fish ovaries’ (pia ‘fish roe’)
   Mic: Marshallese       pia          ‘fish roe’
cf. also
   NNG: Mangap            bard(na)     ‘fish roe’
   Fij:  Wayan            via          ‘fish eggs, roe’
>

In Bauan Fijian and some Polynesian languages fish roe are called by the literal compound
‘fish eggs’ (Bauanyaloka ni ika. Tongan fua ?i ika etc.).


2.66.2 Gills

<
PMP *hasaq ‘gills’ (Zorc 1994)
POc *qasaq ‘gills’
  Adm:       Mussau       asaŋe        ‘internal gills’
  Adm:       Andra        aseŋa
  NNG:       Gitua        asana
  NNG:     Lukep (Pono)   kaŋana
  NNG:      Yabem          (ŋ)asaŋ
  NNG:      Ali            (s)aseŋ
  NNG:      Kaiep          (l)asay
  PT:       Motu           lada
  MM:       Nalik          isaŋ
  MM:       Tab ar         aca
  MM:       Madak          (m)aseŋ
  MM:       Halia          (w)esaŋa
  MM:       Tai of         n-esaŋ
  MM:       Babatana       (j)ajaŋa
  MM:       Marovo         asaŋa
  MM:       Roviana        asaŋa
  SES:      Gela           (s)asaŋa      (retention of final consonant + echo vowel indicates probable borrowing from a NW Solomonic language)
  SES:      Lengo          seŋe
cf. also:
   Adm: Lou                lisa-n        ‘red inner gills of a fish’
   SES:   Sa’a             laŋasi
   SES:   Arosi            raŋasi
>


130    Meredith Osmond

<
POc *koro ‘gills’
  MM:       Vitu        koro-koro
  MM:       Bulu        kolo-kolo
  Mic:      Kiribati    6
  Mic:      Marshallese or
  Mic:      Chuukese    wor
  Mic:      Woleaian    wozo
>

<
POc *gara ‘gills’
  NNG:      Mindiri  gar-gara(ŋ)
  NNG:      Megi ar  (gi)gare(n)
  NNG:      Takia    (gi)gare(n)
  PT:       Lala    ala-ala
  NCV:      NE Ambae gala(vana)
  NCal:     Nyelayu  yara(r)
cf. also:
   PT:      Kilivila    gare(na)
>

PPn *lau-lau-mea ‘fish gills’ (*‘external part, surface’ mea ‘red, reddish’) has also been
reconstructed (pollex).

                                                                                       Fish   131


2.66.3 Scales

A POc verb, * qunapi- ‘scale a fish’ can be reconstructed, and it appears that a noun * qunapi
‘fishscales’ was derived by back-formation in POc, existing as a doublet alongside *qunap.
Polynesian reflexes of the following reconstruction refer to turtle shell as well as fish scale.

<
PAn *quSaNap ‘scale of fish’ (ACD)
POc *qunap[i] ‘fishscale’ ((Dempwolff 1938))
  Adm: Mussau           unei
  Adm: Seimat           uli
  NNG Tuam              anavu
  NNG Malai             anuvu
  NNG Gitua             atiap
  NNG Mindiri           kunapi(n)
  NNG Wogeo             una
  PT:   Duau            kunaha
  PT:   Diodio          k'`anava
  PT:   Iduna           k'`anava
  PT:   Tawala          (we)nawa
  PT:   Mi sima         (un)una
  PT:   Maopa           unavi
  PT:   Hula            yuna           (yunavea (vt) ‘scale fish’)
  PT:   Motu            una            (unahi (vt) ‘ seal e fi sh ’)
  PT:   Roro            una
  MM: Lavongai          kunep          (All the MM terms reflect *k-')
  MM: Tigak             kunap
  MM: Kara (West) kunaf
  MM: Tiang             kuna
  MM: Bola              yona
  SES: Lau              unafa(na)
  SES: Kwaio            una-una        (unafia ‘ seal e fi sh ’)
  SES: Sa’a             uneha(?a)       ‘fish or snake scales’
  SES: Arosi            una            (unahi   ‘ seal e fi sh ’)
  SV:   Sye             niŋevi-
  SV:   Anejom          ninehe-
  Fij:  Rotuman         una
  Fij:  Wayan           una
PPn *quna ‘fish scale, turtle shell’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Niuean          una             ‘turtle shell’
  Pn:   Tongan          ?uno-?uno       ‘fish scales, turtle shell’
  Pn:   Samoan          una            (una laumei ‘scale of hawk’s bill turtle, i.e. tortoise-shell’)
  Pn:   Pukapukan unawi                 ‘fish scales’ (una ‘scale of turtle shell’)
  Pn:   Tikopia         unafi           ‘fish scales’ (una ‘carapace of marine turtle’)
  Pn:   Hawaiian        unahi           ‘fish scales’ (una ‘shell of turtle or tortoise’)
cf. also:
   PT:    Sinaugoro    cunave        ‘fish scales’
   Pn:    Niuean       hinafi        ‘fish scales, to scale a fish’
>


132   Meredith Osmond


2.66.4 Fins

Many languages distinguish between pectoral (breast), dorsal (back), caudal (tail) and ventral
(abdominal) fins. Reconstructions have been made for the first two. The reconstruction of the
next etymon, POc *banic ‘arm, hand, wing, fin (probably pectoral)’, entails some minor formal
problems. All cognates reflect initial *b- except those in the Central Papuan languages
Balawaia, Motu and Mekeo, which reflect *p-. Blust (ACD) reconstructs PMP *pani(d,j) with
either *-d or *-j as final consonant. The only Oceanic reflex with an etymological final consonant
is Vitu baniti-, pointing to POc *-t or *-c. The most straightforward analysis is that PMP
*panij became POc *banic by regular sound change. The final consonants of Wampur bani-t
and Mapos Buang bani-s can be ignored, as they reflect a probable construct suffix found
on inalienably possessed nouns in Huon Gulf languages. The POc meaning of this term had
clearly been extended beyond ‘wing’ to include the pectoral fins of fish, the wings of birds
and the arms of human beings.

<
PMP *panij ‘wing’ (Dempwolff 1938, acd)
POc *banic ‘arm, hand, wing, fin (probably pectoral)’
  Adm:      Seimat      paun              ‘pectoral fin’
  Adm:      Wuvulu      pani-             ‘hand’
  Adm:      Aua         pani-             ‘hand, fin’
  Adm:      Kaniet      pani              ‘wing, hand, fin’
  Adm:      Nyindrou    bani-n            ‘wing’
  Adm:      Pak         beni-n            ‘fin’
  Adm:      Nauna       pin               ‘wing’
  Adm:      Mondropolon pani-n            ‘wing’
  Adm:      Drehet      peni-ŋ            ‘wing’
  NNG:      Gedaged     bani-n            ‘fin, wing’
  NNG:      Takia       bani-             ‘forelegs, hand, arm’
  NNG:      Kairiru     panin             ‘fin’
  NNG:      Tumleo      pain              ‘fin’
  NNG:      Wampur      bani-t            ‘wing’
  NNG:      Mapos Buang bani-s            ‘fin, wing’
  PT:       Gumawana    pane-pane(na)     ‘fish fins, bird’s wing’
  PT:       Balawaia    vane              ‘wing, fin’ (for ''`'bani)
  PT:       Motu        hani              ‘fin, wing’ (for ''`'bani)
  PT:       Mekeo       pa-pani           ‘wing-like object, incl. fins’ (for ]bani)
  MM:       Vitu        baniti-           ‘wing, upper arm’
  NCV:      Mota        panei, paniu      ‘hand and arm, wing, pectoral fin, pig’s shoulder’
  NCV:      Merlav      bani              ‘wing’
  NCV:      Atchin      na-mben           ‘wing, sail, armlet’
  NCal:     Iaai        behi-n            ‘hand, arm, fin’
  NCal:     Iaai         la-behi-n           ‘wing’
  Mic:     Marshallese        pa                  ‘arm, hand, wing, fin’
  Mic:     Carolinian         ppwan               ‘pectoral fin and attached bone of fish’
  Mic:     Ulithian           pal                 ‘ventral fin; hand’
>


                                                                                                 Fish    133


     POc *kaba (n) ‘wing’, (v) ‘flap wings’ (this volume, p.275) may be reduplicated to refer
to the action of flapping back and forth, and in Polynesian languages this meaning is extended
to include the action of fins, flippers and wings together with the name of the bodypart.
Similarly, a number of Papuan Tip languages, Gumawana pane-panena, Molima pape, Wedau
papena and Mekeopa-pani use terms unrelated to *kaba-kaba to refer to both a bird’s wing
or its flapping action and for a fish fm/turtle flipper.

<
PEOc *kaba-kaba ‘to flap the wings’
   SES: Lau            ?aba-?aba        ‘to flap the wings’
PPn * kapa-kapa (1) ‘lateral fins’; (2) ‘flap wings’ (pollex)
   Pn:    Tongan       kapa-kapa        ‘flap the wings, side fin’
   Pn:    Rennellese kapa-kapa          ‘flippers, as of turtle, stingray, whale; base of fish fins’
   Pn:    Samoan        ?apa-?apa       ‘fin’ (?apa ‘to beat, of bird’s wing, turtle flipper etc.’)
   Pn:    Pukapukan kapa-kapa           ‘fin of fish, wing of bird, claw of turtle, arm of baby’
   Pn:    Tikopia      kapa-kapa        ‘pectoral fins; to flap, of wings’
   Pn:    Tokelauan kapa-kapa           ‘of sharks, stingray, turtle etc., lateral fin, flippers’
cf. also:
   MM: Tinputz         keva             ‘fish fins’
   Pn:    Tongan       kapo(ŋa)         ‘back fin’
>

    The following is a variant of the same word.

<
PMP *kapi-kapi ‘fin’ [38]
POc *kapi-kapi ‘pectoral fins’
  NNG: Labu                hi               ‘fish fin’
  MM: Marovo               kapi-kapi        ‘pectoral fins’
>

    Alternatively, a reflex of POc *laliija ‘ear’ is sometimes used to refer to a pectoral fin.

<
POc *lahŋa ‘pectoral fins’ (semantic extension of *talhja ‘ear’)
  Adm: Mussau              (u-)taliŋa    ‘external gills’ (lit. ‘feather + ear’)
  PT:  Motu                taia          ‘gill fins of fish’
  SES: Kwaio               aliŋa(na-ila) ‘fish fin’(lit.‘ear of fish’)
  NCV: Mwotlap              delŋe        ‘pectoral fins’
  Fij: Rotuman             faliŋa        ‘pectoral fins’
>

[38] WMP Kagayanenkapi-kapi ‘fin' (dorsal), Murut ka-kapi ‘ventral fin’, Javanese kepet ‘fin’ and Balinese kepes
 ‘fin (generic)’ (CAD) support reconstruction of PMP *kapi-kapi ‘fin’.

134   Meredith Osmond

<
PMP *siRik ‘dorsal fin’ [39]
POc *siRiko ‘fish fin’
   MM:      Nakanai      siliko-liko     ‘fins’
   NOV:     Uripiv       siki            ‘fin’
   Fiji     Wayan        siko-silo       ‘fin’
cf. also:
   Mic:     Ponapean     sike            ‘top and bottom fins of a fish’ (,s for ft)
>

<
PMic *iiji ‘dorsal fin’ (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Sonsorolese ‘Ji                   ‘generic fin’
 Mic: Sonsorolese        iŋi ri varo    ‘ventral fin’
 Mic: Sonsorolese        iŋi ri waor ‘dorsal fin’
 Mic: Woleaian           lŋi            ‘fin of fish’
 Mic: Mortlockese yo                    ‘dorsal fin’
 Mic: Carolinian         iŋi(l)         ‘dorsal fin’
 Mic: Puluwatese yiij                   ‘dorsal fin’
>

<
PWOc *sio(R,r)a ‘fish fin’
  PT: Kilivila           siola           ‘fin’
  MM: Babatana           si-sioro        ‘fins of fish’
>


2.66.5 Fish gullet

The next POc reconstruction has general reference to ‘middle’, its meaning narrowing to fish
gullet only at PPn level.

<
PMP *kempwj ‘abdomen, belly’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *kobu(ij) ‘middle, waist, belly’
  SES: Gela            obu               i) ‘the middle’; ii) ‘waist of a man’
  SES: Sa’a            upu-upu           ‘middle, waist, a swelling’
  SES: Arosi           ubu(na)           ‘middle’
PPn *kopu ‘fish gullet’
  Pn:   Tongan         kopu              ‘fish gullet’
  Pn:   E Futunan kopu                   ‘fish gut’
  Pn:   Tokelauan kopu                   i) ‘throat’; ii) ‘(fish) gut, stomach’
  Pn:   Maori          kopu              ‘belly, womb’
  Pn:   Hawaiian       bpu               ‘gizzard, maw of animal, crop of bird’
>

[39] WMP cognates: Palauan and Molbog sirik, Minangkabau and Bugis siri?, all ‘(dorsal) fin’ (Tryon 1995)
 support reconstruction of PMP *siRik ‘dorsal fin’.

                                                                                    Fish    135


2.66.6 Barb of stingray

Reflexes of POc *poto(k) ‘thorn’ (vol.3, p. 125) have come to refer to the spike or spines of a
fish in Wayan Fijian and the barb of a stingray in Polynesian languages.

<
PCP *voto ‘thorn, prickle; spike or spines of a fish’
  Fij:    Rotuman       hofu          ‘sting or piercer of stingray’
  Fij:    Wayan         voto          ‘spike or spines of a fish’
PPn *foto ‘barb of stingray’
  Pn:     Tongan       foto           ‘barb of stingray’
  Pn:    Niuean        foto           ‘thorn, barb, spike, bristle’
  Pn:     E Futunan foto              ‘barb of stingray’
  Pn:     Rennellese hoto             ‘barb, as on a stingray’s tail’
  Pn:     Samoan       foto           ‘barb of stingray’
  Pn:     Maori         hoto          ‘barb of stingray’
>


2.67 Conclusion

In this chapter I have reconstructed around 145 Proto Oceanic names for fish spread across
approximately eighty families. All reconstructions bar one are uninomials, the only binomial
reconstructable to POc level being *paRi-manuk ‘Aetobatis narinari, spotted eagle ray’.
Uninomials can refer to fish at the family, genus or species level, and in the case of sharks
bakewa) and rays (*(*paRf), at the level of suborder. In a number of cases I have been able to
identify a reconstruction as ageneric. Examples include * bakewa ‘sharks’, *paRi ‘ray’, * saku
 ‘needlefish’, *taRaqcm ‘squirrelfish’, *kcmase ‘mullet spp.’,*/7777« ‘fresh water eels’, *qonos
 ‘ Sphyraena, barracudas’. Generics may form the headword in a binomial subsuming two or
more species, or may simply be used to include two or more subtaxa. Another kind of generic
is that illustrated by *bebek ‘generic for butterflyfish, coralfish’, which is simply a lumped
 category with no sub-taxa. In some instances it has been possible to link a reconstruction to
 a particular species. However, for the majority of reconstructions it has only been possible
to allocate an identity at the level of genus or family. Undoubtedly, POc fish nomenclature
would have included scores of binomials, commonly at the level of species. My inability
to reconstruct them is due partly to lack of detail in wordlists, but also to the likelihood of
 species variability across the region together with the apparent tendency of binomials to be
local innovations. Most languages also have terms, usually binomial, for categories that cut
 across Linnaean categories, grouping fishes by functional criteria rather than by morphology
 or behaviour. Satawal, for instance, has taxa which identify such categories as flying fish,
jumping fish, unpalatable fish, fish prohibited for women and children to eat, fish prohibited
for pregnant and menstruating women, fish given preferentially to the chief, and fish that
follow driftwood (Akimichi & Sauchomal 1982:25-6). Such terms also tend to be local innovations.
Andrew Pawley has argued that Proto Oceanic probably had around 400 terms for
fish (this volume, ch.3). The substantial number of reconstructions that exist for Proto Central
Pacific and Proto Polynesian is largely due to the work of Paul Geraghty and Robin Hooper,
building on Biggs & Clark (1993). Although Western Oceanic has far more languages than
PCP, we have few wordlists from there which provide good descriptions of fish nomenclature.
With the addition of more detailed wordlists from Western Oceanic languages, it should
be possible for researchers not only to reconstruct more terms, but to further refine the glosses
for those we have.

136   Meredith Osmond





3 Patterns ofstability and change in Oceanic fish names


3.1 Introduction

Some years ago, in a paper reconstructing Proto Polynesian (PPn) fish names, Robin Hooper
suggested that ‘fishing terms and fish names are good candidates for inclusion in core vocabulary
lists for Polynesian languages’ (Hooper 1994:187-8).[1] She meant that names for
kinds of fish and fishing methods may prove to be as stable as words in standard basic vocabulary
lists, such as the Swadesh 100 and 200 word lists. Stability in the lexicon can be
defined, operationally, in terms of retention rates of particular etyma in daughter languages.
Her suggestion rested on the observations that Polynesian fish names ‘reveal a high degree
of uniformity and semantic correspondence ..., which is attributable to a comparative uniformity
in the ichthyological fauna of the tropical South Pacific’ (Hooper 1994:186) and that in
Polynesian communities fishing has great economic and cultural importance. Hooper did not
undertake a close statistical analysis of retention rates for fish names or other fishing terms
but her remarks invite such a study.

    In this chapter I will investigate the stability of 52 of the 140 or so fish names that have
been reconstructed to the level of Proto Oceanic (POc), a language spoken more than 3000
years ago. Examination of a sample of contemporary Oceanic languages shows that POc
names for some fish taxa have been extremely persistent, others have been much less so, and
yet others occupy the middle ground. This leads to the question: Why have some names been
much more (or less) stable than others?

    I will also draw on evidence from contemporary languages to estimate the total number
of fish names likely to have been used by speakers of POc. Osmond (this volume, ch. 2)
reconstructs some 145 POc names for fish taxa, of which 140 look to be well attested in
terms of having reflexes distributed across more than one primary subgroup. Hooper (1994)
reconstructed 115 fish names for PPn, and for Proto Nuclear Polynesian, a stage ancestral to
all Polynesian languages except Tongan and Niuean, she reconstructed 147. Geraghty (1994)
was able to recover some 150 secure terms for Proto Central Pacific, the immediate ancestor
of Polynesian, Fijian and Rotuman.

[1] dedicate this paper to the memory of Phil Quick, whose research on the Pendau language of Sulawesi included
detailed study of Pendau fish names and fishing knowledge (Quick 2005. 2010). I am indebted to Meredith
Osmond for carefully checking the details of all the tables and for thorough-going critical commentary on an
earlier draft, and to Malcolm Ross for helpful comments.

138   A tidrew Paw ley


     Comparative analysis of contemporary lexicons for fishing communities speaking Oceanic
languages and exploiting environments comparable to those of the Bismarck Archipelago, the
probable location of POc, indicates that speakers of POc probably distinguished on the order
of 400 names for kinds of fish. In that case the total of about 140 fish names so far reconstructed
for POc represents about a third of the total. The question arises why so many names
are missing from the reconstructed inventory.


3.1.1 On the distribution of fish families, genera and species in the Pacific

R.H. Carcasson writes as follows of the fish fauna of the tropical Indo-Pacific region:

|      A surprisingly high proportion of Indo-Pacific species occur throughout the area: the
|      Central Indo-Pacific. consisting roughly of the Malay Archipelago, the Philippines and
|      New Guinea, has a richer fauna than any other part of the Region and has probably been
|      the principal evolutionary centre from which the entire Indo-Pacific has been populated.
|      As one moves away from this area, the fauna becomes progressively impoverished...
|      (Carcasson 1977:13).

More than 150 families of fish occur in the Indo-Pacific region. Although the number of genera and
species declines as one moves eastwards from New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago, the dominant
families (those with most species, e.g. the wrasses, groupers, trevallies
and jacks, damselfishes, cardinalfishes, surgeonfishes, gobies and moray eels) are present
throughout the region.

    The Bismarck Archipelago, the probable location of the POc speech community, is richer
in marine life than any other region in the South Pacific apart from New Guinea. The coral
reef systems of this region support several thousand species and several hundred genera.


3.1.2 The location and dating of Proto Oceanic

As we are concerned with retention rates of POc lexical items it is relevant to ask what time
span is involved. The breakup of POc can be dated with considerable confidence to between
3400 and 3100 BP. POc was almost certainly spoken in the Bismarck Archipelago, where the
greatest concentration of primary subgroups of Oceanic is found today. Dating of its breakup
to within a span of two or three centuries is possible because of the strong association between
the appearance in the Bismarck Archipelago and subsequent spread across the SW Pacific of
the highly distinctive archaeological culture known as Lapita and the initial diversification of
Proto Oceanic within the Bismarcks and the subsequent spread of Oceanic languages across
the SW Pacific (Green 2003, Kirch 1997, 2000, Pawley 2003, 2007, 2008, Spriggs 1997,
Summerhayes 2001).

                                                  Stability and change in Oceanic fish names             139

    The latest critical reviews of C14 dates indicate that Lapita appeared in the Bismarcks
around 3400-3450 BP (Specht 2007). By 3200-3100 BP bearers of this culture had settled
the Reefs-Santa Cruz group, east of the main Solomons group (Green 2003, Green et al.
2008), and by about 3000 BP or earlier they had occupied Vanuatu (Bedford 2003, 2006),
New Caledonia (Sand 2003) and Fiji (Nunn et al. 2004, Clark and Anderson 2009). By 2900
Lapita populations were present in the southern part of the Tongan group (Burley and Con-
naughton 2007) and by 2800-2700 they were in Samoa and the small islands between Tonga
and Samoa: Futuna, Uvea (Wallis) and Niuatoputapu (Clark and Anderson 2009).

    The carriers of Lapita material culture were, almost certainly, the first people to settle the
Reefs-Santa Cruz group, Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji and western Polynesia. Given that all
these regions were occupied within 300-600 years of the first appearance of Lapita in the
Bismarcks, we would expect that their first colonists spoke forms of Oceanic that were not
greatly differentiated from their common ancestor, Proto Oceanic.[2]

[2] For example, the Proto Central Pacific (PCP) dialect complex, immediately ancestral to the
Fijian and Poly nesian languages and Rotuman, can be equated with the first couple of centuries of Lapita settlement in Fiji.
 PCP retained about 91 percent of POc basic vocabulary’ on a 200 item list (Pawley 2010).


3.2 Methodological preliminaries

Before proceeding to an analysis of the data on fish names we should consider some methodological issues.


3.2.1 Datasources

The descriptions available on fish names and taxonomies in Oceanic languages are very uneven in
quality and quantity. Although there are reasonably good general dictionaries for
about 50 of the 450 or so languages in the Oceanic group only a handful provide something
close to a comprehensive list of fish names together with scientific identifications and
information about the indigenous taxonomy. In addition there are a few published papers and
unpublished works that provide fairly extensive data. The statistical data cited in this paper
are based on materials from a sample of 15 Oceanic languages plus a non-Oceanic language of
Micronesia, Palauan, and a Malayo-Polynesian language of Sulawesi, Pendau (see Table 3.1).


3.2.2 On taxonomies and nomenclatures

3.2.2.1 Folk taxonomies

The core of a folk taxonomy is a set of named categories (taxa) that form a semantic hierarchy
in which all taxa are related by virtue of being included in a higher order category or by virtue
of including lower order taxa. A term that includes two or more named subtaxa is a generic
taxon. There may also be covert taxa, conceptual categories whose unity is indicated by other
means than sharing a class name. For example, for many English speakers horses, zebras and
donkeys form a covert category (horse-like animals), as do dogs and wolves. A distinction
needs to be made between the core categories in the taxonomic hierarchy and other kinds of
categories that crosscut these, e.g. ecological categories, like ‘fish of the reef’ vs ‘fish of the
deep sea’, and functional categories, like ‘poisonous fish’.

140      Andrew Pawley

__pre__
         Table 3.1     Details of languages cited (all Oceanic except Palauan and Pendau)
   Name                  Location                       Subgroup         Main source
   ---
   Arosi                 Makira, eastern Solomons       SE Solomonic     Fox 1978
   Gela                  Florida, central Solomons      SE Solomonic     Foale 1998
   K’marangi             atoll south of the Carolines   Polynesian       Lieber and Dikepa 1974
   Kiribati              atoll chain, Kiribati          Micronesian      Thaman & Tabano n.d.
   Lau                  Malaita, SE Solomons            SE Solomonic     Fox 1974. Akimichi 1978
   Marovo               New Georgia. W Solomons         NW Solomonic     Hviding 1990. 1996. 2005
   Marquesan            Eastern Polynesia               Polynesian       Lavondes 1977
   M’bunai Titan         Admiralty Islands. PNG         Admiralties      Akimichi & Sakivama 1991
   Motu                  Central Province, PNG          Papuan Tip       Oram n.d.
   Mutu (Mandok)         Vitiaz Straits, PNG            North New Guinea Pomponio n.d.
   Niuatoputapu          small high island, W Polynesia dialect of Tongan Dye 1983
   Palauan               Western Carolines              Malayo-Polynesian Helfmann & Randall 1973
   Pendau                Central Sulawesi               Malayo-Polynesian Quick 2005. 2010
   Satawalese            Central Carolines              Micronesian      Akimichi & Sauchomal 1982
   Teop                 NE Bougainville, PNG            NW Solomonic     Shoffner 1976
   Uvean (Wallisian)     high island, W Polynesia       Polynesian       Rensch 1983
   Way an                small high island, W Fiji      Fijian           Pawley & Savaba 2003


3.2.2.2 Uninomials vs binomials

An important distinction is between uninomial and binomial names, sometimes called primary and
secondary terms. Uninomials are names that are either a single morpheme (oak,
pine, apple) or are multimorphemic but with meanings that are idiomatic (she-oak, screw
pine). A screw pine (pandanus) is not a kind of pine, and a she-oak (casuarina) is not a kind
of oak. Binomials consist of a uninomial term plus a modifier, where the uninomial names
the class and the modifier distinguishes members of the class (i.e. a white pine and redwood
pine are kinds of pine, and white pointer shark and hammerhead shark are kinds of shark).
Uninomials typically name taxa at the level of what Berlin (1992) calls ‘folk generics’. These
are taxa that belong to a particular major generic or ‘life form’ such as ‘fish’, ‘bird’ and ‘tree’
and which themselves may contain subtaxa that are designated by binomials.

    Binomials provided by native speakers need to be viewed with some caution.
When informants are asked to name or discriminate between specimens they sometimes offer ad hoc
descriptions, such as ‘spotted X’, or ‘red X’, which the investigator may mistake for genuine
conventional names. Independent checks with a range of informants are desirable but not
always possible.


3.2.3 On counting the units in a taxonomy

                                             Stability and change in Oceanic fish names        141

Counting the number of lexical units in a folk taxonomy is not completely straightforward.
There are several ways of counting members, which give different results. First, one can count
the total number of terms that represent taxa. Each formally distinct term is counted separately
even if it has synonyms, e.g. Australian English chook, fowl, and chicken ‘domestic
 fowl, Gallus gallus' count as three terms. Second, one can count just the number of contrasting
 taxa, in the sense of distinct conceptual categories, treating as a single taxon any set of
 referential synonyms (i.e. two or more terms that have the same referential meaning). In this
 case, for some English speakers the three terms chicken, fowl and chook would represent one
 taxon. In this study totals generally refer to the number of distinct terms for fish taxa provided
 by each source, because it is not always possible to identify synonyms in a list of names.

     Another variable is names for growth stages. For certain species in several groups (e.g.
 barracuda, eels, groupers, wrasses, mullet, trevally, sharks) Oceanic languages commonly
 distinguish two or more growth stages. In this study I follow the standard practice of treating
 each name for a growth stage as representing a distinct taxon.

     Yet another variable is polysemy. Some terms have two senses, one referring to a more
 specific category, another to a more general one (e.g. cat can refer to the domestic cat, Felis
felis, or more broadly to any member of the cat family (lion, tiger, cheetah, etc.) In this study
 generic and specific senses of fish names are not counted separately, chiefly because we lack
 reliable data on such sense differences for most languages.


3.2.4 Semantic reconstruction

Hooper (1994:189) points to the kinds of difficulties met in attributing meanings to reconstructed
fish names. The comparative linguist is dependent on the quality of the definitions
available in accounts of contemporary languages and on the measure of agreement between
them. Usually it is possible to pin down the meaning of a reconstructed form to a family or
a group of closely related families, e.g. ‘kind of rock-cod (Serranidae)’ or ‘kind of snapper
(Lutjanidae) or emperor (Lethrinidae)’. In a minority of cases it can be said with considerable
confidence that a name referred to a particular species or group of closely related species, or
to a growth stage of a species or genus.


3.2.5 On formulating hypotheses about whether fish names show similar retention rates to basic vocabulary

Hooper (1994) presents a brief statistical argument that Polynesian uninomial fish names,
overall, show retention rates similar to those exhibited by etyma whose meanings belong
to standard lists of basic vocabulary. She reconstructs 115 PPn fish names for generic and
specific taxa, of which only three are binomials. She notes that if we compare the 112 PPn
uninomials with lists for Uvean (Rensch 1988), Niuatoputapu (Dye 1983) and her own list
for Tokelauan we get impressively high retention rates. The rates are about 66% for Uvean
(74 retentions), 61% for Niuatoputapu (68 retentions) and 84% for Tokelauan (94 retentions).
Hooper adds that ‘ [if] we hypothesize that the Proto Polynesians, like their present-day
descendants, used a vocabulary of about 130 monomial [uninominal] fish names, the retention
rates are more plausible: 60% for Uvean, 52.2% for Niuatoputapu, and 72.3% for Tokelauan -
close to the expected average retention rate of 70% for core vocabulary’ (Hooper 1994:187).

    There are certain problems with this proposal. First, Hooper does not say how the
‘expected’ average retention rate of 70%’ for contemporary Polynesian languages was arrived at.
It was presumably based on work in glottochronology indicating that, on average, languages
will replace about 20 percent of words on the 200 item Swadesh list per 1000 years. An estimate
of 30 percent replacement would make sense on the assumption that PPn broke up
around 1400 years ago. This estimate is reasonable as a latest possible date of PPn breakup.

142    Andrew Pawley

    Second, Hooper’s assessment of average retention rates for fish names is based on just
those 112 uninomials that have been reconstructed for PPn. These etyma will be a subset of
the total number of fish names used in PPn (less stable names will not have been recovered).
How small a subset is 112? For reasons indicated in §4,1 estimate the number of uninomials
in PPn to be more than 200. To take the case of Uvean, 74 retentions out of 200 would equate
to a retention rate of 37 percent, still substantial but much less than 66 percent. Third, in some
cases semantic matches between PPn fish names and their reflexes are not exact, e.g. the POc
generic term for ‘shark’ is continued in some daughter languages by a term that refers to
the Remora or sucking fish, which attaches itself to sharks. In standard glottochronological
procedure, a form that continues a proto-language etymon but changes the meaning is not
counted as a retention. In the case of PPn fish names that refer to particular families, genera
or species, a reasonable compromise would be to count a reflex as retained in a daughter
language provided that it refers to the same biological family as the etymon in the protolanguage.

    There is, however, a more fundamental concern. Even a comparison of the average retention
rates of PPn fish names with that of basic vocabulary will not leave us much the wiser.
This is because the individual meanings in the basic vocabulary list do not share a constant
retention rate. On the contrary, there is enormous variation in the rates at which forms representing different meanings are replaced. A comparative study of Austronesian languages
(Dyen et al. 1967) indicates that, over a span of several millennia, the least persistent item
on the Swadesh 200 item basic vocabulary list is many times more likely to be replaced than
the most persistent item.

    Using a 196 item meaning list Dyen et al. compared 89 Austronesian languages and calculated
cognation rates over the total set of language pairs. The languages were drawn from
diverse subgroups, most of them belonging to the Malayo-Polynesian subgroup, to which 98
percent of Austronesian languages belong. It was found that 10 meanings on the list show
cognation rates of between 50 and 80 percent. Forty-two meanings have rates exceeding 20
percent. Only 70 meanings have rates of more than 10 percent. As many as 105 meanings
show cognation rates of less than seven percent and 43 of these score below three percent.[3]

    Admittedly, cognation rate and retention rate in basic vocabulary are not the same thing.
The former is a measure of how often pairs of languages have cognate words for a given
meaning on the list. The latter is a measure of how often a given reconstructed etymon is
retained with the same meaning. But cognation rate in Dyen et al’s study will generally be
a fairly accurate indicator of retention rate. For example, if a meaning, say ‘louse’, shows a
high cognation rate it is almost certainly represented by an etymon (in this case, *kutu) that
was present in a proto-language ancestral to most or all 89 languages in Dyen et al.’s sample
and that has been continued by a high proportion of daughter languages.

[3] Why do basic vocabulary items vary so markedly in cognation rates? Differences in frequency of use in
 discourse may be an important part of the answer but it cannot be the whole answer. Indeed, forms for the ‘verb ’
 meaning that is most frequent in spoken discourse in most languages of the world, ‘say’, have a cognation rate
 of less than one percent in the study by Dyen et al., while forms for the less frequent ‘die’ and ‘eat’ score about
 60 percent. The meaning ‘vomit’ (22%) scores higher than ‘come’ (15%) and ‘live’ (9%), although the latter
 cross-linguistically are much more frequent. Why do terms for ‘louse’, with a cognation rate of 71 percent,
 rank in the top five, while ‘man’ (10.5%) and ‘woman’ (13.8%) both fail to make the top 50? Why is ‘blood’
 among the most stable items (27th in rank, cognation rate 27.8%) while ‘water’ is a good deal less stable
 (59th, with 12.3%)? Malcolm Ross (pers. comm.) suggests that where the denotatum of a basic vocabulary
 term is conceptually sharply distinct from other denotata, in a way that is common cross-linguistically, as is the
 case with ‘die’, ‘vomit’ ‘louse’ and ‘blood’, the term will have a high retention rate. But where the denotatum
 belongs to a set of denotata encoded by a set of conceptually overlapping terms, as is the case with ‘say’ (cf
 ‘speak’, ‘talk’, ‘tell’, ‘inform’ etc.), the retention rate will be low.

                                            Stability and change in Oceanic fish names     143

     Retention rates for what are approximately the most stable 60 items of POc basic vocabulary
in a modified Swadesh list were presented in Pawley (2009). Retentions and replacements were recorded in a sample of 40 present-day Oceanic languages. Retention rates for
individual items ranged between 97 and 23 percent. Each of the 24 most persistent POc et-
yma were retained by 70 percent or more languages, 44 etyma were retained by 50 percent
or more languages, 54 by 40 percent or more, and 60 by 23 percent or more.

     Given that individual basic vocabulary items vary so much in their retention rates, there
is little point in asking whether POc fish names in general show retention rates similar to
basic vocabulary in general. We need to ask questions sensitive to the variable retention rates
of individual lexical items. First, retention rates needed to be determined for a sample of
POc fish names Then it will become possible to make comparisons with the rates established
for the 60 most POc etyma in the modified Swadesh basic vocabulary list. We can ask, for
instance, how many fish names have a higher retention rate than the 20th, or 40th, or 60th
most stable etymon in the basic vocabulary list.


3.3 Retention rates for POc fish names

3.3.1 Investigating retention rates for a sample of POc fish names

Retention rates for 52 POc fish names, drawn from Osmond’s list of reconstructions, were
investigated in 12 languages belonging to diverse subgroups: Titan (Admiralties group),
Mutu (North New Guinea), Motu (Papuan Tip), Marovo and Teop (Meso-Melanesian), Gela
(Guadalcanal-Gelic), Arosi and Lau (Makira-Malaitan), Kiribati and Satawalese (Micronesian),
Wayan (Fijian) and Niuatoputapu (a dialect of Tongan, Polynesian).

    Between them, the 52 POc names represent a wide range of fish families. In Osmond’s
data each of the 140 secure reconstructions is well attested by cognate sets drawn from diverse
subgroups. In my sample not all reconstructions are well attested: whereas Osmond was in
some cases able to draw on cognates from scores of languages, my sample consists of just 12.

    For convenience of presentation the 52 POc names are divided into four groups. Tables
 3.2-3.5 show the presence (y) or absence (-) of reflexes of each etymon in the 12 contemporary
 languages. A question mark, accompanied by an explanatory footnote, indicates doubt
as to whether the form should be counted as a reflex of the etymon. The columns showing
the number of retentions (‘no. retentions’) and the percentage of languages that reflect the
etymon then show alternate figures, one not counting, the other counting the doubtful reflex.

144    Andrew Pciwley

__pre__
      Table 3.2     Presence/absence of reflexes of POc fish names in twelve languages (1)
       *ikan             ‘generic for fish (and certain other free-swimming aquatic creatures)’
       *bakewa          ‘generic for sharks’
       *paRi            ‘generic for rays’
       *tuna             ‘generic for freshwater eels (Anguillidae)’
       *qawaq           ‘milkfish, Chanos chanos (Chanidae)’
       *saku            ‘needlefish and long toms (Belonidae)’
       *qonos            ‘mature Sphyraena spp,, possibly generic for all barracuda
       *qaln            ‘taxon of barracuda (Sphyraenidae)’
       *taijiRi          ‘Scombridae spp,, probably incl. Spanish mackerel and wahoo’
       *qatun           ‘skipjack tuna, Katsuwonuspelamis, (Scombridae)’
       *walu            ‘Scombridae sp. or spp.’
       *saku-layaR       ‘sailfish (Istiophoridae)’
       *sabutu           ‘snapper (Lutjanus) or emperor (Lethrinus) sp. or spp.’
                                                                               5                    <z>
                                                o                              e.                   c
                                                >                        c
                                                                         cC    o     eð                       fl
                          c     5    s    cu    o                 ’to    >>    ‘5                   u-        4>
                                                                                                              Q
                         —eð<   o         o     eə    "aS    5
                                                             eð    o                ’C                        Uh
                                          £                              £          2              6
                        H       S    S          S     0      u                 £           GC      a          cu
       *ikan            y            y          y     y      y    y      y     y     y     y      10         83
       *bakewa          y       y4   -    y     -     y      y    y      -     -     y     y       8         67
       *paRi            y       -    -    -     y5    y      y    y      y     y     ?6    y     8-9      67/75
       *tuna            -       -    y    -     -     -      -    -      y     y     -     -       3         25
       *qawaq           -       -         -     -            -    _7                               6         50
                                     y                y                  y     y     y     y
       *saku                                                                         _8            3         25
                                                                         y     y           y
       *qonos           —            -    -     -                        _9          -     -       5         42
                                y                     y      y    y            y
       *qalu            y       -    -    -     -     y      -    -      -     -     -     -       2         17
       *taijiRi         ylO     -                     _n     -    _12    -     -                   6         50
                                     y    y     y                                    y     y
       *qatun           -       -    -    y     -     y      y    y      y     y     y     y       8         67
       *walu            -            -    -     -     _13    -    -                  -     -       3         25
                                y                                        y     y
       *saku-layaR                                                                   ?14         4-5      33/42
                        y                                                y     y           y
       *sabutu          -       y    -    -     -     -      -    -      y     y     -     -       3         25


[4] mayoa for ^bayewa.

[5] Only example is vari-popolo ‘bull ray. Mylob ahis’.

[6] baimanu ‘devil-headed manta ray’ for ^aimanu. Borrowed?

[7] Arosi has saw a ‘mullet’ (confusion with reflex of *(k,q)aRual).

[8] raku ‘swordfish’ for f ‘needlefish’.

[9] Wayan has ono ‘Lienardella fasciata. harlequin tuskfish (Labridae)'.

[10] taŋini for ''`laŋi.

[11] Loss of first syllable. Hi for ^taŋili.

[12] Wrong meaning: ‘shoal of porpoises'.

[13] Changed meaning: alu ‘barracuda’ not ‘Scombridae, possibly Spanish mackerel’.

[14] Only first part cognate in compound raku-riri ‘Pacific sailfish’, raku generic for Istiophoridae and Xiphiidae.

                                                       Stability and change in Oceanic fish names          145

__pre__
     Table 3.3      Presence/absence of reflexes of POc fish names in twelve languages (2)
      *kulabo             ‘snapper sp. or spp. (Lethrinidae)’
      *(n,n)opuq          ‘stonefish, Synanceia spp., incl. S. verrucosa (Synanceiidae)’
      *taRaqan            ‘squirrelfish, Sargocentron sp. or spp. (Holocentridae)’
      *jumu               ‘triggerfish (Balistidae) and possibly leatherjackets (Monacanthidae)’
      *bebek              ‘generic for butterflyfish and coralfish (Chaetodontidae)’
      *kuRapu             ‘rock-cod, Epinephelus sp. or spp. including E. lanceolatus,
                          Queensland grouper (Serranidae)’
      *palaja             ‘rabbitfish, Siganus spp. (Siganidae)’
      *laci               ‘Scomberoides spp., incl. S. lysan (Carangidae)’
      *qulua              ‘Caranx sp., possibly C. ignobdis. big-headed jack (Carangidae)’
      *pilu               ‘Caranx sp. or spp. (Carangidae)’
      *qatule             ‘scad spp. (Carangidae), incl. Trachurops crumenophthalmus,
                          big-eyed scad’
      *taRutu(m,q)        ‘porcupinefish, Diodon spp. (Diodontidae)’
      *kanase             ‘generic for certain mullet (Mugilidae)’
      *bunaR              ‘batfish, Platax sp. (Platacidae)’
      *tiqo               ‘goatfish sp. (Mullidae)’
                                                                             -5                  cZ)
                                                                             cL                  c
                                                                             θd          Q        O
                                                                                                  a
                                                 o                           fl­         13       0>
                                                                                                           S3
                                                 >                     a
                                                                             o
                          c               fl­    o      S3       ’to   S3
                                                                             S3
                                                                                                  0>
                                                                                                  s-h
                                                                                                           0>
                          eð
                                o         o            ‘5    §    o          fl    ’C                      Q
                                                                                                           s-h
                                          £
                                                                  Uh
                                                                                         15       6        0>
                                                                             %           GC       fl       fl-
      *kulabo                  -          -      -     -     -   -     _15         -     -        2        17
                          y         -
                                                                             y
      *[n,n]opuq                                             -   7I6                          10-11     83/91
                          y    y    y     y      y     y               y     y     y     y
      *taRaqan            -    y    -     -      -     y     -   -     -     y     y     y        5        42
      *jumu               -    y    -     -      -     -     -   -     y     y     -     -        3        25
      *bebek              -    y    -     -      -     -     y   -     -     -     y     -        3        25
      *kuRapu             y    -    -     ?17    -     y     y   y     y     -     y     y      7-8     58/67
      *palaja                  -    -     -      -     -         7I8         -     -     -      3-4     25/33
                          y                                  y         y
      *laci               y    y    y     -      y     y     -   -     -     y     y     -        7        58
      *qulua                                                                       719   -      1-2      8/17
                                                                             y
      *pilu                                                            y     y     -     y        3        25
      *qatule             y                                            y     y     -     -        3        25
      *taRutu(m,q)        -    -    -     -      -     -     y   -     -     y     y     -        3        25
      *kanase             -    -    -     y      -     -     -   y     y     y     -     -        4        33
      *bunaR              -    -                 -     -     -   -     720   -     -     -      2-3     17/25
                                    y     y
      *tiqo               -    y    -     y      -     y     -   -     -     -     y     y        5        42

[15] kula for ykulabo.

[16] Vague gloss: ‘k.o. fish’/’fish with spiny ridge’.

[17] ravw. first syllable missing.

[18] Vague gloss: ‘k.o. fish’.

[19] urua for ^unu. Borrowed?

[20] vuna for ^buna.

146    Andrew Pawley

__pre__
      Table 3.4      Presence/absence of reflexes of POc fish names in twelve languages (3)
       *(k,q)ulapi           ‘parrotfish spp. (Carangidae) incl. Hipposcarus longiceps,
                             longnosed parrotfish’
       *bala(q,k)i           'Acanthurus and Naso spp. (Acanthuridae)’
       *qume                 ‘unicornfish, Naso unicornis (Acanthuridae)’
       *koto(ij)             ‘large rock cod, Epiphenilus spp. (Serranidae)’
       *don(o,u)             ‘rock cod, possibly Cephalopholis (= Plectropomus) spp.
                             (Serranidae)’
       *(k,q)umutuR          ‘sweetlips, Plectorhynchus spp. (Haemulidae)’
       *b‘ a[p,w]a           ‘snapper, Lutjanus sp. (Lutjanidae)’
       *tasiwa               ‘snapper, Lutjanus sp. (Lutjanidae)’
       *kasika               ‘large emperor, Lethrinus sp. (Lethrinidae)’
       *palata               ‘dolphinfish (Coryphaenidae)’
       *bwa(sj)i             ‘moray eel (Moraenidae)’
       *muqu(ij)             ‘rabbitfish, Siganus sp., possibly S. spinus (Siganidae)’
       *lanipa               ‘sardine, Sardinella sp. (Clupeidae)’
                                                                                     0>
                                                                                     ao
                                                                                     ce
       *(k,q)ulapi                                                                   33
       *bala(ij,k)i                                                                  27
       *qume                                                                         33
       *koto(ij)                                                                     17
       *don(o,u)                                                                     25
       *(k,q)umutuR                                                                  42
       *b‘ a[p,w]a                                                                   17
       *tasiwa                                                                       25
       *kasika                                                                       42
       *palata                                                                        8
       *bwa(s,j)i                                                                     8
       *muqu(ij)                                                                     25
       *tanipa                                                                        8


[21] Niuatoputapu tenifa ‘whale shark’ shows semantic shift.

                                                     Stability and change in Oceanic fish names     147

__pre__
     Table 3.5      Presence/absence of reflexes of POc fish names in twelve languages (4)
      *paya                ‘anchovy (Engraulidae)’
      *(k,q)aRua(s)        ‘generic for mullet (Mugilidae)’
      *bubu                ‘triggerfish, Balistes sp. (Balistidae)’
      *taRat               ‘unicomfish, Naso spp., probably incl. N. brevinostris
                           (Acanthuridae)’
      *qaroijo             ‘surgeonfish, Acanthurus sp. (Acanthuridae)’
      *mamin               ‘Cheilinus spp. (Labridae), incl. double-headed Maori wrasse,
                           C. undulatus'
      *taqapa(Rr)          ‘large wrasse, probably Cheilinus sp. (Labridae)’
      *magaRut             ‘flying fish (Exocoetidae)’
      'fianapa             ‘garfish, Hemiramphus sp. (Hemiramphidae)’
      *paRi-manuk          ‘eagle ray, Aetobatus narinari'
      *kaboRa              ‘catfish-eel, Plotosus sp. (Plotosidae)’
                                                                                          CO
                                                                                         _o         a>
                                                                                         '-fl       on
                                                                                          c
                                                                                          <D
                                                                                                    eð
                                                                                         4—*c
                           c
                           ce     ao    aa    fl                                              fl
                                                                                          <D
                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                                    i—
                                                                                          b
                          H             S     £                                           c         CL
      *paya               _22    -            -                                           1          8
                                        y
      *(k,q)aRua(s)       y      -      -     -     —     y   y   —   —   y   y   y       6        50
      *bubu               y      -      -     y     -     -   y   y   y   -   y   y       7        58
      *taRat              -      y23    -     -           -   —   —       -   —           4        ɔɔ
                                                    y                 y           y
                                                                                          o
      fiaroŋo             y                                               y   y   —       J        25
      *mamin              y      y      y     -     y                             y       5        42
      *taqapa(R,r)                                                            -   p24   3-4     25/33
                          y                                           y   y
                                                                                          o
      *magaRut            y      -      -     -                   y               y       J        25
      *panapa             _25    -      -     p26                                       1-2      8/17
                                                                              y
      *paRi-manuk         -      y      -     -     -     -   -   y   y   y       -       4        ɔɔ
      *kaboRa             —      —      —     —     -     y   —   —   y   -   —   —       2        17


[22] Titan par ‘gizzard shad’.

[23] Motu tara ‘k.o. fish’.

[24] Satawalese napanap ‘wrasse’.

[25] Titan cinap ‘barred garfish’ has wrong initial syllable.

[26] Teop ponpon ‘various garfish spp.’

148    Andrew Pawley

    Table 3.6 shows the full range of retention rates for the 52 POc etyma. It can be seen
that there is wide variation, with the most durable names being ten times more likely to be
retained than the least durable.

__pre__
                   Table 3.6      Retention rates for 52 Proto Oceanic fish names
                   -‘Proto Oceanic fish name
      retentions
        83/91      *(n,n)opuq        ‘stonefish, Synanceia spp.’
           83      *ikan             ‘fish (generic)’
           67      *bakewa           ‘shark (generic)’
           67      *paRi             ‘ray (generic)’
           67      *qalun            ‘skipjack tuna, Katsuwonuspelamis (Scombridae)’
        58/67      *kuRapu           ‘rock-cod, Epinephelus sp. or spp. (Serranidae)’
           58      *bubu             ‘triggerfish, Balistes sp. (Balistidae)’
           58      *laci             ‘Scomberoides spp., incl. S. lysan (Scrombridae)’
           50      *(k,q)aRua(s)     ‘mullet, generic (Mugilidae)’
           50      *qawaq            ‘milkfish, Chanos chanos (Chanidae)’
           50      *taijiRi          ‘Scombridae spp., probably incl. Spanish mackerel and
                                     wahoo’
            42     *kasika           ‘large emperor, Lethrinus sp. (Lethrinidae)’
            42     *qonos            ‘mature barracuda (Sphyraenidae)’
            42     *(k,q)umutuR      ‘sweetlips, Plectorhynchus spp. (Haemulidae)’
            42     *mamin            ‘Cheilinus spp., incl. double-headed Maori wrasse,
                                     C. undulatus (Labridae)’
           42      *taRaqan          ‘squirrelfish, Sargocentron sp. or spp. (Holocentridae)’
           42      *tiqo             ‘goatfish sp. (Mullidae)’
        33/42      *saku-layaR       ‘sailfish (Istiophoridae)’
           33      *kanase           ‘generic for certain mullet spp. (Mugilidae)’
           33      *(k,q)ulapi       ‘parrotfish spp. (Scaridae), incl. Hipposcarus longiceps,
                                     longnosed parrotfish’
            33     *paRi-manuk       ‘eagle ray, Aetobatus narinari'
            33     *qume             ‘unicornfish, Naso unicornis (Acanthuridae)’
            33     *taRat            ‘unicornfish, Naso spp., probably incl. N. brevinostris
                                     (Acanthuridae)’
        25/33      *palaja           ‘rabbitfish, Siganus spp. (Siganidae)’
        25/33      *taqapa(R,r)      ‘large wrasse, probably Cheilinus sp. (Labridae)’
           25      *bala(i],k)i      ‘surgeonfish, prob, an Acanthurus wad Naso taxon
           25      *bebek            ‘generic for Chaetodontidae, butterflyfish’
           25      *don(o, u)        ‘rock cod, possibly Cephalopholis spp. (Serranidae)’
           25      *jumu             ‘Balistidae, triggerfish, and possibly Monacanthidae,
                                     leatherjackets’
            25     *magaRut          ‘flying fish (Exocoetidae)’
            25     *muqn(q)          ‘rabbitfish, Siganus sp., possibly S. spinus (Siganidae)’
            %
                  Proto Oceanic fish name
     retentions

            25    *pilu          'Caranx sp. or spp. (Carangidae)’
            25    fiaroŋo        ‘surgeonfish, Acanthurus sp. (Acanthuridae)’
            25    *qalu!e        ‘scad, incl. big-eyed scad, Trachurops crumenophthalmus
                                 (Carangidae)’
           25     *sabutu        ‘snapper (Lutjanidae) or emperor (Lethrinidae) sp. or spp.’
           25     *saku          ‘needlefish and long toms (Belonidae)’
           25     *taRutu(m,q)   ‘porcupinefish, Diodon spp. (Diodontidae)’
           25     *tasiwa        ‘snapper, Lutjanus sp. (Lutjanidae)’
           25     *tuna          ‘generic for freshwater eels (Anguillidae)’
           25     *walu          ‘Scombridae sp. or spp.’
        17/25     *bunaR         ‘batfish, Platax sp. or spp., possibly Naso sp. or spp.’
           17     *bwa[p,w]a     ‘snapper, Lutjanus spp. (Lutjanidae)’
           17     *kaboRa        ‘catfish-eel, Plotosus sp. (Plotosidae)’
           17     *koto(ij)      ‘large rock cod, Epiphenilus spp. (Serranidae)’
           17     *kulabo        ‘snapper sp. or spp. (Lethrinidae)’
           17     *qalu          ‘taxon of barracuda (Sphyraenidae)’
           17     *qulua         ‘Caranx sp., possibly C. ignobilis, big-headed jack
                                 (Carangidae)’
         8/17     *panapa        ‘garfish, Hemiramphus sp. (Hemiramphidae) ’
            8     *b‘'a(s,j)i    ‘moray eel (Moraenidae)’
            8     *palata        ‘dolphinfish (Coryphaenidae)’
            8     *paya          ‘anchovy (Engraulidae)’
            8     *tanipa        ‘sardine, Sardinella sp. (Clupeidae)’

                                            Stability and change in Oceanic fish names    149


3.3.2 Some fish names are as persistent as some basic vocabulary items

We are now in a position to evaluate the hypothesis that some Proto Oceanic fish names have
been as persistent as some basic vocabulary items.

    It was noted in §2.5 that, in a sample of 40 daughter languages, the 60 most conservative
POc basic vocabulary items in a modified 200 item Swadesh list show retention rates ranging
between 97 and 23 percent. The 24 most persistent etyma were retained by 70 percent or more
languages, 44 etyma were retained by 50 percent or more languages, 54 by 40 percent or more,
and 60 by 23 percent or more.

    No fewer than 38 of the 52 POc fish names examined show retention rates within the
range exhibited by the 60 most stable basic vocabulary etyma. Eleven fish names fall within
the range of the 44 most stable basic vocabulary etyma. The hypothesis is strongly supported.

    Some small caveats must be attached to this conclusion. Methodological difficulties in
comparing fish name retentions with basic vocabulary retentions were discussed in §2. In
this study the fish name retention rates are based on just 12 languages, whereas the basic
vocabulary retention rates are based on 40. (The same 40 languages could not be used in the
fish names study for reasons stated in §2.1.) If the composition of the two samples, in terms
of distribution across major subgroups, were markedly different this might bias the results,
because some Oceanic subgroups are known to contain more languages that are lexically
conservative than other subgroups. However, the composition is roughly similar so the effects
of different sample sizes are probably small.

150   Andrew Paw ley

__pre__
       Table 3.7   Retention rates in PCP and PPn for fish names by families/groups
        family/group                                  POc           PCP          PPn
                                                       no.    % retained   % retained
        rays                                             2           100           100
        damsels, sergeant-majors (Pomacentridae)         2           100           100
        sweetlips (Plectorhynchidae)                     2           100            50
                                                         Jo          100            ɔɔ
                                                                                    ɔɔ
        boxfish (Ostraciidae)
        eels                                              7           86            14
        trevally, jacks etc (Carangidae)                 6            84            66
        scombrids                                        6            84            84
        garfish (Heramphidae)                             5           80            80
        surgeons and unicorns (Acanthuridae)            12            75            25
        snapper (Lutjanidae                              4            75            50
        rock cod (Serranidae)                            4            75            50
        mullet (Mugilidae)                               Jo           75            75
        squirrelfish (Holocentridae)                     Jo           66            66
        goatfish (Mullidae)                              Jo           66             0
        parrotfish (Scaridae)                             7           57            57
        rabbitfish (Siganidae)                            7           57            43
        wrasses (Labridae)                               6            50            33
        emperors (Lethrinidae)                            5           40            20
        triggerfish (Balistidae)                         4            50            25
        marlin (Xiphiidae))                              2            50            50
        sharks                                            7           43            43
        porcupinefish (Diodontidae)                       5           40            40


    Only two fish names have retention rates of more than 70 percent, ranking with the most
stable 24 basic vocabulary items. One of these is the life form taxon *ikan ‘fish’. The other is
the generic *(n,n)opuq ‘stonefish’. These repulsive-looking fish are not economically useful
but are extremely dangerous denizens of the shallow sandy bottoms. The next three most stable forms consist of the respective generics for sharks and rays, *bakewa and * paRi, together
with * qatun, which denotes one or more species of much-prized game fish in the bonito and
tuna family. Sharks and rays are extremely salient fish for several reasons: they are highly
distinctive in appearance and behaviour, very large, some kinds are dangerous, and they have
economic importance. The next five names in the top ten all denote large or fairly large fish
that are highly regarded as food.


3.3.3 Retention rates of names by families or higher-order groups

Have names for taxa belonging to certain families of fish been more persistent than names for
taxa belonging to other families? An answer to this question requires comparison of all secure
POc reconstructions with a later language or languages. One set of comparisons that can
readily be made is between POc, PCP and PPn. Table 3.7 specifies the number of retentions
in PCP and PPn of reconstructed POc names for fish belonging to particular families or, in
the case of sharks, rays and eels, high-order groups.

                                            Stability and change in Oceanic fish names      151

__pre__
               Table 3.8   Retention rates by language for 52 POc fish names
                           language                no.   percentage
                                            retentions      retained
                           Wayan                29-30         56-58
                           Niuatoputapu            28            54
                           Titan                   24            46
                           Satawalese              20            38
                           Motu                    17            33
                           Kiribati             16-19         31-36
                           Gela                    16            31
                           Lau                     15            29
                           Arosi                12-13         23-25
                           Marovo                   9            18
                           Teop                   8-9         16-18
                           Mutu                     8            16


    Unfortunately, numbers in most groups are too low to make tests of statistical significance
useful. Among those groups with four or more POc names it is noteworthy that carangids,
scombrids, rock cod and mullet, all important food fish, show high retention rates in both
PCP and PPn. But it is unclear why, of the four names in the sample representing carangids,
one, *laci ‘Scomberoides spp. incl. S. lysari, has been very durable (scoring 58%) while the
other three have not (*qatule, probably denoting the big-eyed scad, *qulua and * pilu, both
denoting Caranx sp. or spp., all score 25% or less). It is also striking that although most POc
names for kinds of eels and for Acanthuridae (surgeonfish and unicomfish) are retained in
PCP, very few are kept in PPn.


3.3.4 Variation in retention rate among languages in the sample

The 12 languages vary greatly in their retention rates for fish names (Table 3.8). This finding
is consistent with what is known about retention rates for basic vocabulary among Austronesian languages in general (Blust 1981, 1999).

    The percentages for certain languages are likely to have been deflated by the
incompleteness of the fish name lists for these languages, particularly Kiribati and Mutu and to a lesser
extent Arosi, Lau, Niuatoputapu and Teop.

152   Andrew Pawley

__pre__
               Table 3.9    Total recorded fish names in 12 Oceanic languages
               Wayan          Satawalese    Gela    Marovo     Titan      Uvean
               484            400           368     316        287        284
               K’marangi      Marquesan     Niua    Teop       Kiribati   Mutu
               262            260           209     197        151        145


3.4 Estimating the size of the Proto Oceanic lexicon of fish names

3.4.1 Introduction

Let us turn now to another set of questions. How many fish taxa were distinguished in POc?
What proportion of the fish names were uninomials and binomials, respectively?

     A fair idea can be gained by looking carefully at descriptions of a sample of present day
languages. Investigators making fairly comprehensive studies of particular fishing communities living in rich marine environments in western Melanesia have consistently recorded
more than 300 names for kinds of fish. Hviding (1996:193) says that speakers of Marovo
distinguish by name over 400 kinds of fish; Hviding (1990) lists 316 Marovo fish names. For
Gela, Foale (1998) lists 368 names (including 14 synonyms). During only 12-16 weeks fieldwork on M’bunai Titan, a language of the Admiralty Islands, Akimichi & Sakiyama (1991)
recorded 287 fish taxa.

     Figures for some communities in Remote Oceania are of a similar order. Helfman and
Randall (1973) give 336 fish names for Palauan, a non-Oceanic Austronesian language.
For Satawalese, spoken on an atoll in the Central Carolines, 400 names were recorded by
Akimichi & Sauchomal (1982), based on seven months fieldwork. This number is high considering that Satawalese is a part of a chain of atolls, and the range of species and genera is
likely to be fewer than in the vicinity of large high islands and especially, continental Melanesia. For the Western Fijian language of Wayan, 484 fish names were recorded of which 352
are uninomials and 132 are binomials (Pawley and Sayaba 2003). (This count excludes about
60 binomials that are probably descriptions rather than conventional names.)

     Total counts for some isolated atolls and small high islands in the central Pacific are a
bit lower. Lieber (1994) gives 262 names for Kapingamarangi, an isolated atoll south of the
main Carolines group. Rensch (1983) gives 284 names for Uvean (aka Wallisian), in western
Polynesia, and Lavondes (1977) gives 260 fish names for Marquesan. There are a number of
other published lists which, although very useful, are plainly incomplete. For example, the
list (Dye 1983) for Niuatoputapu, a language of western Polynesia, consists of 209 names
(37 of these mark developmental stages of 12 species).

     For Tobelo, a non-Austronesian language of the Bird’s Head family in North Halmahera,
Taylor (1990) recorded 358 fish taxa. For Pendau, a Malayo-Polynesian language of central
Sulawesi, Quick (2010) recorded 300 names, of which 73% were uninomials.

     For reasons to be discussed below, it is likely that none of the inventories of fish names
referred to above is exhaustive, not even those numbering over 400. There are various means
of spotting the gaps and estimating their extent. We turn now to this matter.

                                                 Stability and change in Oceanic fish names            153

__pre__
Table 3.10     Uninomials and binomials in 11 contemporary Oceanic languages and in POc,
                                      PCP and PPn
                     Mutu             Gela      Way an     Marovo      Satawalese      Titan   Uvean
    uninomials        104              252        352         194            278        279      180
    binomials          41              100        132         122             122          8     104
    % binomials        28               27         28          38              30          3      36
                      Niua     K’marangi      Kiribati        Teop             POc      PCP     PPn
    uninomials         138           148          132          168              140      150    112
    binomials           71           114           19           29                1        3      2
    % binomials         34            43           14           15                1        2      2


3.4.2 Estimating absolute numbers of names

One method of detecting gaps is simply to compare the total number of fish names recorded
for each language in a representative sample. It can be seen that, among the 12 languages
cited in Table 3.9, the total number of names varies greatly.[27]

    Insofar as all these languages are spoken by fishing communities who use similar fishing
techniques and have access to a pretty similar range of fish families and genera, and indeed
species, we would expect the size of their lexicons to be more similar than they are. On these
grounds alone it can be inferred that the lists numbering below 300 are probably incomplete,
especially for the languages of Melanesia, and lists below 200 are seriously incomplete.
However, it must be allowed that in some Pacific Island communities there has in recent times
been a reduction in the range of fishing methods employed and a decline in knowledge of
fish names and fish ecology.


3.4.3 Number and ratio of uninomials to binomials

Another method is to compare the ratio of uninomials and binomials that have been recorded,
as well as the absolute numbers of each (Table 3.10).

    Taking the five languages with the highest number of uninomials in Table 3.10 as
representing the best described languages, we find an average of 271 uninomials. It is noteworthy
that the three Polynesian languages in the sample range between 138 and 180 uninomials,
well short of this figure.

    In the best documented Oceanic fish taxonomies, binomials normally amount to between
 27 and 38 percent of the total names (median 30 percent). If the proportion of binomials
recorded for a language deviates markedly from this range it stands out as suspiciously
anomalous. In three languages, Titan, Kiribati and Teop, the percentage of binomials is 15
percent or less. It is likely that in each case the list of binomials is seriously incomplete. Most
striking is Titan, where binomials make up only three percent of the 287 fish names. We can
infer that roughly 100 Titan binomials were not recorded. At the other extreme, Kapingama-
rangi (43%) is considerably above the median; it may be that in this case the list of binomials
includes some ad hoc descriptive forms and/or that the list of uninomials is far from complete.

[27] In this and Intertables ‘K’marangi’ refers to Kapingamarangi and ‘Niua’ to Niuatoputapu.

154   Andrew Pawley

__pre__
  Table 3.11    Grouper, rock cod, coral cod (Serranidae); trevally and jacks (Carangidae)
                Niua     Uvean      Kiribati    Satawalese    Gela    Wayan    Titan    Teop    PPn
 Serranidae       12        28           14             26     26        21       19       7      6
 Carangidae        6        12           16             21     43        10       18      11     12



3.4.4 Comparison of number of fish names family by family

Yet another indicator of how complete the record of fish names for a particular language is,
comes from cross-linguistic comparison of the number of taxa or names for each particular
biological family (or sometimes a group of related families). Fairly consistent patterns emerge
as to how many taxa are typically distinguished in each family or larger group. If the number
of recorded taxa in a language is much lower than the average or median this is a sign that
the list is incomplete.

    Tables 3.11-3.22 give the number of names recorded for certain groups of fishes in eight
contemporary languages plus PPn. The groups are usually a single family or a pair of closely
related families, though in the case of sharks, rays and eels, each group consists of several
families. In the case of PPn, it is to be expected that the totals for each family will generally
be below the average for contemporary languages because the PPn reconstructions consist
almost exclusively of uninomials and because the PPn list is probably more seriously incomplete
than that of any of the contemporary languages.

    The Serranidae and Carangidae (Table 3.11) both contain many species and many important
food fish. Morphologically distinct species in each family are consistently classified
into many taxa. (There seem to be no cases where a language has a generic for the diverse
Serranidae family and the same is true for the Carangidae. Generics exist with much more
restricted ranges.) For the Serranidae, the Teop list is anomalous in having only seven names.
Of the 26 Gela terms for Serranidae, as many as eight are synonyms, so the number of distinct
taxa is only 18. For the Carangidae, Niuatoputapu and Wayan are anomalous in having
as few as six and 10 names, respectively, and Gela in having as many as 43. The Gela list
includes four terms for growth stages (other than the unmarked, mature stage term) and five
synonyms.

    With hundreds of species each, the Labridae and Scaridae (Table 3.12) are two of the
largest and morphologically most diverse families. Both families contain many important
food fish. Kiribati and Niuatoputapu are anomalous in distinguishing only three and four
terms for Labridae. Wayan stands out in distinguishing as many as 48. Twenty-seven of the
Wayan terms are uninomials, so even if we discount some binomials as being merely descriptive
the number of valid taxa remains high.

__pre__
                      Table 3.12     Wrasses (Labridae); parrotfish (Scaridae)
               Niua     Uvean      Kiribati    Satawalese    Gela    Wayan    Titan    Teop    PPn
  Labridae        4         9            3             14      17       48       10      14     4/5
  Scaridae        9        14            5             28      11       16       18      13     5/6

                                                    Stability and change in Oceanic fish names        155

__pre__
                       Table 3.13        Goatfish (Mullidae); mullet (Mugilidae)
                Niua       Uvean       Kiribati    Satawalese   Gela   Wayan    Titan    Teop     PPn
 Mullidae          8          10             3             15      8      10        9       6       6
 Mugilidae         7           7              5             8      2       2        7       3       4


    Mullidae, goatfish (aka grey mullet, Table 3.13) are a fairly numerous family of shallow
water feeders, usually caught in nets or traps, and which are easily identified by the pair
of barbels on the chin. There is usually a generic term for the family as well as a number
of named kinds. Mugilidae, mullet (aka red mullet), are a small family of shallow water
feeders, with just a few species present in any one locality, but are economically important
and each species is often distinctively named. The Gela, Wayan and Teop lists are anomalous
in distinguishing only two or three Mugilidae taxa.

    The scombrids (Table 3.14) include several species much valued as game fish and usually
finely discriminated in indigenous Oceanic taxonomies. However, the family is morphologically fairly diverse and it is not usual to find a generic for the whole family. Wayan is on the
low side in number of scombrid taxa. Xiphiidae are a very small family of morphologically
distinctive deep sea fish. The lists for Niuatoputapu and Gela lack names for two prominent
kinds of Xiphiidae: swordfish and marlins, and Teop, unusually, subsumes all kinds in one
taxon.

    The Acanthuridae (Table 3.15) are a moderately us family of reef grazers which
occur in schools. The larger species, especially, are valued as food and morphologically distinctive species are usually named separately. Satawalese has an exceptionally high number
of Acanthuridae names, as many as 28 being uninomials. The Siganidae are a fairly small
family of reef grazers with very sharp fin spines. They are good eating and are usually finely
discriminated in the taxonomy. The Satawalese, Niuatoputapu, Uvean and Kiribati lists appear to be missing some terms.

    The Holocentridae (Table 3.16) are small, brilliant shallow water coral fishes. There is
often a generic for the family and invariably several taxa are named. The Balistidae, grazing fish of the coral reef and weedy shallows, number many species. Most are distinctively
marked with bright colours and many are separately named. Some are poisonous. The Aluteridae comprise many species of small or medium sized grazing fish, similar in habits to
the Balistidae. Some species are considered poisonous. Aluteridae and Balistidae are sometimes subsumed under a single generic in Oceanic languages. There is a marked gap between
Satawalese and Wayan and the rest in number of names for Holocentridae and for Balistidae
and Aluteridae.

__pre__
    Table 3.14     Mackerels and tuna (Scombroidei); marlin and swordfish (Xiphiidae)
                 Niua       Uvean       Kiribati   Satawalese   Gela   Wayan   Titan    Teop    PPn
    scombrids       8          12             7            10      9       6     13        6      4
    Xiphiidae          1           1          3            2       1       3       2       1      1

156   Andrew Pawley


__pre__
       Table 3.15     Surgeonfish/unicornfishes (Acanthuridae); rabbitfish (Siganidae)
                    Niua       Uvean    Kiribati       Satawalese       Gela       Wayan       Titan       Teop       PPn
  Acanthuridae        13          23         10                32         19          20          10         11         9
   Siganidae           3           4           1                4         19          10          13          7         2


__pre__
      Table 3.16     Squirrelfish/soldierfish (Holocentridae); triggerfish (Balistidae) and
                       leatherjackets (Aluteridae incl. Monacanthidae)
                    Niua       Uvean    Kiribati       Satawalese       Gela       Wayan       Titan       Teop       PPn
  Holocentridae        4          11          5                14          5          10           5          5         6
  Balistidae
                       5          11           3               22         11          25           9         11         1
  and Aluteridae


     The Lutjanidae (snappers, Table 3.17) are a large family of carnivorous fish, mostly
bottom dwellers moving in schools in outer coral reefs and lagoons. The Lethrinidae (emperors)
comprise about 20 species living mainly in shallow, coastal waters. Noteworthy here
is the high number of terms for kinds of snapper in Gela, and the low numbers for Wayan,
and also the high number of Titan terms for emperors. The fact that authors providing lists
of fish names and identifications for Oceanic languages often follow conflicting scientific
taxonomies creates difficulties in comparing group totals across languages. Taxonomists disagree,
for example, over whether Lethrinidae and Plectorhynchidae (grunters, sweetlips)
should be assigned to the family Lutjanidae or to separate families. Members of these closely
related groups are carnivorous, usually have large heads, equal jaws and a forked tail-fin.
They are an important food source and many taxa are distinguished but as a rule, Oceanic
languages have no generic terms for any of the families (or sub-families) in question.

__pre__
Table 3.17     Snapper, sea-perch, bass (Lutjanidae); emperors (Lethrinidae); sweetlips and
                                grunters (Plectorhynchidae)
                     Niua       Uvean     Kiribati      Satawalese       Gela       Wayan       Titan       Teop       PPn
 Lutjanidae            13          16          13                8        23               7       17         11        10
 Lethrinidae               3       10              7            13         15          10          23             7         3
 Plectorhynchidae          0        ?              0                2          6       12              7          1         ?

                                              Stability and change in Oceanic fish names          157

__pre__
                                 Table 3.18     Sharks and rays
             Niua    Uvean    Kiribati     Satawalese    Gela     Wayan    Titan    Teop    PPn
   sharks       7       13           7             10      10        13        8       6      5
   rays         5        7           5              7       4         9        5      10      3


     Sharks and rays (Table 3.18) each fall into several families, some with several species.
Individual species tend to be salient because of their size and distinctive morphology and
behaviour and, in some cases, because they are eaten. In Oceanic languages there is almost
always a generic term for sharks and another for rays, and the generics generally have several
subtaxa. The Kiribati, Niuatoputapu, Titan and Teop totals for sharks are on the low side, as
is the Gela total for rays.

     Eels (Table 3.19) fall into several families, chiefly the Anguillidae (freshwater eels) and
several families of sea or brackish water eels: Muraenidae (morays), Ophichthydae (snake
eels), Congridae (conger eels) and Muraenesocidae (pike eels or pike congers). This highly
salient group of fish is usually finely classified in Oceanic languages. There is often a generic
term for eels as well as terms (often with subtaxa) for each of the families.

     Sphyraenidae (barracuda, Table 3.19) are a small family of predatory fish, large fast
and elongated, with very large sharp teeth that make them dangerous to humans. They are
good eating. Generally, several growth stages and sometimes two or three mature kinds of
barracuda are distinguished. It can be seen that several languages are on the low side in
number of recorded eel and barracuda taxa.

     The Clupeidae (Table 3.20) are small migratory shoaling fish of shallow coastal waters.
They are good eating and are taken in nets. The lists for Gela, Niuatoputapu, Satawalese and
Teop score notably lower than Titan and Wayan in number of Clupeidae, and it is likely that
the lists are incomplete. The only member of the Chanidae is the milkfish, Chanos chanos,
which is everywhere distinguished. The Atherinidae are a small family of silvery, sardinelike
schooling fishes which are mainly used as bait.

     The genus Synanceia (stonefish) is sometimes included by ichthyologists in the family
Scorpaenidae (scorpionfish) and the two groups are lumped together here (Table 3.21).
Species of this morphologically diverse family all have long poisonous pectoral and dorsal
spines. The Synanceia have the most potent of all the fish venoms, secreted from glands at
the base of their needle-like dorsal fin spines. They have large grotesquely shaped heads and
mouths and conceal themselves by lying in mud, sand, coral or weeds, and are extremely
dangerous. Wayan distinguishes many more scorpionfish and stonefish taxa than the other
languages. The fact that most Wayan names are uninomials suggests that lists for some of the
other languages are incomplete.

__pre__
               Table 3.19     Eels (Anguilliformes); barracuda (Sphyraenidae)
              Niua    Uvean     Kiribati    Satawalese    Gela     Wayan    Titan    Teop    PPn
 eels           10       16           7             14        8       10        6       9      3
 barracuda       2        5           2              5       Jo        5        5       4      3

158     Andrew Pawley

__pre__
              Table 3.20             Sardines and herrings (Clupeidae); milkfish (Chanidae);
                                        silversides/hardyheads (Atherinidae)
                      Niua           Uvean       Kiribati           Satawalese    Gela       Wayan       Titan       Teop         PPn
      Clupeidae          1               ?             5                     0       1           7           7          0             4
                                         ɔ                                   1         1         1           1            1           1
      Chanidae           1               ɔ              1
                                                                                       ɔ                                  0           0
      Atherinidae        0               1             0                     0         ɔ         1          0


__pre__
              Table 3.21              Scorpionfish (Scorpaenidae) and stonefish (Synanceia)
                        Niua           Uvean        Kiribati          Satawalese      Gela     Wayan        Titan        Teop         PPn
 Scorpaenidae                    ɪ                              ɪ
                                                                                  7        4         16              4            2       1
 and Synanceiidae


    The Blennidae (blennies, Table 3.22) are a large family of agile, small elongated fish of
shallow reef waters and tidal pools. The Gobiidae (gobies) are usually very small fish of
tidal pools, reefs and estuaries. The Periopthalmidae (mudskippers) comprise a few small
amphibious species of mangrove swamps and muddy shores. Figures for these three families
are lumped together here both because lexicographical identifications are often vague, and
because ichthyologists have trouble deciding how many families should be distinguished.
The totals for Satawalese and Gela are spectacularly higher than the rest. Most Gela terms
are binomials and it is possible that some represent ad hoc descriptive epithets rather than
conventional names.

__pre__
 Table 3.22         Blennies (Blennidae), gobies (Gobidae) and mudskippers (Periopthalmidae)
                       Niua           Uvean        Kiribati          Satawalese       Gela     Wayan       Titan         Teop         PPn
 Blennidae,
 Gobidae and                 1               ?              0                23        28            5           2            1       1(?)
 Periopthalmidae

                                            Stability and change in Oceanic fish names      159


    This survey of family name totals suggests that even the larger inventories of fish names
for Oceanic languages, those in the 350-480 range, are not complete. The Wayan list, for
example, shows significantly below average numbers of names for Carangidae, Lutjanidae,
Mugilidae and Scombridae.

    POc speakers lived in the Bismarck Archipelago, a region with a very rich fish fauna.
Lexical evidence (Osmond 1998) and archaeological evidence (Walter 1989, Kirch 1997)
indicate that they exploited a wide range of fishing techniques. Given these considerations,
we can infer that the number of fish taxa distinguished by POc speakers was on the same order
as the largest numbers recorded for contemporary Oceanic languages, in the 400+ range, and
that about 70 percent of fish names were uninomials.


3.5 Where have all the fish names gone?

The total number of fish names so far reconstructed for POc (145) falls far short of the number that we estimate were used by speakers of the language. Why are so many names missing
from the reconstructed inventory? A similar question can be asked about PCP (150-160 reconstructions) and PPn (115).

     One category of missing names can easily be identified: binomials. The only secure binomial
reconstructed for POc is *paRi manuk ‘eagle ray, Aetobatis narinarf (lit. ‘bird ray’).
  saku-layaR ‘swordfish’ is historically analysable into *( *saku ‘needlefish and long toms’
plus *layaR ‘sail’, but it was not a binomial: it is clear from contemporary evidence that
*saku-layaR were not a kind of *saku) Of the 160 reconstructions in Geraghty’s (1994) list
ofPCPfish names, just two are binomials. Of the 115 fish names that Hooper (1994) reconstructs for
PPn, just three are binomials. The lack of widespread fully cognate binomial terms
confirms what many commentators (e.g. Rensch 1983) have said: binomials, or to be more
exact, the secondary or modifying terms in binomials, are notoriously unstable. Binomials
generally make up around 30 percent of the total taxa in Oceanic fish taxonomies (see §3).
The chances are that most of this 30 percent of missing POc terms will never be recoverable.

     The dramatic difference between uninomial and binomial retention rates, presumably, has
something to do with the geographic distribution of species as opposed to genera. Folk generics,
represented by uninomials, are typically applied to two or more species of a biological
genus and are sometimes applied to whole families. The same genera and families of fish tend
to occur throughout the tropical Indo-Pacific. By contrast, folk specifics, often represented by
binomials, typically apply to a single biological species or a group of closely related species
and the geographic distribution of species tends to be more localised. Thus, modifying terms
for folk specifics do not ‘travel’ as well as generic terms. But perhaps the main reason is
that while generic names are usually arbitrary, modifiers almost always describe a feature of
the morphology, the behaviour or the ecological niche of particular species. Accordingly, a
number of competing modifiers may suggest themselves as equally convenient ways of
distinguishing a particular member of a folk genus, so that even when a species is ubiquitous
the original modifier in a binomial will often be subject to competition.

     So much for the binomials. This still leaves many missing uninomials unaccounted for.
One might seek to explain variations in durability among uninomials in terms of (a) where
names rank in the taxonomic hierarchy, (b) the relation of particular taxa to humans, e.g.
their usefulness, importance in cosmology and ritual, or danger, (c) inherent properties of
the referents, e.g. how striking or unusual they are in appearance or behaviour, and (d) the
geographic distribution of particular species and genera.

160   Andrew Pawley

     While factor (d) very likely has had a considerable influence on the durability of binomials
I do not think it has played much of a part with respect to uninomials. The latter generally
refer to genera, families or high-order groups, and in those cases where they refer just to a
 single species it usually is one that is highly distinctive and widespread in the tropical Pacific.
This is the case for the few POc reconstructions that can be identified as referring, or probably
referring to a single species, e.g. *qawaq ‘milkfish, Chanos chanos', *qume ‘unicomfish,
Naso unicornis', *mamin ‘double-headed Maori wrasse, C. undulatus' and possibly *qalun
 ‘skipjack tuna, Katsuwonuspelamis'.

     A reasonable hypothesis is that, other things being equal, the persistence of a name will
correlate with its rank in the taxonomy: names of life-form taxa will be the most persistent,
followed by major generics, minor generics, and specifics, in that order. There is some
evidence in support of this hypothesis although what we can say is limited by the lack of
precise semantic reconstructions for many POc names. The life form *ikan ‘fish’ and the
major generics *bakewa ‘shark’, *paRi ‘ray’ and *kanase ‘mullet’ show high retention rates.
However, the generics *bebek ‘butterflyfish and coralfish’, *jumu ‘triggerfish and leatherjackets’,
*saku ‘needlefish and long toms’ and *tuna ‘freshwater eel’ all score quite low. In
general minor generics have relatively low retention rates but the single most durable fish
name, * (n,ri)opuq ‘stonefish’, was probably a minor generic, memorable because the stone
fish is so dangerous.

     I have not carefully scrutinised evidence bearing on the hypothesis that, at the level of
folk generics and folk specifics, names for economically valuable fish will be more stable
than other names (all other things being equal). There is some evidence that this is the case.
For example, names for various members of the highly valued scombrid, carangid, rock-cod,
snapper and mullet families tend to show high retention rates.

     Further research should shed more light on these matters.



4 Aquatic invertebrates


4.1 Introduction

This chapter deals with invertebrates that are aquatic or semi-aquatic, such as crustaceans,
molluscs, echinoderms, sea-worms, jellyfish and corals.[1] It addresses the following questions:
(1) What terms for aquatic invertebrates can be attributed to Proto Oceanic (POc) and
other high-order interstages of Oceanic? (2) What uses were made of these animals? (3) How
does the number of taxa reconstructable for POc compare with the number attested in well-
described contemporary languages?

    The marine invertebrate fauna of the tropical southwest and central Pacific is fairly
uniform, so that when Oceanic speakers first dispersed across this region some 3000 years ago
they generally encountered familiar creatures. It must be added that not every island or island
group has the full range of habitats: fringing coral reefs, mangrove forests, estuarine
mudflats, seagrass flats, etc.

    Molluscs, crustaceans and echinoderms gathered in and around the intertidal zone form
one of the most reliable protein food sources of coastal Oceanic communities. The bulk of
foraging for invertebrates in this zone is done by women while in most societies diving for
lobsters and deep water molluscs is mainly men’s work. Mollusc shells were traditionally
made into a variety of tools and ornaments. Archaeological discoveries underline the longstanding
importance of water invertebrates to speakers of Oceanic languages. Living sites
and middens left by bearers of the Lapita culture contain extensive remains of molluscs and
crustaceans and artefacts made from mollusc shells (see §4.1).

[1] This is a much revised and expanded version of Pawley (1996). I am grateful to Meredith Osmond for help
 in compiling and checking the list of cognate sets, and to Aim Chowning. John Lynch and Malcolm Ross
 for valuable comments on a draft of the paper. I am also indebted to Aim Chowning for data on some New
 Britain languages, to Paul Geraghty for providing terms from the Viwa dialect of Way an Fijian and for helpful
 discussion of the Wayan material and to John Lynch for comparative material on Southern Vanuatu languages.


162      Andrew Pawley


   Linguistic evidence that foraging on the reef for invertebrates was important to Proto
Oceanic speakers is found in two widespread cognate sets noted by Clark (1991). Clark’s
POc reconstructions are given below, with a few additional cognates.2 The first is a verb.

<
POc *paijoda ‘gather seafood on the reef’ (Clark 1991)
   PT:      Gapapaiwa         vanota ‘net prawns’
   PT:      Motu              haoda  ‘to fish’
   MM:      Teop              vagana (1) ‘gather marine organisms on the reef’; (2) ‘to fish, go fishing’
   SES:     Bugotu       vaŋoda      ‘hunt for shellfish on the reef’3
   SES:     Gela         vaŋoda      (v) ‘collect food on the reef.’ (n) ‘shellfish, crustaceans and echinoderms) gathered on the reef’
  SES:      Sa’a         haŋoda      ‘HaHotis, abalone’
  NCV:      Mota         vaŋona      ‘catch fish with a line, get shell-fish, etc. for a relish’
  NCV:      Nguna        (pa)vaŋoda Took for shellfish, gather shells, fish for seafish’
  NCV:      SE Ambrym pæŋor          ‘to fish’
  NCV:      Namakir      (ba)vaŋot   ‘forage on reef’
  NCV:      Lonwolwol faŋbr          Took for fish’
  NCV:      Uripiv       (e)vaŋor    ‘forage on the reef’
  SV:       Anejom       (a)haŋee    ‘forage on reef’
  Mic:      Marshallese yaife.i      ‘go fishing’
  Fij:      Rotuman      haŋota      (v) ‘to fish.’ (n) ‘fishing excursion, shoal of fish’
  Pn:       Tongan      fdŋota       ‘to fish, or to search for shell-fish or any kind of fiŋota'1
   Pn:      Niuean      faŋota       ‘gather shellfish on the reef’
   Pn:      Rennell      hdŋota      ‘to fish or gather shells, especially by women on the reef’
   Pn:      Iftra-Mele fdŋota        ‘gather shellfish etc. on the reef’
>

    The second reconstruction, *p<in>ai]oda, is a nominalisation of the verb using the infix
*<zw>, which in POc typically derived a noun denoting the thing acted on or produced by
the action of the verb. It is likely that *pii]oda was present in POc as a fast speech variant:
reflexes of *p<in>aijoda show loss of the second syllable in all Polynesian languages and in
some North and Central Vanuatu and Papuan Tip languages.

<
POc *p<in>ayoda, *piijoda ‘seafood gathered on the reef, edible sea invertebrates’ (Clark 1991)
  PT:    Molima       igoda        ‘collect shellfish’
  PT:    Kilivila     vigoda       ‘shell (clams, snails)’
  PT:     Dobu          igoda       (v) ‘gather shellfish’, (n) ‘shellfish’
  MM:     Tolai         vinaŋonoi   ‘generic name for sea shells’ (final syllable irregular)
  NCV: Nguna            vinaŋoda    ‘shell, shellfish’
  Pn:  Tongan          fiŋota       ‘sea creature of any kind other than vertebrates: shell-fish, crustaceans, cuttle-fish, jellyfish, eels, sea-snakes, sea-slugs, starfish, etc. and even sea-weeds’
  Pn:     Niuean        fiŋota      (1) ‘shellfish’; (2) ‘gather shellfish’ (McEwen); ‘an edible sea crab’ (Sperlich)
  Pn:     Samoan        fiŋota      ‘general term for edible molluscs and invertebrate sea animals’
  Pn:     Takuu         finota      ‘various kinds of shell-fish and seafoods gathered by women’
>

[2] In these two reconstructions I have substituted *d for the POc phoneme that Clark writes as *nt.

[3] With respect to ' shellfish’, much used in dictionary' and wordlist glosses cited for this and certain other cognate
 sets, it should be noted that this term means different tilings to different people. Nearly all New Zealanders and
 many Australians and English people use ‘shellfish’ to mean ‘(edible) molluscs with external shells’, excluding
 crustaceans, whereas others, including most people from the USA. use it to mean ‘(edible) crustaceans and
 molluscs with external shells’. It is apparent that most of our sources for Oceanic languages use this term in
 the narrower sense.

                                                                Aquatic invertebrates        163


4.2 Classification of marine invertebrates

4.2.1 Zoological classification

In the discussion that follows cognate sets presented will be grouped under standard zoological
categories. Zoology offers a complex phylogenetic taxonomy of invertebrates based
on current views of their evolutionary relationships and morphological characters. The
invertebrate family tree distinguishes more than 20 levels of grouping from kingdom down to
species. Here we need only note those distinctions which will be useful in organising the
material from Oceanic languages.

__pre__
 phylum ARTHROPODA
   class Crustacea
      order Decapoda
        tribes Palinura and Astacura: crayfish, lobsters, slipper lobsters
        tribe Anomura: hermit crabs, coconut crabs, mangrove lobster, etc.
        tribe Brachyura: true crabs
      suborder Natantia: true prawns and shrimps
      order Stomatopoda: Mantis shrimps, etc.
      order Thoracia: barnacles
      other shrimp-like animals
 phylum MOLLUSCA
      order Gastropoda: univalves or snail-like shellfish
      order Bivalvia (Pelecypoda): bivalves or clam-like shellfish
      order Cephalopoda: octopus, squid, nautilus
      order Amphineura: chitons
 phylum ECHINODERMATA
   class Echinoidea: sea eggs (sea urchins)
   class Asteroidea: starfish
   class Ophiuroidea: brittle starfish
   class Holothuroidea: sea cucumbers (beche de mer, trepang, holothurians)
   class Crinoidea: sea lilies and feather stars
 phylum CNIDARIA (COELENTERATA)
   class Anthozoa: corals, anemones
   class Scyphozoa: true jellyfish
   class Hydrozoa: fire corals, hydroids, siphonophores
   class Ctenosphora: comb jellyfish
 WORM-LIKE phyla: annelids, nemerteans, acanthoceaphalans
 phylum PORIPHERA: sponges


164    Andrew Paw ley


4.2.2 Oceanic folk taxonomies of aquatic invertebrates

In order to get an idea of the likely size and taxonomic structure of the POc lexicon for
aquatic invertebrates one must look at contemporary languages whose speakers exploit a
marine and shore environment fairly similar to that inhabited by POc speakers. Unfortunately
there are very few systematic studies in this domain. There is a fairly detailed account of
aquatic invertebrate taxonomy in Wayan, a dialect of the Western Fijian language (Pawley
1994, Pawley and Sayaba 2003) spoken on two small islands on the western margin of Fiji.
Wayan speakers distinguish by name more than 240 marine invertebrate taxa.4 Almost 150
of these names apply to molluscs, about 48 to crustaceans, about 31 to echinoderms, about
 12 to coelenterates and about five to marine worms.

    Folk classifications of animals have many fewer levels than those recognised by zoologists.
Berlin (1992) has discussed at length the organising principles underlying folk taxonomies of
animals and plants (see chapter 8 for more detail). As folk taxonomies go, the
Wayan classification of aquatic animals is among the more complex. Some domains have a
depth of six contrasting levels - two levels more than Berlin’s model recognises as the known
maximum for folk taxonomies of wild animals.

    Table 4.1 shows the contrasts between some first-order categories of invertebrates that
occur in the Wayan Fijian taxonomy. These fall under no higher category other than manumanu,
which refers to all creatures.

    In many respects Wayan higher-order taxa differ markedly from those found in zoological
classifications. For instance, there is no echinoderm category: sea cucumbers, sea urchins,
starfish and brittle starfish are each assigned to separate primary taxa. There is no category
corresponding to crustaceans. There is a general name for sea cucumbers but no overt taxon
uniting the various sea urchin taxa (these animals represent a covert category, which Wayans
readily identify by a descriptive phrase such as manumanu laulau ni ðakau ‘spiky animals
of the reef’). Unsurprisingly, octopus and squid form a primary taxon apart from other molluscs.
There is a generic for gastropods (ðiði) but no generic for all bivalves. Instead there
are generics for burrowing bivalves (lave) and all kinds of oysters (dzvɑ). Wayan also has a
category, manumanu gwdgwd, that refers to edible decapods, subsuming ura, seka, tuba, uŋa
and told. However, this is a ‘collective’ category rather than a true superordinate taxon: one
does not point to an animal and identify it as a manumanu gwdgwd.

[4] These numbers referto terminal taxa, i.e. excluding higher-order taxa (generic terms with two ormore subtaxa),
 and counting only one item for each set of synonyms or variant forms. Numbers are necessarily approximate
because of disagreements among informants, the uncertain status of some descriptive binomials, and other
 factors.

                                                                            Aquatic invertebrates          165

__pre__
                 Table 4.1      Some high-order aquatic invertebrate taxa in Wayan
    1.                                 manumanu ‘animals, creatures’
    2.      ura            seka           tuba             uŋa           didi                 lave
          prawns       aquatic crabs land crabs      hermit crabs,   gastropods     burrowing bivalves
         & lobsters                                 coconut crabs
    2.    diva        sulua            dri           [covert]     ikali ni iko     sulua vadravadra
         oysters      octopus     sea cucumbers     sea urchins      starfish           brittle starfish
                      & squid
    2.   baya ni waitadi          bosudu         drdlevu     dromani             lase            sam
             sea worms            sea slugs    sea hares     anemones       hard corals        jellyfish


    Systematic descriptions of other Oceanic taxonomies are admittedly few but the available
evidence suggests that the size and taxonomic structure of the Wayan terminology are fairly
typical of Oceanic-speaking maritime communities.[5] It is reasonable to assume that the POc
taxonomy was roughly of the same order.

[5] For information about taxonomies of aquatic invertebrates in particular Oceanic languages see Akimichi &
 Sakiyama (1991). Foale (1998), Hviding (2005). Pawley (1994).


4.3 Crustaceans

From the limited evidence available it seems that Oceanic languages spoken by coastal communities
typically distinguish some 40-50 crustacean taxa, of which between 20 and 40 taxa
are crabs.


4.3.1 Order Decapoda: crabs, lobsters, prawns

The crustaceans named and taken for food and bait in Oceanic societies are almost exclusively
decapods. There is a well established PMP generic for prawns and crayfish, which is
continued in POc.

<
PAn *qudaij ‘shrimp, lobster’ (Blust 2002)
POc *quraij ‘generic for prawns and shrimps, crayfish and lobsters’
  NNG:     Manam             uro              ‘crayfish’
  PT:      Dobu              ?ula(bo?a)       ‘lobster, medium sized’
  PT:      Motu              ura              ‘crayfish’
  MM:      Nalik             uraŋ             ‘crayfish’
  SES:     Gela              ura              ‘generic for crayfish, Panulirus spp
  SES:     ’Are’are          ura              ‘shrimp, crayfish, prawn’
  SES:    Arosi         ura                 ‘a small prawn’
  SES:    Sa’a          ura                 ‘crayfish, prawn’
  NCV:    Mota          ura                 ‘crayfish’
  NCV:    Raga          ura                 ‘generic for crayfish’
  NCV:    Namakir       lira                ‘crayfish, shrimp’
  NCV:    Sakao         uraij               ‘crayfish’
  Mic:    Kiribati      lira                ‘lobster’
  NCal:   Nemi          kiila               ‘prawn’
  Fij:    Bauan         lira                ‘generic for prawns and crayfish’
  Fij:    Wayan         lira                ‘generic for prawns and shrimps, and in extended sense also for lobsters (urauj
PPn *qura ‘crayfish’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan         ?uo                  ‘generic for crayfish and prawns
  Pn:    Samoan        iila                 ‘crayfish’
  Pn:    Samoan          ula-tai              ‘a saltwater shrimp’
  Pn:    Samoan          ula-a-vai            ‘a freshwater shrimp’
>


166   Andrew Pawley



4.3.2 Palinura: spiny lobsters

The Palinura are represented in Oceania by two major families: (i) Palinuridae, spiny or
rock lobsters and (2) Scyllaridae, slipper or shovel-nosed lobsters. (The terms ‘lobster’ and
‘crayfish’ are used interchangeably by many English speakers and the gloss ‘crayfish’ is
commonly found in the dictionaries and wordlists.)


                               Figure 4.1    Palinums sp., spiny lobster

                                                                            Aquatic invertebrates      167


4.3.2.1 Palinuridae, spiny lobsters

Lobsters are prized food in the Oceanic world. Among the spiny lobsters the commonest
species is Palinurus pencillatus, the common spiny lobster. P. versicolor is a larger, more
colourful relative. These are distinguished as specifics in Wayan.

   In contemporary languages reflexes of the POc generic *quraij (see §3.1) are typically
applied to spiny lobsters (Palinurus spp.) as opposed to the very distinctive slipper lobsters
(Scyllaridae). It is likely that this was also the case in POc.

4.3.2.2 Scyllaridae, slipper (or shovel-nosed) lobsters

Slipper lobsters are a family of clawless decapods with a very distinctive appearance, having
a broad flat carapace and enlarged antennae projecting forward from the head as wide plates.
Species of this family are found in warm waters throughout Oceania. A term for slipper lobster
can be tentatively reconstructed for POc but the comparisons are phonologically problematic.

<
POc *[pa]paba ‘Parribacus sp. (Scyllaridae), slipper lobster’
   PT:      Mi sima           sapapa             ‘k.o. saltwater lobster, lacking long feelers’ (*p >s irregular)
   MM:      Tolai            papaba              ‘crayfish sp.’
   SES:     Gela             mapa                ‘slipper lobster’ (perhaps dissimilation: *p > /77, for f*v)
  NCV:      Mwotlap          na-vam              ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus‘
  NCV:      Mota             vavapa              ‘kind of crawfish’
  NCV:      Uripiv           ne-vep              ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus‘
  NCV:      Naman            ne-vev              ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus"
  NCV:      Unua             nepep               ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus"
  NCV:      S Efate          pepep               ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus"
  NCal:     Iaai             (wa)hep             ‘slipper lobster’ (*p > h, for f *v)
>

    There is a well attested term in PCP which shows some resemblance to the above. However,
the correspondence of PPn *t to Fijian ð indicates a PCP palatal (which Blust (1978Z>)
writes *c and Geraghty 1986 as */).

<
PCP *jabajaba ‘Parribacus sp. (Scyllaridae), slipper lobster’
  Fij:    Wayan       dabaðaba     ‘Parribacus sp., similar to Moreton Bay Bug’
PPn * tapatapa ‘Moreton Bay Bug’ (pollex)
  Pn:     E Futunan tapatapa       ‘Moreton Bay Bug’
  Pn:     K’marangi tapatapa       ‘Parribacus anlarlica. sand lobster’
  Pn:     Nukuoro     tapatapa     ‘slipper lobster’
  Pn:     Tikopia     tapatapa     ‘large edible prawn (unidentified), up to 20 cm’
cf. also:
   NNG: Gedaged               sabai             ‘shrimp, prawn, freshwater crayfish (sabai dumadum ‘small marine crayfish, up to 12 inches long’)
   SV:      Kwamera           təpatəpa          ‘slipper lobster, Parribacus caledonicus‘ (probably a loan from Polynesian)
>

168    Andrew Pawley


   Another set of resemblant forms, represented in certain MM languages of New Georgia
and Santa Isabel and in one SES language, shows a superficial resemblance to the Central
Pacific forms but the sound correspondences do not match and point instead to an earlier
form such as *pepete or *tepe-tepe).

__pre__
    MM:      Roviana         pepete          ‘a crustacean resembling Ibacus cihaluP
    MM:      Marovo          pepete          ‘shovel-nosed lobster’
    MM:      Nduke           epete           ‘shovel-nosed lobster, Thenus ox Ibacus sp.’
    MM:      Maringe         phapate         ‘edible saltwater crustacean, crayfish-like’
    SES:     Ghari           tepe-tepe       ‘small crayfish of reef’ (metathesis?)



4.3.3 Suborder Natantia: true prawns and shrimps

In many Oceanic languages reflexes of ^guraŋ serve as the general name for prawns and
shrimps and this was evidently the case in POc. However, a second term, *luRa, has reflexes
in certain Micronesian and Fijian languages.

<
PROc *luRa ‘small shrimp’ (Geraghty 1990: PEOc)
  Mic:     Ponapean      lur                 ‘a small shrimp’
  Mic:     Mokilese      lur                 ‘a small shrimp’
  Fij:     (unspecified) lua                 ‘a small shrimp’
cf. also:
   MM: Sengseng              e-lus           ‘freshwater shrimp’
>


4.3.4 Suborder Anomura: hermit crabs, mud lobsters, half-crabs

The Anomura, which include hermit and coconut crabs, are not true crabs but form a suborder
that is sister to true crabs (Brachyura). They have a long abdomen and appear to have
only three pairs of walking legs, the last pair usually being hidden inside the gill chamber
under the carapace. The Anomura are an extremely varied group and no Oceanic language
has a name for the group as a whole.

4.3.4.1 Paguroidea: Coenobitidae (hermit and coconut crabs), and Diogenidae and Paguridae (sea-dwelling hermit crabs)

This group includes the familiar hermit crabs which carry a gastropod shell to protect their
long soft abdomen. The coenobitids are terrestrial hermit crabs which have the left claw larger
than or equal to the right. The coenobitids include the large coconut crab (or robber crab). The
pagurids have a larger right claw. The sea-dwelling hermit crabs of the families Diogenidae
and Paguridae are considerably larger than land-dwelling hermit crabs, growing up to 7 to 10
cm in length.

4.3.4.2 Birgus latro, coconut crab

                                                                         Aquatic invertebrates   169

                            Figure 4.2     Birgits latro, coconut crab

There is a strongly supported reconstruction for the coconut crab, Birgus latro, which climbs
coconut trees to sever coconuts and is widely believed by Oceanic comunities to be able to
open coconuts. This very large crab is considered a delicacy and has been hunted to extinction
on some smaller islands.

<
PMP *qayuyu ‘coconut crab, Birgus latro’ (Blust 2002)
POc *qayuyu ‘coconut crab, Birgus latro’ (Blust 1972b)
  Yap:    Yapese       Anv/y
  Adm:    Mussau       aiu
  Adm:    Titan        kasusu
  Adm:    Wuvulu       arum           (Blust 1996b: 20)
  PT:     Dobu         Payuyu
  SES:    Tolo         ui
  SES:    Lau          kasukasu       q (*> k irregular)
  SES:    Sa’a         esusii
  SES:    Arosi        asusu
  SES:    Bauro        ail
  NCV:    Lonwolwol    an              ‘small sand crab that runs into the sea at one’s approach’
  NCV: S Efate         as             y > s /_ (**u   is regular) (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCal: Iaai           eu
  Fij:   Rotuman       arum
PPn *qiiqu ‘ coconut crab, Birgus iatro' [(pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan        ?u?u
  Pn:    E Futunan PiiPu
  Pn:    Tikopia       u
  Pn:    K’marangi u
>


   POc *qayuyu was replaced in PMic by *afafi (Bender et al. 2003:12).

170    Andrew Pawley


4.3.4.3 Hermit crabs

A number of Oceanic languages distinguish several kinds of hermit crabs by name. The
distinguishing criteria include size, habitat (sea vs land) and growth stage. For example, for
Niuean Sperlich (1997) records four taxa of hermit crab: do ‘hermit crab, Dardanus sp.’,
pulou ‘a hermit crab’, uŋa-mea ‘a land dwelling hermit crab’ and uŋa-uŋa ‘a sea dwelling
hermit crab’. Hermit crabs are widely used as bait.

    Three uninominal terms for hermit crabs are attributable to POc: *qum‘aij, *koba and
*kato(q)u. It is unlikely that these terms were full synonyms. Unfortunately, the glosses
provided for the reflexes in our sources are typically general and do not allow a semantic
distinction to be made between the three POc terms.

    *qumwaq continues a PAn etymon. In Oceanic languages a reflex of this form commonly
stands as a generic for typical hermit crabs, in contrast to coconut crabs. However, in several
Oceanic languages reflexes have an extended sense that includes coconut crabs.

<
PAn *qumaij ‘hermit crab’ (Blust 1980a)
POc *qum‘'aij (1) ‘generic for hermit crabs’, ? (2) ‘generic for hermit and coconut crabs’
  NNG:      Gedaged     (wa)gum         ‘hermit crab’
  NNG:      Manam       guma            ‘hermit crab’
  NNG:      Numbami     gubaŋa          ‘hermit crab’
  NNG:      Takia       gum             ‘hermit crab’
  PT:       Dobu        gumana          ‘hermit crab’
  PT:       Molima      gumana          ‘hermit crab’
  PT:       Gapapaiwa   gumaya         ‘hermit crab’
  PT:       Misima      go-gaman       ‘hermit crab’
  MM:       Tolai       quman          ‘hermit crab, Paguridae sp.’
  MM:       Tab ar      guma           ‘hermit crab’
  NCV:      Paamese     o-umo          ‘crab (generic)’
  SV:       Anejom      n-umwan        ‘k.o. small hermit-crab’ (-n unexplained)
  NCal:     Pije        kumwa          'Coeno bi la sp.’
  Fij:      Bauan       uŋa            ‘hermit crab’
  Fij:      Wayan       uŋa            (1) ‘hermit crab’; (2) ‘generic for hermit and coconut crabs’
  Fij:      Wayan        uŋatolou      ‘generic for hermit crabs’
  Fij:      Wayan        uŋa vule      ' coconut crab ’
PPn *quqa ‘generic for hermit crab’ (pollex gives ‘hermit crab sp.’)
  Pn:   Tongan         '/uŋa         ‘large hermit crab’
  Pn:   Niuean        uŋa            ‘coconut crab, Birgus latro`
  Pn:   Niuean       uŋa-mea        ‘land-dwelling hermit crab’
  Pn:   Niuean       uŋa-uŋa        ‘sea-dwelling hermit crab’
  Pn:   Samoan        uŋa            ‘name given to hermit crabs in general’
  Pn:   Tikopia       uŋa            ‘hermit crab’
  Pn:   Rennellese ?uqa              ‘hermit crab, Coenobita sp.
  Pn:   Rennellese        ?uqa mouku ‘forest-dwelling hermit crabs’
  Pn:   Rennellese        ?uqa puŋou ‘sea-dwelling hermit crab carrying the _puŋou_ parasite’
>

                                                                             Aquatic invertebrates   171


  A second term, *koba, is less widely attested but reflexes are found in the Admiralties,
Meso-Melanesian (in Northwest Solomonic) and Southeast Solomonic.

<
POc *koba ‘hermit crab’
  Adm:     Penchai          (kai)kop           ‘hermit crab’
  MM:      Marovo           koba               ‘generic for hermit crabs’
  MM:      Nduke            koba               ‘generic for hermit crabs’
  SES:     Gela             koba               ‘generic for hermit crabs’
  SES:     Ghari            koba, ko-koba      ‘hermit crab’
  SES:     Tolo             ko-koba            ‘hermit crab’
>

    A third term has reflexes in Mussau, Southeast Solomonic and North-Central Vanuatu.

<
POc *kato(q)u ‘hermit crab’
  Adm: Mussau       kitou
  SES: Arosi        kawou, kou ‘hermit crab, Coenobita spp.’
  SES: Bauro        gou
PNCV *kato(q)u ‘hermit crab’ (Clark 2009 gives *katou)
  NCV:Mota          gatou
  NCV:Raga          gatou
  NCV:Tamambo       hatou
  NCV:Nguna         katou
  NCV:Namakir       kato?
>

4.3.4.4 Other Anomura: Thalassina, mud lobsters, and Porcellanidae, porcelain crabs (half-crabs)

There are only two species of Thalassina, the distinctive ‘mud lobster’ of the Indo-Pacific
region, a nocturnal animal that digs a deep and intricate network of burrows in mangrove
mudflats. It typically grows up to 16-20 cm long. Thalassina are found as far east as Fiji and
Samoa. The meat is bland and this animal is not a prized source of food but it is trapped for
its edible claws in parts of Fiji. In the few dictionaries that provide names for the mud lobster
each language has its own generic, e.g. Gedaged gumei, Nduke zona, Roviana zoa, Bauan
Fijian mana, Western Fijian told, No POc reconstruction is possible.

     Porcelain crabs (or half-crabs) are small, usually 1-2 cm wide. They are common on
rocky beaches and shorelines. Names for porcelain crabs are seldom given in Oceanic dictionaries
and no widespread cognate set has been found.


4.3.5 Brachyura: true crabs

True crabs are the dominant decapods on marine coasts. In true crabs (tribe Brachyura) the
front pair of legs are clawed and the abdomen is reduced, flattened and folded underneath
the carapace. Eggs are attached to the pleopods of the female’s abdomen. Of the many crab
species only a minority are of economic value to Oceanic communities.

    Oceanic speaking communities exploiting reefs and mangrove swamps typically distinguish
between 20 and 30 crab taxa, excluding crabs of the tribe Anomura. For example, dictionaries
of Arosi, Wayan Fijian and Niuean, list about 30, 33 and 22 taxa, respectively, excluding the
Anomura. There is little doubt that POc would have had a similar array. However,
only seven secure POc terms for Brachyura crabs have been reconstructed: *kape, *kaRaka,
*kaRu(i)ki, *kuka, *rakum(u), *qalimaijo, *tubaRa.

172   Andrew Pawley

                             Figure 4.3    Scylla serrata, mangrove crab

4.3.5.1 Portunidae, mangrove and swimming crabs

Oceania has many species of portunids, belonging to the genera Portunus, Thalamita and
Charybdis. Most are large crabs, much valued as food. The English folk names ‘mud crab’,
‘mangrove crab’ or ‘black crab’ are often applied to Scylla serrata, a large round crab which
may exceed 20 cm in width and which burrows in muddy shallow tidal waters of estuaries and
mangrove swamps. POc continues a PMP term, *qalimaqaw, that probably denoted several
portunids of the genus Scylla. Wolff’s dictionary of Cebuano describes alimaŋu as ‘edible
crab of tidal swamps, round in shape, up to 10 inches in diameter, black on back, white front,
large meaty claws’, unmistakeably a large Scylla sp.

<
PMP *qalimaqaw ‘mangrove crab’ (Blust 1980a)
POc *qalimaijo ‘large mangrove crab, Scylla serrata (Portunidae) and probably other
  portunids’
  NNG: Kove           alimaŋo        ‘mangrove crab’
  PT:    Molima       kalimana       ‘mangrove crab’
  PT:    Dobu         kalimana       ‘large black crab’
  PT:    Dobu         Palimana       (ditto)
  PT:    Kilivila     keimagu        ‘large mud crab’
  MM: Teop            animano        ‘k.o. swamp crab’
  SES: Lau            alimaŋo        ‘largest sp. of crab, found on outer reef, black’
  SES: ’Are’are       alimano        ‘big crab living in mangrove swamps’
  SES: Arosi          arimaŋo        ‘very large crab with paddles, found in mangrove swamps’
  SES: To’aba’ita alimaŋo            ‘mangrove crab’
  Mic: Ponapean       elimoŋ         ‘mangrove crab’
  Mic: Carolinian alimoŋ             ‘large sea crab with red-orange shell’
  Mic: Puluwatese yelimoi]           ‘a seacrab smaller than mangrove crab’
  Mic: Chuukese       onimoŋ         ‘mangrove crab’
  Fij:   Rotuman      Poimonu        ‘k.o. crab’
  Pn:       Samoan          (paʔa)limaqo ‘large edible mud crab, Scylla sp.’ (paʔa ‘generic for crabs’)
>


                                                                       Aquatic invertebrates   173


4.3.5.2 Cardisoma spp. and other large land crabs

The large land crabs, Cardisoma spp., are an important food source in many Oceanic communities
and there are often several terms referring to their growth stages and spawning
behaviour. For example, Foale (1998) reports that in West Gela (central Solomons) females
of the abundant land crab Cardisoma hirtipes migrate to the beach at certain phases in the
lunar cycle in the wet season, from October to December, releasing zoea larvae from their
egg mass (lami). This is known as the sau lami (wash eggs). Three weeks before doing this
they migrate to the sea to immerse themselves, an event known as the sapa toga (thousands
go seawards). This is the preferred time to take them because they are fatter. In Fiji, Wayans
refer to the mass migration of C. hirtipes as vui.

<
POc *tubaRa ‘probably generic for large land crabs, Cardisoma spp.’ (cf. Geraghty 1990)
  PT:   Motu           dubara               ‘small land-crab’
  MM: Tolai            tubara               ‘land-crab’
  SES: Gela            tumbala              'Cardisoma carnifex, white land crab’
  SES: ’Are’are        opara                ‘k.o. crab’
  NCV: Mota            tipara               ‘k.o. land crab’
  SV:    Sye           tupo                 ‘a large land crab’
  SV:   Kwamera        tup‘ a               ‘k.o. landcrab’
  Fij:  Rotuma        fupa                  ‘land crab’
  Fij:  Wayan          tuba                 ‘generic for large land crabs, esp. Cardisoma
PPn *tupa ‘landcrab’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Samoan        tupa                 ‘land crab sp. with large claws’
  Pn:   Tongan         tupa                 ‘k.o. land crab’
  Pn:   Tikopia        tupa                 ‘large land crab, keenly sought for food’
  Pn:   Rarotongan tupa                     'Cardisoma cardifax, edible land crab’
cf. also:
   MM: Nduke                tubavu          'Cardisoma sp., probably C. hirtipes'
   SES: Ghari               tuba            ‘a species of land crab’ (for ^tubald)
>

    POc * rakum(u) is a well attested form which probably referred to a crab of some importance.
Some witnesses (e.g. Kove, Bugotu, Namakir, Woleaian) support attributing final *u
to this etymon; others are equivocal. Most sources give uninformative glosses for reflexes
of *rakum(u) but in Mangap (North New Guinea), Roviana (Meso-Melanesian), Puluwatese
and Ponapean (Micronesian), and SE Ambrym (North and Central Vanuatu) these refer to a
land crab. In several languages the reflex has become a term for crabs in general.

<
POc *rakum(u) ‘k.o. large crab, probably a land crab’
  Adm:      Lou             roum             ‘k.o. crab’
  NNG:      Manam           rakum            ‘k.o. big, red crab’
  NNG:      Mangap          rukum            ‘general name for crabs’
  PT:       Dobu            lakua            ‘generic for crabs’ (loss of *m irregular)
  PT:       Kilivila   lakum                   ‘small mud crab’
  PT:       Muyuw      lakum                   ‘crab’
  PT:       Gapapaiwa rakum                    ‘k.o. crab’
  MM:       Tab ar     raku                    ‘crab’
  MM:       Roviana    garumu                  ‘Cardisoma carnifex, white land crab’ (metath.)
  SES:      Bugotu     ragomu                  ‘a crab’
  NCV:      SE Ambrym oum                      ‘land crab’
  NCV:      Namakir    rakum'`                 ‘land crab’
  NCV:      Neve’ei    nu-rukhim               ‘a crab’
  SV:       Sye        a-royum                 ‘k.o. crab’
  SV:       Anejom     n-ray                   ‘k.o. crab’
  Mic:      Ponapean   rokum'`                 ‘sp. of small land crab’
  Mic:      Puluwatese rokum                   ‘large land crab’
  Mic:      Puluwatese   rokum(ihæt)             ‘common black sea crabs’
   Mic:     Woleiaian  zaxum'u                 ‘crab (generic)’
cf. also:
   NNG: Kove                 laumu            ‘k.o. crab, said to be western dialect for sand crab, called karoki in eastern dialect’
>


174    Andrew Pawley


4.3.5.3 Grapsidae, (1) shore crabs, (2) burrowing crabs of mud flats

The most commonly seen shore crabs are the grapsids, which forage among rocks and coral
rubble in the intertidal zone. The carapace is squarish, with very convex edges. The last pair
of legs are not flattened but are adapted for climbing over rocks. There are several genera,
including Grapsus, Sesarma, Metopograpsus, and Leptograpsus. Oceanic languages typically
distinguish several grapsid taxa. For example, Wayan distinguishes two main taxa within the
Grapsidae: mangrove crabs (Sesarma spp,, Metopograpsus spp,), which are kuka, and shore
(or rock) crabs (Grapsus spp,), which are galau, as well as dividing the generics kuka and
galau into further subtaxa.

4.3.5.4 Sesarma spp,, mangrove grapsids

Judging by its reflexes in EOc languages POc *kuka referred chiefly to grapsids of the genus
Sesarma, which live in mangrove forest mudflats. In Tolai (MM), Arosi and To’aba’ita (SES)
and Lonwolwol (NCV) the reflex has become a generic term for crabs.

<
POc *kuka ‘mudcrab, including Sesarma sp. or spp,, living in mangrove forest and mudflats’
  MM: Tolai             kuka        ‘generic for crabs’
  MM. Maringe           kokha       ‘hermit crab’
  MM: Sursurunga        kuk         ‘crab’
  SES: Arosi            kuka        ‘generic term for crabs, excluding the Anomura and possibly portunids’
  SES: To’aba’ita       ?u?a        ‘general term for a variety of crabs, excluding hermit crabs and cocout crabs’ (syn. ŋuda)
  SES: Lau              ua          ‘a crab’
  SES: Lau            nd fou          ‘large sea crab’
  SES: Lau            ud su           ‘very large reef crab’
  SES: ’Are’are      ?u?a            ‘k.o. mud crab’
  SES: ’Are’are      ?u?a(puru)      ‘a land crab’
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-xux          ‘crab’
  NCV: Lonwolwol     (lo)kuk         ‘crab (generic)’
  Fij: Bauan         kuka            ‘small red and black crab, found in mangrove swamp’
  Fij:  Wayan          kuka          ‘crabs of mangrove swamps, red claws, black carapace, Sesarma and Metopograpsus spp.’
PPn *kuka ‘mangrove crab, Sesarma sp. or spp.’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan         kuka          ‘k.o. crab’
  Pn:   Samoan         ?u?a          ‘common mangrove crab, Sesarma sp
>


                                                               Aquatic invertebrates      175


    Reflexes of POc *kape typically refer to a kind of reef crab (Roviana, Gela, Rotuman).
In Raga the reflex has become a generic term for crabs and in Arosi and Mota it appears to
serve as a generic for a subclass.

<
POc *kape ‘crab taxon, probably a rock crab (Grapsidae)’
  Adm:   Lou            kah            ‘shell of crab or bivalve mollusc’
  NNG:   Sengseng       kahe           ‘crab’
  NNG:   Mengen (Poeng) kape           ‘crab’
  NNG:   Adzera         wafi           ‘crab’
  NNG:   Middle Watut   k‘afi          ‘crab’ (Holzknecht 1989)
  MM:    Roviana        gave           'Metasesarma rousseauxii'
  SES:   Gela           gave           ‘reef crab’
  SES:   Ghari          gave raqasi    ‘shore crab, Grapsus sp.’
  SES:   To’aba’ita     ?afe           ‘flat crab, ? Percnonptanissimum'
  SES:   ’Are’are       ?ahe           ‘a sea crab’
  SES:   Arosi          ?ahe           ‘first element, serving as generic classifier in names of several different species’
  SES:   Arosi             ?ahe-haruta ‘a large sea crab’
  SES:   Arosi             ?ahe-roma ‘a red crab’
  SES:   Arosi             ?ahe-to?o   ‘a small land crab’
  SES:   Sa’a              ?ahe        ‘a crab’
  NCV:   Mota              gave        ‘several spp. of crab’
  NCV:   Raga              gave        ‘generic for marine and land crabs’
  NCV:   Paamese           æh          ‘kind of crab found on rocks’
  NCV:   Nguna             kdve        ‘sp. of rock crab, black’
  NCV:   Uripiv            na-aw       ‘various kinds of shore crabs’
  SV:    Sye               n-ev(lah)   ‘a crab’
  Fij:   Rotuman           'iknhe      ‘k.o. reef crab, reddish with very flat back’
>

176    Andrew Pawley


4.3.5.5 Ocypodidae long-stalked crabs (ghost crabs fiddler crabs soldier crabs)

The Ocypodidae are a very distinctive group of small crabs, with eyes on stalks, common on
sandy beaches, mudflats and mangrove forests. There are several genera: Ocypoda spp., ghost
crabs, Uca spp., fiddler crabs, and Macropthalama spp., sentinel or soldier crabs. Oceanic
languages typically distinguish more than one kind by name. Wayan has a generic for ghost
crabs, koke, and two specifics for subtaxa. It has a separate generic, told, for fiddler and
sentinel crabs.

    There is a well-supported POc term for ghost crabs, which continues a PMP etymon,
*kaRuki. WOc and Micronesian witnesses point to POc *kaRuki. However, Geraghty (1990:
62) reconstructs *kaRuiki to account for the agreement between Chamorro haguiki (doublet
haguhi) and the Central Pacific forms. For both POc and PCP it seems preferable to posit
doublets, which perhaps were careful and fast speech variants. Polynesian and Rotuman reflexes
of PCP *kauiki show reanalysis of unstressed intervocalic *//  as *w, with subsequent
change of hr > v in some languages.

<
PMP *kaRuki ‘sand crab, Ocypoda sp.’ (cf. Blust 1983-84a)
POc *kaRuki, (dbl. *kaRuiki) ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp., small white crab found on sandy beaches’ (cf. Geraghty 1990)
  NNG Hote             kaluk              ‘crab’
  NNG Manam            garuku             ‘k.o. little crab’
  NNG Kove             karoki             ‘middle-sized crab found in holes on beaches
  NNG Bukawa           gain?              ‘crab’
  NNG Mangap           kerek              ‘crab type, small, used as bait’
  MM: Vitu             karoki             ‘crab’
  Mic: Kiribati        kauki              ‘ghost crab’
  Mic: Marshallese karuk                  ‘white sand crab’
  Mic: Kosraean        kuluk              ‘sand crab’
PCP *kauki, *kawiki ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’
  Fij:   Rotuman       ?avi?i             ‘sand crab’
  Fij:   Bauan         kauke              ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’
  Fij:   Wayan         koke               ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda spp
PPn *kawiki ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’
  Pn:   Tongan        keviki           ‘small light-coloured sand crab’
  Pn:   Samoan        ?avi?i           ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’
  Pn:   Tikopia       kaviki           ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’
  Pn:   Hawaiian      lohiki           ‘sand crab, probably Ocypoda sp
  Pn:   Hawaiian      ?ohiki-?an-moana ‘ocean crab, possibly Planes or Pachygrapsus sp.’
>

   There is another form partially resembling *kaRu(i)ki that is attributable at least to PEOc,
showing *-pe instead of *-ki in the final syllable. This has reflexes in Southeast Solomonic
and North and Central Vanuatu languages and in at least one Micronesian language.

<
PEOc *kaRuve ‘k.o. beach crab, probably Ocypoda sp., ghost crab’
  SES: Ghari                     galuve           ‘small land crab’
  SES: Arosi                     karuhe           ‘burrowing sand crab’
  NCV: Mota                      yarwe            ‘a ghost crab’
   NCV:     Mwotlap       na-yj&w               ‘ghost crab’
   NCV:     Nguna         kapwe                 ‘ghost crab’
   NCV:     Port Sandwich xauv                  ‘beach crab’
   NCV:     Lonwolwol     kawiu                 ‘ghost crab’
   Mic:     Woleaian      xazipe                ‘beach crab’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Mutu               garuru           (1) ‘ghost crab, Ocypoda sp.’ (2) ‘soldier crab, Mictyris sp.’
>


                                                                           Aquatic invertebrates   177


No language is known to have reflexes of both *kaRu(i)ki and *kaRuve.

   The following PEOc reconstruction is not very secure, resting on agreements between
two Central Pacific languages and one Southeast Solomons language.

<
PEOc (?) *kakaka ‘small shore crab, possibly Ocypoda sp’ (Geraghty 1990)
  SES:      To’aba’ita      kakaka          ‘Ocypoda sp., ghost crab’
  Fij:      Rotuman         ka?-kaʔa        ‘small beach crab, one claw much bigger than the other, spreads its claws when approached’
  Fij:      W. Fijian       kakaka          ‘k.o. land crab, possibly Sesarma sp.’ (Geraghty 1990)
cf. also:
   PT:    Misima            kakalisu    ‘ghost crab’ (final -su unexplained)
   MM: Marovo               kaka(rita)  ‘mangrove crab, Scylla serrata’
   MM: Marovo               kaka(baeha) ‘small, hairy sea crab, poisonous’
>


4.3.5.6 Crabs of uncertain family and families lacking reconstructed names

For some reconstructed crab names no secure family identification can be made. Geraghty
(1990:61) reconstructs PEOc *kaRaka ‘k.o. crab’. Extra-Oceanic cognates occur in Palauan
kesako ‘k.o. land crab’ and Chamorro hagahat ‘rock crab’ and these comparisons point to
POc *kaRaka.

<
PMP *kaRakap ‘probably rock crab’ (ACD)
POc *kaRaka ‘k.o. crab, possibly rock crab.’ (cf. Geraghty 1990)
  NNG:      Takia           karag            ‘crab’
  NNG:      Gedaged         kalag            ‘k.o. crab’
  Fij:      Bauan           gaka             ‘mangrove crab’
  Pn:       Niuean          keka             ‘small sea crab sp.’
  Pn:       Tongan          kaka(fatu)       ‘k.o. crab’ (fatu ‘rock’)
cf. also:
   Mic:     Kiribati        kakawa           ‘k.o. small crustacean’
>

    The following reconstruction is tentative.

<
POc *(g,k)alau ‘k.o. shore crab, possibly a grapsid sp.’
  NNG: Gedaged              kalau            ‘small crab found under rocks’
   Fij:   Wayan         galan         ‘grapsid crabs of the shore’
cf. also:
   NNG: Zivo            kulau         ‘k.o. crab’
>

178   Andrew Pawley


4.3.5.7 Xanthoidea

The Xanthoidea comprises several families, including Xanthidae, Menippidae and Trapezi-
idae. Xanthidae are the typical crabs of coral reefs, emerging at night. There are many species,
quite variable in form but the carapace is usually broad in front, narrow at the rear. Some
species are poisonous. The menippids and trapezids are similar in appearance to the xanthids.
Wayan distinguishes at least three different xanthoids: motodi (some Xanthidae and
Menippidae), vulau (some Xanthidae and Trapeziidae) and galau ni waitaði (probably Libia
tesselata). No POc terms are reconstructable for this group.


4.3.6 Generic terms for crabs

Many Oceanic languages have a uninomial that refers to crabs in general or at least to a
large subclass of crabs, e.g. Molima kaka?u, Maringe khakan ‘crabs in general’, To’aba’ita
ŋuda (syn. ?u?a) ‘general term for crabs except hermit crabs and coconut crabs’. Dictionaries
of many Polynesian languages (including Samoan, East Uvean, East Futunan, Pukapuan and
Tikopia) describe a reflex of PPn *paka as ‘a general term for crabs’ or similar. However, one
must view such glosses with some caution, unless it is clear that the authors have carefully
investigated whether all groups of crabs fall under this rubric.

    Often the generic for crabs also serves as the name of a particular crab taxon that is an
important food source - a kind of polysemy that is common in folk taxonomies worldwide.
For example, in Bauan Fijian the name gari, specifically applied to large mud crabs of the
genus Scylla, is extended to embrace all typical crabs (tribe Brachyura) other than large land
crabs (Cardisoma spp,). The same is true of the Wayan term, seka. However, Wayans do not
regard hermit crabs, coconut crabs and Thalassina (all of which are members of the tribe
Anomura) as seka.

    While it is likely that POc had a general term covering some or all crabs we can do little
more than point to three candidates. The strongest of the candidates is probably *kuka.

    As noted in §3.5.4, reflexes of POc *kuka, which probably referred chiefly to grapsid
crabs that live in mangrove swamps, esp. those of the genus Sesarma, serve as a general term
for crabs, or at least typical crabs (i.e. other than Anomura) in certain languages belonging to
three different subgroups: Tolai (MM), Arosi and To’aba’ita (SES), and Lonwolwol (NCV).
Reflexes of * kuka may occur more widely as a generic - relatively few dictionaries and
wordlists provide precise statements about which crab names serve as generics.

    Reflexes of POc *rakum(u) (§3.5.2) occur as a general name for crabs in at least one North
New Guinea language, Mangap, one Papuan Tip language, Dobuan, and one Micronesian
language, Woleaian.

    A term for another grapsid group, POc *kape (§3.5.4), has become a generic covering
both true crabs and hermit crabs in most or all NCV languages (Francois, pers. comm.). In
Mota and Uripiv (both NCV) the reflex of *kape appears to serve as a generic for a variety
of rock or shore crabs. There are signs that the Arosi reflex of *kape was once a generic for a
range of sea and land crabs because this form now appears only as the first element in several
Arosi compounds.

                                                                          Aquatic invertebrates    179


4.3.7 Other crustaceans

4.3.7.1 Mantis shrimps (order Stomatopoda)

The mantis shrimps, Stomatopoda, are a distinctive group represented by Squilla spp. and
other genera. The fierce, predatory mantis shrimps are prominent denizens of the intertidal
zone. They burrow in sand or hide in crevices and ambush prey. Few sources give names for
these creatures. Among the handful of terms that have been noted, e.g. Gedaged kalompit,
Nduke hahaka. Wayan vidividi, no widespread cognate set has been found.

4.3.7.2 Barnacles (class Cirripedia, order Thoracia)

Barnacles are shrimp-like crustaceans that superficially resemble externally shelled molluscs.
They attach themselves by the head to a surface and grow a shelly wall of protective plates.
There is a Proto Cristobal-Malaitan form that may have referred to barnacles. This form has
possible cognates in two Meso-Melanesian languages of the western Solomons.

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *sisira ‘a barnacle or kind of small mollusc’
   SES:     ’Are’are         sisire              ‘k.o. small shellfish that clings to mangrove roots
   SES:     Arosi            sisire, sire-sire   ‘barnacle’
   SES:     Lau              sisile              (i) ‘barnacles’; (2) ‘very small molluscs (generic)
   SES:     Sa’a             sisile              ‘k.o. shellfish’
cf. also:
   MM: Roviana               zere                ‘barnacle’
   MM: Maringe               sisira              ‘seashell, a cowry, Cypraea tigris'
>

<
PCP *jove ‘k.o. shellfish or barnacle’ (cf. Geraghty 1986)
  Fiji    Bauan          sove                 ‘barnacle’
PPn *tofe ‘k.o. bivalve’
  Pn:     Tongan         tofe                 ‘pearl oyster’
  Pn:     Niuean         tofe                 ‘k.o. edible cockle, white’
  Pn:     E Futunan tofe                      ‘k.o. shellfish’
  Pn:     Samoan         tofe                 ‘Perna sp.’
  Pn:     Rennellese tohe                     ‘small white bivalve or barnacle, as on floating logs; edible’ (tohetohea ‘thickly crusted with tohe')
>


4.3.8 Growth stages and sexes of crustaceans

Oceanic communities often have distinct names for various growth stages and sexes of important
crabs, particularly the larger land crabs and coconut crabs. However, no widespread
cognate sets of this sort have been found.


4.3.9 Body parts of crustaceans

Oceanic languages have names for various parts of crustaceans, e.g. Niuean Hike ‘thorax of a
crab’, ami ‘crab roe’, afo uŋa ‘breeding cord of a female coconut crab’, nifo ‘nippers of land
crab, etc.’ One secure reconstruction can be made.

180   Andrew Pawley

<
PEOc *Rami ‘crustacean roe’ (Geraghty 1990)
  SES: Gela            lami           ‘spawn of crabs’
  SES: Arosi           rami           ‘eggs of crabs or crayfish’
  NCV: Mota            rame(ai)       ‘eggs of crayfish, crabs, etc
  NCV: Mota            rame           ‘cover with eggs’
  NCV: Raga            ami(ni)        ‘crustacean eggs’
  NCV: Uripiv          ni-ami(n)      ‘crab’s eggs’
PPn *ami ‘crustacean roe’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan        ami          ‘crab and lobster roe’
  Pn:   Samoan        ami          ‘roe of crabs and other crustaceans
  Pn:   Tokelaun      ami          ‘roe of crustaceans’
>


4.4 Molluscs

4.4.1 Molluscs as a resource in Oceanic communities

Molluscs are very important sources of protein food in Oceanic-speaking coastal communities.
A survey of the Milne Bay coral reef systems recorded 945 species of molluscs living
in reef habitats (Kinch 1999, Wells and Kinch, 2003). That figure excludes the many species
that occupy mangrove and mudflat habitats, which were not surveyed. While the Milne Bay
region has one of the richest marine faunas in the Pacific, it exemplifies the abundance of
mollusc resources available to communities living close to coral reef systems.

     Unfortunately, few good ethnographic descriptions exist of shellfishing in Oceanic
communities. Languages for which there are near exhaustive lists of mollusc terms distinguish
upwards of 100 taxa. Cemuhi of New Caledonia has around 133 terms for molluscs (Rivierre 1994)
and Paici, another New Caledonian language, has around 100 (Rivierre 1983), Wayan
(Western Fijian) distinguishes more than 140 mollusc taxa, including 105 gastropod, 35
bivalve and four chiton taxa (Pawley and Sayaba 2003). Fox’s (1978) dictionary of Arosi gives
 104 names for kinds of molluscs. Sources for a number of other languages give impressive
totals that are unlikely to be exhaustive. Fox (1974:93) reports that the Lau of NE Malaita
name some 75 kinds of shells. Churchward’s Tongan dictionary lists 63 names for kinds of
shellfish. Waterhouse lists some 60 names for shelled mollusc taxa for Roviana and White
(1988) gives 53 such names for Maringe (Cheke Holo).

     One of the few good ethnographic accounts is a description of shellfishing at Nukakau
Island, West New Britain, by Swadling and Chowning (1981). For the people of Nukakau,
who speak Kove, shellfish are “especially important when fishing is poor and the weather
too rough for fishing parties to go out” (p. 159). The three species that are most collected
are three bivalves: Geloina coaxans (Kove tue), which are gathered in mangrove forests,
Andara granosa (Kove masilau), gathered from estuarine mudflats, and Andara antiquata
(Kove uleule), taken from weed-covered coral reef flats. The shells of the first of these are
also used as cutting and scraping tools.

                                                                        Aquatic invertebrates      181

     The importance of shellfish to speakers of Proto Oceanic and its immediate descendants is
shown by the large quantities of gastropod and bivalve shells, and artefacts made from shell,
that are found inLapita sites (Gifford & Shutler Jr 1956, Kirch 1997, Spriggs 1997, Swadling
 1977, 1996) and other archaeological sites associated with Oceanic languages. Gifford and
Shutler (1956) identified at least 74 species of molluscs occurring in Lapita sites in New
Caledonia. Swadling (1977) reports 54 mollusc species from the Taurama sequence in Central
Province, Papua New Guinea, beginning around 2000 BP. Tools made from shells included
one-piece fishhooks, adzes made from Tridacna valves and food scrapers from various shell
families. Kirch writes that shell valuables in Lapita sites included “rings, disks, beads and
worked rectangular sections made from various species of marine shell, especially large cone
shells (Conus leopardus. C. litteratus\ Spondylus oysters, Tridacna clam shells and Trochus
shells” (Kirch 1997:236).


4.4.2 Class Gastropoda: univalves

The larger Pacific islands and island groups have extensive and varied communities of gastropods.
On the reefs the following families are prominent: Arciidae, Conidae, Strombidae,
Trochidae, Turbinidae. On rocky shores and in mangrove swamps the Neritidae and Cerithi-
dae predominate.

    POc reconstructions have been made for only a minority of families. A total of seven
POc terms for gastropods are reconstructed here: *buli(qj. : *lala(k), *qaliliq, *buRua, *Raqa,
*sisiq, *tapuRi. This is probably less than ten percent of the number of gastropod taxa named
in POc.

4.4.2.1 Strombidae, strombs, spiders, conches

Strombids are the well-known conch and spider shells, which live in sandy and rocky reef
areas. The strombids are an important food source in Oceanic coastal communities. There
is a widely-reflected reconstruction for the spider conch, Lambis lambis. It is likely that this
term served as a generic for a range of spider shell taxa, as its reflex does in some daughter
languages.

<
PMP *Raija, *Raqak or *Raqar ‘the spider conch, Lambis lambis‘ (Blust 1989)
POc *Raqa ‘Lambis spp,, esp. spider conch, Lambis lambis"
  NNG:      Mangap          ra                ‘spider shell’
  PT:       Iduna           laga              ‘Lambis scorpius. Strombus sinuatus‘
  MM:       Tab ar          raŋ               d.am bis truncata sebae"
  SES:      Arosi           raŋa              ‘spider shell, with long spines’
  NOV:      Uripiv          ni-raŋ            ‘Lambis sp.’
  Mic:      Kiribati        ne-aŋ             ‘spider shell, Lambis sp’.
  Mic:      Puluwatese      (le)yaq           ‘spider shell’
  Mic:      Woleaian        (re)yaqa          ‘k.o. sea shell’
  Mic:      Ponapean        ldŋ               ‘spider shell’
  Fij:      Bauan           yaqa              ‘generic name for some varieties of shellfish: Pterocera and Lambis sp.’
   Fij:     Way an          eŋa               (i) ‘Lambis truncata" (2) ‘generic for Strombidae’
cf. also:
   MM:      Maringe         cega              ‘spider conch incl. Lambis sp.’
>

182    Andrew Pawley


                               Figure 4.4    Lambis spp., spider conches


4.4.2.2 Turbinidae, turbans

The turbans are herbivorous grazers common on intertidal and subtidal reefs, well-known
for the operculum or ‘cat’s eye’ which the animal uses to close off the entrance to its shell.
Turbans are an important food resource. Wayan has a generic for turbans, kerekere, as well
as names for several subtaxa, and this pattern appears to be typical of Oceanic languages.

4.4.2.3 Turbopetholatus

For the tapestry turban, Turbopetholatus, there is a well-attested POc reconstruction, *qaliliij,
which continues a PMP etymon. This term may have served as a generic for the genus.

<
PMP *qaliluj ‘cat’s eye shell’ (some reflexes indicate initial *w)[6]
POc *qalilii] ‘Turbopetholatus, tapestry turban; possibly generic for several or all Turbo
  SPP
  MM: Tolai               kaliliŋ        ‘k.o. shell fish’
  SES: Gela               lili           ‘Turbo spp. (generic)’
  SES: Lau                salili         ‘ Turbo petholatus’
  SES: To’aba’ita         thalili        ‘sp. of turban shell, possibly tapestry turban, Turbo petholatus’
  SES: ’Are’are           rariri         ‘k.o. small shellfish, with cat’s eye’
  NOV: Tamambo            (h)alili       ‘cat’s eye shell’
  NOV: SE Ambrym lili                    ‘operculum of green snail’
  NOV: Namakir            ?alil          ‘cat’s eye shell’
PPn *qalili ‘cat’s eye shell, Turbo sp.’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan           lelili         ‘a shellfish with cat’s eye’
  Pn:      Niuatoputapu Telili            ‘Turbo sp.’
  Pn:      Rennellese   Taijiqi           ‘turban shells, T. petholatus, used for spoons’
  Pn:      Samoan       alili             ‘a mollusc, Turbo sp.’
  Pn:      Tikopia      alili             ‘greensnail; Turbo spp. incl. T. marmoratus, T. bargyrostomus, T. setosus'
>

[6] Blust (1980a) gives this form as PWMP but Oceanic cognates allow it to be attributed to PMP.

                                                                   Aquatic invertebrates     183


4.4.2.4 Other Turbo taxa

Usually a number of turban shell taxa are named, sometimes by a compound using a reflex
of *mata ‘eye’, with reference to the operculum. The second element of PEOc *mata-buku
is probably *buku ‘knot, lump, protruberance’.

<
PEOc *mata-buku ‘ Turbo spp.’
  SES:     Lengo            mata-puku   ‘Turbinidae’
  Fiji     Way an           mata-buku   ‘Turbo spp., possibly including T. chrysostoma, T. argyrostoma, T. necnivosus"
cf. also:
   MM: Maringe              phipuku      " Trochus inerassalus'
   SV:    Anejom            na-pek       " Turbo marmoratus"
>


4.4.2.5 Cymatiidae, tritons

The tritons are a family of many species, which eat echinoderms and molluscs. The large shell
of Charonia tritonis, Triton’s trumpet, is widely used as a trumpet for ceremonial purposes
or to summon people to meetings. There is a widely-reflected POc reconstruction for triton
shells, which continues a PMP etymon.

<
PMP *tabuRiq ‘conch shell trumpet’ (dbl. *tabuRT) (Blust 1989)
POc * tapuRiq (i) ‘generic for conch shells, esp. triton’s trumpet, Charonia tritonis and allied spp.; possibly extended to some Cassis (helmet) shells’; (2) ‘trumpet of Charonia shell’
  Adm: Mussau            taue         ‘triton shell’
  NNG: Kove              taule        ‘triton’s trumpet, used for sending messages’
  NNG: Gedaged           taul         ‘triton shell’
  NNG: Manam             tauru        ‘conch; used as a wind instrument’
  NNG: Mangap            twiiri       ‘trumpet shell, Triton’
  PT:     Kilivila       tauya        ‘triton shell; trumpet of this’
  MM: Nalik              tafuru       ‘triton shell’
  MM: Sursuranga taur                 ‘triton shell, blown to send messages’
  MM: Patpatar           tahur        ‘triton shell’
  MM: Vitu               tavure       ‘triton shell’
  SES: Gela              tavuli       ‘triton shell; helmet shell, Cassis cornulus: a trumpet’
  SES: Arosi            ahuri         ‘conch shell, triton; trumpet of this, blown only on solemn occasions, e.g. at a death’
  SES: Arosi          ahuri (poru)                   ‘k.o. Cassis shell’
   SES: Sa’a      ehuri                          ‘conch shell, blown as a summons’
   TM: Burna      teveliko                       ‘triton shell’ (Francois In press)
   NCV: Mota      tawe                           ‘conch shell’
   NCV: Mwotlap   na-lf)                         ‘conch shell’
   NCV: Lonwolwol taviu                          ‘conch shell (and sound)’
   NCV: Nguna     tavui                          ‘triton shell’
   SV:  Sye       n-tovu                         ‘triton shell’
   SV:  Anejom    n-tohou                        ‘triton shell’
   Mic: Kiribati  tau                            ‘triton conch’
   Mic: Woleaian  tawii                          ‘conch shell; trumpet’
   Fij: Bauan     davui                          ‘Triton’s trumpet; used as a trumpet, chiefly on canoes’
   Fij:      Wayan            tavui              ‘Triton’s trumpet and allied spp.; trumpet of this’
>


184       Andrew Pawley


4.4.2.6 Neritidae, nerites, and allied families of Neritacea

Typical nerites have globular shells with flattened base. They are vegetarians, living under
rocks or in crevices close to the high tide mark. The nerite family contains marine, freshwater
and terrestrial species. The wide range and abundance of nerites, and their importance as food,
may explain why the generic for this family has come to be used as a generic for a wider range
of gastropods in a number of Oceanic languages, including Takia, Roviana, Bauan, Wayan
and Samoan.

<
PMP *sisuq, *sisi[q] ‘edible snail’ (doublets *snsnq) (Blust 1980a)
POc *sisiq (1) ‘various small, snail-like gastropods of nerite family’; (2) ‘probably generic for a wider class of edible gastropods’
  NNG: Takia              sise(i)        ‘generic term for all varieties of sea shells’
  PT:     Molima          sisi(?alo)     ‘a brown bivalve, small and edible, found in tidal flats’
  MM: Nakanai              e-sisi         ‘k.o. shellfish’
  MM: Teop                 hihi           ‘Nerita albicilla‘
  MM: Roviana              sise           ‘general name for a number of small shells’
  MM: Marovo               sise           ‘small marine gastropod’
  MM: Marovo               sise (kavo) ‘freshwater gastropod’
  SES: To’aba’ita         sisi-          ‘first element in several compounds for kinds of shellfish’
  SES: ’Are’are           sisi           ‘a big sea shell’
  SES: ’Are’are           sisi-          ‘first element in compounds for kinds of gastropods’
  SES: Arosi              sisi(apiro)    ‘limpet’
  SES: Lau                sisi(afufu)    ‘mollusc sp.’
  SES: Gela               hihi(vuhi)     ‘freshwater snail sp., Neritina brevispina‘
  NCV: Mwotlap           ne-ses         ‘Neritaplicata, generic for molluscs’
  NCV: NE Ambae          hihe           ‘Nerita sp.’
  NCV: SE Ambrym ses                    ‘shellfish of family Neritidae’
  NCV: Tamambo           sise           ‘shellfish sp.’
  NCV:      Nguna             sisa    ‘snail including nerites’
  NCV:      Raga              hiha    ‘seasnail, winkle’
  NCV:      S Efate           ses     ‘nerite’
  NCal:     Cemuhi            ti      ‘generic term for gastropods’
  NCal:     Fwai              thik    ‘trochus, but used generically for gastropods’
  NCal:     Nemi              thik    ‘trochus, but used generically for gastropods’
  Fij:      Rotuman           sisi    ‘edible shell-fish, the periwinkle’
  Fij:      Bauan             siði    (1) ‘Trochus spp.’; (2) ‘first element in various compounds naming kinds of gastropods and a few bivalves’
  Fij:    Way  an       ðiði          ‘generic for gastropods’
PPn *sisi ‘a univalve mollusc’ (pollex)
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu hihi           ‘Nerita spp.’
  Pn:     Niuean        hihi-         ‘first element in compound names for some gastropods’
  Pn:     Samoan        sisi          ‘name given to small snails in general’ (Milner); ‘freshwater molluscs’ (Pratt)
  Pn:     E Futunan     sisi          ‘small shellfish spp., Neritidae and Naeticidae’
  Pn:     Tikopia       sisi          ‘a range of marine and land snails incl. Melampus and Nerita spp.’
  Pn:     Rennellese    sisi          ‘edible Nerita shells’
cf. also:
   NNG: Yabem                 usu              ‘sea snails (general term)’
   PT:    Motu:               dudu             ‘name of a shellfish’ (u for fz)
>


                                                                         A quartc inverte brates   185


     Some WOc and NCV languages reflect * siseq or *sisciq rather than *sisiq. These departures
can be explained in terms of dissimilatory change in which the final, unstressed vowel
is lowered. Dissimilation of the final vowel, *sisiq > sisu > susu, also explains Motu dudu
for expected *didi.

4.4.2.7 Cypraeidae (cowries) and Ovulidae (egg and spindle cowries)

Many species of cowries are present. The white or egg cowrie (Ovula ovum) is used in some
societies as a decoration associated with chiefs and chiefly property. In Fiji, for example, these
shells are hung from the ridge-pole of a chief’s house and in the western Solomons they are
used as prow ornaments on war canoes. Oceanic languages generally classify cowries and
ovulids together under a single generic with subtaxa distinguished by binomials. There is a
well-attested POc reconstruction which continues a PMP etymon.

<
PMP *buliq ‘cowrie shell’ (Blust 1980a)
POc *buli(q) ‘generic for cowries’
  NNG:      Takia           bul              ‘k.o. shellfish: Ovula ovum, white egg cowrie
  PT:       Kilivila        bune-butia       ‘cowrie’
  PT:       Molima          buli             ‘cat’s eye (operculum of shell)’
  MM.       Tab ar          buri-buri        ‘big cowrie shell’
  MM.       Maringe         buli             ‘cowrie shell’
  SES:      Gela              buli            ‘generic for cowries’
  SES:      To’aba’ita        bull            ‘egg cowrie, Ovula ovum’
  SES:      Lau               buli            ‘white cowrie, Ovula ovum’
  SES:      Sa’a              puli            ‘cowrie shell, used as sinkers for nets’
  NCV:      Mwotlap           (no-wo)p''ol    ‘cowrie shell, not edible; Cypraeidae spp.’
  NCV:      Nguna             pule            ‘cowries’
  Mic:      Ponapean          p‘ili           ‘cowrie shell’
  Mic:      Puluwatese        pOhy            ‘cowry shell; to scrape, as breadfruit’
  Fij:      Bauan             buli            ‘cowrie shell’
  Fij:      Wayan             buli-buli       ‘cowrie shell: generic term for Cypraeidae and Ovulidae’
PPn *pule ‘cowrie’
  Pn:    Samoan               pule            ‘cowrie’
  Pn:    Niuean               pule            ‘cowrie, Cyprea sp.’ (pule tea ‘white cowry, Ovula ovum)’
>

186    Andrew Pawley

                                             Figure 4.5   Cowries


4.4.2.8 Trochidae, top shells

The Trochidae are a family of shallow water dwellers, represented by many species, with
conical shells and flat or convex circular base. Some are a valued food resource. Oceanic
peoples traditionally made ornaments, such as arm and wrist bracelets, from trochus shell.
Oceanic languages usually have a generic term for the family and several binomials naming
subtaxa. There is a good chance that the term lalai, which entered Tok Pisin from Tolai,
has spread from Tok Pisin into many vernacular languages of Papua New Guinea and the
Solomons.

<
PMP *lalak ‘trochus shell’ (Blust 2002)
POc *lala(k) (1) ‘ Trochus spp,, including T. niloticus and possibly T. stellatus’; (2) ‘rings or armlets made of this’
  NNG: Wogeo           lala          ‘pearl shell’
  MM: Tolai            lalai         ‘Trochus spp,, armlet made from trochus shells’
  MM:       Maringe          glala    ‘ Trochus niloticus’
  SES:      Gela             lala     ‘ Trochus niloticus’
  SES:      Longgu           lala     ‘ Trochus niloticus’
  NCV:      Mota             lala     ‘top shell; bracelet made of this’
  NCV:      Raga             lala     ‘ Trochus stellatus: shell armlet, ring
  NCV:      Tamambo          lala     ‘trochus’
  NCV:      Uripiv           na-lel   ‘trochus shell’
cf. the following, all possibly borrowed from Tok Pisin lalai`.
   Adm: Mussau           lailai       ‘pearlshelT
   NNG: Kove             lalai        ‘pearlshelT
   MM: Bali              lailai       ‘pearlshelT
>

                                                                  Aquatic invertebrates   187


4.4.2.9 Conidae, cone shells

The Conidae are all conical in shape, usually with long narrow aperture and smooth outer lip.
Species vary greatly in length, ranging from 6 mm to 230 mm. The Conidae are carnivores
and inflict a venom with a radular dart on the proboscis. The larger shells are much used
for making bracelets and rings. There is a term attributable to PEOc whose SES reflexes
generally refer both to the shell itself and to bracelets and other ornaments made of cone or
trochus shell.

<
PEOc *lako (1) ‘cone or trochus shell’; (2) ‘various ornaments made from this’
   SES:    Gela              Iago     ‘cone shells made into ornaments’
   SES:    Arosi             ra?o     ‘trochus shell; various ornaments made from this; canoe decorated with inlaid shell pieces’
   SES:     ’Are’are         ra?o     ‘cone shell used as ornament on belt or arm; tied on canoes as protection’
   SES:    Lau               lao      ‘generic for Conus spp.; ornaments of Conus, canoe decorated with Conus’
   SES:     Sa’a             la?o     ‘cone shell, trochus; forehead ornament of this or tridacna; armlets; shell inlaid on sides of canoes’
  Mic:     Puluwatese la-             ‘possessive classifier for bracelets’
  Mic:     Puluwatese    lælælæ          ‘use s.t. as a bracelet’
  Mic:     Woleiaian  raxa            ‘bracelet, wrist ornament’
>

    Proto SE Solomonic *kome evidently referred to a particular kind of armlet, made from
*lako shell. A partially or fully reduplicated form, *ko-kome or *komekome, may have been
a general name for cone shells in Proto SE Solomonic. However, given that *kome referred
to a valuable trade good, this term may well have spread by borrowing among languages of
the central and eastern Solomons.

<
Proto SE Solomonic *kome ‘armlets made from cone or trochus shell’
Proto SE Solomonic *ko-kome or *kome-kome ‘generic for cone shells’
  MM: Maringe       kome-kome ‘Conidae family (generic)’
  MM: Maringe       khome        ‘cone shell, Conus leopardus, used to make armlets’
  SES: Arosi        kome          ‘white shell armlet of ra?o trochus’
   SES:    Lau              home              'Conus'1
   SES:    Sa’a             ko-kome           ‘round white armlet of trochus (la?o)
   SES:    To’aba’ita       home              ‘armlet, shell of Conus sp.’
   SES:    Kwaio            home              ‘cone shell arm ring’
   SES:    Kwaio            ko-kome           ‘cone shells (generic)’
>

188    Andrew Pctwley

4.4.2.10 Muricidae, murexes

Murexes have large shells, sculptured with knobs and ridges, spines and spinal cords. They
are carnivores which live in the subtidal zone especially on sandy mudflats. Numerous species
occur in the tropical Pacific.

<
POc *buRua 'Murex sp.’ (Geraghty 1990)
  PT:       Bwaidoga        (hewahewa) bulu   'M. ramosus'
  MM:       Tolai           burua, bura-burua 'M. palma rosa'
  Fij:      Wayan           bua               'Murex spp.’
cf. also:
   NNG: Kove                vuru                    ‘cone shells and ornaments made from these’
   MM: Nakanai              e-buru                  ‘cone-shaped shellfish’
>


4.4.2.11 Gastropod families lacking POc names

For many groups of gastropods present in the tropical Pacific region no reconstructions have
been made to POc level, even though names for these groups are present in contemporary languages.
For example, POc names are missing for limpets (Patellidae), key-hole limpets (Fis-
surellidae), ceriths (Cerithidae), cones (Conidae), dog-whelks (Nassaridae), mud-whelks (Po-
tomididae), helmet shells (Cassidae), tun shells (Tonnidae), miters (Mitridae), augers (Tere-
bridae), turrids (Turridae) and drupes (Thaidinae).

4.4.2.12 Generic terms for gastropods

For a small minority of Oceanic languages the sources give a term that applies to gastropods
in general or to a wide range of gastropods. The fact that reflexes of POc *sisiq have this
semantic range in a North New Guinea language (Takia sisef), and in the Fijian languages
(Wayan ðiði, Bauan siði) might suggest that *sisiq also had a similar range in POc. However,
comparison of the larger sample of cognates listed in §4.2.8 suggests that it is at least as likely
that POc * sisiq was a more restricted generic, referring to various small gastropod families
and that more than once it independently became a term for edible gastropods in general. See
ch. 8 for further discussion. Marovo (Meso-Melanesian) has a generic, chuko, that embraces
most small to medium-sized gastropods but excludes nerites and turbans (Hviding 2005:67).


4.4.3 class Bivalvia: clams, cockles, oysters, etc.

   There are ten pretty secure POc reconstructions for kinds of bivalves: *kaRi, *japi, *kasr
*kuku, *kima, *sapulu(q), * liRom, *tu(qu)asi, *tu(q)e-tu(q)e and *(w,y)aro.

                                                                           Aquatic invertebrates   189

               Figure 4.6        Left to right Univalve shells: turban, trochus, cone, murex

                                   Figure 4.7    Tridacna gigas, giant clam


4.4.5.1 Tridacninae, giant clams

Giant clams are a small but economically important group that includes the largest externally
shelled molluscs. The largest species (Tridacna gigas) grows up to a metre long. Traditionally
regarded as a separate family, this group has recently been reclassified as a subfamily
(Tridacninae) of Cardiidae. Giant clams are prized food, consumed at ceremonial feasts. In
some societies edge-ground adze blades and shell rings were made from the heavy shells.
Typically Oceanic languages have a generic referring to all Tridacna, with several binomials
distinguishing subtaxa. Thus Arosi Pima is the generic and there are eight binomials (including
one pair of synonyms) denoting subtaxa. Wayan has vdsua as the generic and has three
subtaxa: (vasua) cavucavu, T. gigas, the largest kind, which is easily removed, and is symbolic
of women because they marry away from home; kativatu, T. maxima, is hard to remove
and is symbolic of men, who stay with their father’s clan; and vosavosa, the fluted clam, T.
squamosa.

    There is a well-attested POc generic for giant clams, *kima, with a PMP antecedent.

<
PMP *kima ‘giant clam, Tridacna spp.’ (Blust 2002)
POc *kima ‘giant clam, Tridacna spp., include. T. gigas'
  PT:      Molima          PimaPima           ‘a shell which is used as a scraper’
  PT:      Wedau        kimei                 ‘clam shell’
  PT:      Tawala          kima               ‘clam shell’
  MM:      Tabar           kima               ‘clam’
  SES:     Gela            gima               ‘ Tridacna gigas'
  SES:     Sa’a            ?ime            ‘giant clam variety’
  SES:     To’aba’ita      ?ima            ‘generic for giant clams’
  SES:     Longgu          ?ima            ‘large clam’
  NCV:     Mota            gima            ‘giant clam variety’
  Mic:     Kiribati        kima            ‘tridacna’
>


190    Andrew Pawley

    Reflexes of *kima are absent from Central Pacific, where it was evidently replaced by
*(b,v)dsua. This was the PCP reflex of a PEOc term for a large but unidentified shellfish
species. Reflexes show unexplained variation in the initial consonant.

<
PEOc *(b,v)asua ‘large shellfish, perhaps a bivalve’
  SES: Gela           (pau)pasua ‘Murex spp.’
  SES: Arosi          (han) wasua ‘oyster’ (initial w- unexpected)
  NCV: Uripiv         na-basow       ‘scallop, Pallium sp., and Spondylus rubicundus
PCP * (b,v)asua ‘giant clam, Tridacna spp.’
  Fij:     Wayan       vasua        ‘generic for Tridacna spp.’
  Fij:     Bauan       vdsua        ‘giant clam, Tridacna spp.’
PPn *(p,j)asua ‘Tridacna clam sp.’
  Pn:      Samoan     fdisua        ‘Tridacna sp., giant clam’ (-z- irregular)
  Pn:      Rennellese hdsua         ‘general term for Tridacna spp.’
  Pn:      Emae       fdsua         ‘Tridacna sp., giant clam’
  Pn:      Ifira-Mele vasu-vdsua ‘k.o. edible bivalve’
Proto Eastern Polynesian-Northern Outlier *pasua ‘Tridacna sp. or spp.’
  Pn:      Sikaiana   pdsua         ‘clam’
  Pn:      Tokelauan paua           ‘poisonous shellfish attached under shelving coral
  Pn:      Nukuoro    pdsua         ‘ Tridacna maxima’’
  Pn:      Tahitian   pdhua         ‘ Tridacna elonga’
  Pn:      Rarotongan pa?ua         ‘clam, oyster’
  Pn:      Marquesan pahua          ‘oyster sp.’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Tongan           vdsua           ‘clam’ (borrowed from Fijian)
>

    The Gela and Arosi comparisons are problematic but they provide evidence, consistent
with some Eastern Polynesian witnesses, that PCP *(b.v)asua derived from a pre Central
Pacific form that referred to a group of bivalves other than the Tridacninae.

4.4.3.2 Asaphis spp. (Psammobidae) and cockles (Cardiidae)

There is a well-supported POc form, *kasi, which referred to to the action of grating or scraping,
to scrapers made from the valves of circular bivalves, such as Asaphis (Psammobidae)
and cockles (Cardiidae spp.) and to the shellfish themselves, which are good eating. The
vernacular term ‘cockle’ is used loosely in many sources, referring not just to shells of the
Cardiidae family but also to other small to medium-sized rounded bivalves with radial or
concentric striae, including Psammobidae and Tellinidae.

                                                                Aquatic invertebrates    191

<
POc *kasi (v) ‘to scrape; scraper or grater made from robust circular bivalve shell, such as
  Asaphis and cockles’, (n) ‘shellfish taxon, esp. Asaphis spp.’ (cf. vol.l, pp.162, 238-240)
  PT:     Tawala         kahi           ‘pearl shell’
  MM: Nakanai            kasi           ‘mussel or clam; mussel shell used as knife’
  Fij:   Rotuman         ?osi           ‘cockle, shell much used for scraping’
PPn *kasi ‘shellfish, Asaphis spp.’ (pollex)
  Pn:     Tongan         kahi           ‘name of a mussel’
  Pn:    Niuatoputapu kahi              ‘Asaphis violascens"
  Pn:     Samoan         ?asi           ‘a mussel, Area sp.’
  Pn:    Nukuoro         kasi           ‘Asaphis diehotoma'
  Pn:     Tikopia        kasi           ‘bivalve mollusc, Asaphis violascens, and possibly other related bivalves; shell used as cutting or scraping implement’
  Pn:    Rarotongan      ka?i           ‘Asaphis violascens"
  Pn:    Maori           kahi           ‘Amphidesma australe and certain other bivalves’
cf. also:
   Mic: Carolinian       xatil         ‘very small clams (thumb sized) used in soups’
>

    The next term, POc *kaRi, may have referred to cockles or may have been a more general
term for a wider range of small to medium-sized bivalves.

<
POc *kaRi ‘bivalve sp or spp, possibly cockle, used as a scraper’ (Geraghty 1990; cf. vol.1, p.162)
  NNG: Manam          ?ori?ori      ‘pearl shell, traditionally used to scrape coconuts; coconut grater, scraper’
  SES: Gela           gali          ‘species of mollusc, Asaphis sp. (eaten)’
  SES: To’aba’ita ?ali              ‘bivalve sp., used as scraper and spoon’
  SES: Sa’a           ali           ‘cockle’
  NCV: Mota           yar           (i) ‘cockle’; (2) ‘to scrape’
  NCV: Raga           gari          ‘cockle shell; used as a scraper’
  Fij:   Bauan        kai           ‘generic name of bivalve shellfish’
  Fij:   Bauan        kai-koso      ‘generic for several bivalves’
>

    PPn pipi appears to have applied to various circular bivalves including Asaphis sp. or
spp. Its reflexes are of interest because in several cases (Kapingamarangi, Pukapukan, Ren-
nellese and Tikopia) they have become a generic for bivalves.

<
PPn *pipi ‘probably general name for small or medium-sized circular bivalves, including cockles, Asaphis spp.’
  Pn:    Tongan       pipi         ‘shellfish sp.’
  Pn:    Samoan       pipi         (1) ‘kind of cockle, Asaphis sp.’; (2) ‘shell scraper for barkcloth’
  Pn:    Tokelauan pipi            (1) ‘Asaphis sp.’; (2) ‘scraper of this’
  Pn:    Tuvalu       pipi         ‘Asaphis sp., Nerita spp.’
  Pn:    Rennellese pipi           ‘circular bivalves’
  Pn:    Kapinga      pipi         (1) ‘Asaphis sp.’; (2) ‘general term for small clams’
   Pn:      Tikopia   pipi            ‘bivalve of many spp.’
   Pn:      Pukapukan pipi            ‘general name for clams’
   Pn:      Maori     pipi            ‘Paphies australis, Chione slutchburyi'
>


192      Andrew Pawley

4.4.3.3 Mytilidae, mussels

Mussels occur in dense colonies on rocky shores, attaching themselves to surfaces by byssus
threads. They fall into several subfamilies. Mytilus spp. predominate in cold waters but in
tropical waters they are replaced by species of the subfamilies Modiolinae and Lithophaginae.
Commonly Oceanic languages distinguish two or more mussel taxa by name, e.g. Wayan has
a generic term boro, with two subtaxa: boro boro, probably Modiolus plumescens, and drivi
‘small mussels with black shell, possibly Lithophaga sp.

    Blust (1972:10) relates POc * kuku(r) P mussel sp.’ to PAn *kuDkuD ‘rasp, file’, noting
reflexes such as Tagalog kudkod, Toba Batak hurhur ‘grated’, Ngadju Dayak kukur ‘rasp,
grater’. It is likely that POc *kuku(r) was polysemous, referring both to food scrapers of
various kinds of shells and to mussels, which were used as scrapers.

<
POc *kuku(r) ‘mussel sp. or spp., used as food grater or scraper’ (see vol.l, p. 161)
  Adm: Lou            kuki            ‘shell used to scrape coconut’
  NNG: Takia          kuk             ‘shellfish: Anadara sp., cockle shell’
  NNG: Kove           kuku            Tittle black horse mussel’
  SES: Gela                           ‘mollusc sp.’
  SES: Arosi          kuku            ‘a small bivalve, Area sp.’
  NCV: Lonwolwol huhu                 ‘a sharpened shell, for scraping’
  Fij:   Bauan        kuku            ‘generic for mussels, incl. Modiola spp
PPn *kuku ‘mussel sp. (Mytilidae)’ ( pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan       kuku            ‘pink-fleshed mussel’
  Pn:    Niuean       kuku            ‘a small black mussel’
  Pn:    Samoan       ?u?u            ‘mussel, Modiola sp.’
  Pn:    E Futunan kuku               ‘mussel sp. (Mytilidae)’
  Pn:    Rarotongan kuku              ‘mussel sp., Mytilus edulis'
  Pn:    Rennellese kuku              ‘ Tellina discus‘
>


4.4.3.4 Ostreidae, rock oysters

The English folk category ‘oyster’ refers to several families of bivalves, including Ostreidae
(typical oysters), Isognomonidae (mangrove oysters), Malleidae (hammer oysters), Pteridae
(pearl and wing oysters) and Spondylidae (thorny oysters), the latter being more closely related
to scallops than to the other ‘oyster’ families. Wayan Fijian has a generic term, diva,
with a similarly broad range of reference.

    POc * tiRom continues a PAn term for oyster. The range of the POc term probably included
both typical oysters (Ostreidae), which attach themselves by cementing one valve to rocks or
wood, and tree oysters (Isognominidae), found mainly among mangrove roots or under rocks
in the intertidal zone. Only a few species of Isognomonidae occur in the Pacific Islands.

                                                                        Aquatic invertebrates     193

<
PMP *tiRem ‘oyster (Ostreidae)’ (Dempwolff 1938, Blust 2002)
POc *tiRom ‘oyster (Ostreidae, Isognomonidae)’
  Adm: Lenkau                tireŋ            ‘k.o. shell’
  NNG: Kove                  tiro             ‘Crassostrea commercialis, oyster found on stones and mangroves’
  NNG: Kove             tiromu                ‘oyster (edible)’ (borrowed from Bali?)
  NNG: Mangap           tir                   ‘freshwater shellfish type’
  PT:     Motu          siro                  ‘oyster’
  MM: Nakanai           tiro                  ‘mangrove oyster’
  SES: Gela             tilo                  ‘k.o. bivalve, in mangroves and borer in ships’
  SES: ’Are’are         iro                   ‘k.o. oyster living on roots of mangroves’
  SES: Arosi            iro                   ‘small gastropod’
  SES: Kwaio            ilo                   ‘oyster’
  NCal: Pije            diam                  ‘oyster’
  NCal: Nemi           jiem                   ‘oyster’
  Fij:    Bauan         dio                   ‘rock oyster’
  Fij:    Wayan         tio                   ‘generic for rock oysters (Ostreidae)’
PPn *tio ‘oyster sp.’ POLLEx)
  Pn:     Tongan        sio                   ‘rock oyster’
  Pn:     E Futunan tio                       ‘rock oyster’
  Pn:     Samoan        tio                   ‘mollusc, Vermetus sp.; iridescent fish lure made from its shell’
  Pn:       Tokelauan        tio              ‘gastropod, Vermetus sp. (Vermitidae)’
>


4.4.3.5 Pteridae, pearl and wing oysters, and Malleidae, hammer oysters

The family Pteridae includes pearl and wing oysters, which live on rocky ocean floors. They
have moderate to large shells with one valve more inflated, with pearly interior. The Malleidae,
hammer oysters, have ears drawn out into elongate wings. The common hammer oyster,
Malleus malleus, anchors to the bottom in shallow reef waters.

    The gold-lip pearl shell, Pinctada maxima, and the black-lip pearl, P. margaritifera, were
traditionally important as a trade item and source of ornaments, especially the breastplate
crescent made from the lip of this shell and worn by men. Although they are widely distributed
species Swadling (1994) reports that the environmental conditions for dense concentrations
of gold- and black-lip pearl shells occur only in a few parts of Papua New Guinea (Manus
Province, Ramoaaina Islands, Arawe Islands, Brooker and Moturina in the Calvados chain,
eastern Milne Bay Province, and the Torres Strait Islands). Pearl oysters are absent from the
more southerly subtropical parts of Polynesia, and in some other parts of Polynesia, including
Tonga and Samoa, occur in locations that were not easily accessible to divers. The importance
of pearl shell ornaments as trade valuables no doubt led to borrowing of the names for these
in some regions. However, the fact that reflexes of * japi, showing regular sound shifts, are
found from New Guinea to Polynesia is strong evidence of the POc antiquity of this term.

<
POc *japi (i) ‘bivalve taxon, probably P. maxima, gold-lipped pearl shell’; (2) ‘ornament made from this’ (see vol. 1, p. 104)
  NNG: Manam          javi             ‘pearl shell spoon’
  MM:     Roviana      davi           ‘pearl shell’
  MM:     Marovo       davi           ‘goldlip pearl, Pinctada maxima’’
  SES:    Bugotu       davi           ‘gold-lip pearl shell’
  SES:    Gela         davi           ‘gold-lip pearl; crescent ornament made from this’
  SES:    ’Are’are     tahi           ‘pearl shell; ornament made of same worn by chiefs
  SES:    Arosi        dahi           ‘gold-lipped pearl shell’
  SES:    Sa’a         dahi           ‘gold-lipped pearl; crescent breast ornament worn by men, cut from this shell’
PCP *jiva ‘pearl oyster, including Pinctada spp.’ (metathesis)
   Fij:   Bauan         diva          (i) ‘pearl and wing oysters (Pinctada and Avicula spp.), hammer oyster (Malleus sp.)’; (2) ‘breastplate of pearl shell in frame of whale’s tooth ivory’
   Fij:   Bauan         diva-diva     ‘small oyster, Pinctada matensis’
   Fij:   Way an        diva          (1) ‘pearl and winged oysters, including blacklip pearl, Pinctada margaritifera, and giant wing oyster; (2) ‘generic for all kinds of oysters’
   Pn:    Tongan        sifa          ‘pearl shell breastplate’
   Pn:    Niuean        tifa          ‘mother of pearl shell and ornament’
   Pn:    Tikopia       tifa          ‘large pearl shell, formerly worn by men of rank as a breast ornament. Types include Pinctada margaritifera, P. maxima, Isognomon isognomum, I. perna and Pinna sp. ’
   Pn:    Rarotongan tiʔa             ‘pearl shell breastplate’
cf. also:
   PT:    Hula          ravivi        ‘clamshell’
>

194   Andrew Pawley


   The next two sets probably belong to the same etymon, w/y crossover occurs in certain
other forms. The Gela reflex is compatible with either set because word-initial *w is lost in
Gela.

<
POc *(y)aro(q) ‘black-lipped pearl, Pinctada maxima‘, possibly generic for Pinctada spp.
  NNG:    Bing         yar-yar        ‘blacklip pearl oyster shell, P. maxima’
  NNG:    Gedaged      jal            ‘goldlip pearl’
  NNG:    Mangap       yar-yar        ‘saltwater shellfish, very colourful’
  PT:     Motu          laro          ‘small pearl shellfish; shell used for cutting and paring’ (I- a sporadic accretion in Motu)
  MM:     Roviana      aro(moi)       ‘k.o. large oyster’
  MM:     Nduke        aro(moi)       ‘large oyster found on reef, Pycnodonata hyotis (= Ostrea hyotis)
  SES:    Lengo        aro            ‘oyster’
>

<
PEOc *waro(q) ‘probably black-lipped pearl, Pinctada maxima, possibly generic for
  Pinctada spp.’
  SES: Gela         aro               ‘black-lip pearl, P. margaritifera’
  SES: Arosi        waro              ‘black-lip pearl’ (waro-anakaoea, scallop, Pecten sp.’)
   SES:     To’aba’ita       k''aro         ‘pearl oyster, P. margaritifera'
   SES:     To’aba’ita      k‘ aro(memena) ‘pearl oyster sp., dark yellow tinge, probably P. maxima, black-lip pearl’
  Fij:     Wayan             warn           ‘pen shell, Pinna sp.’
>

                                                                     Aquatic invertebrates      195


4.4.3.6 Pinnidae, pen shells

The Pinnidae or pen shells have large fragile shells. They live buried in soft sand anchored
by a silk byssus. The following reconstruction is tentatively associated with the genus Pinna
because of the Gela and Fijian reflexes. In Cristobal-Malaita languages the reflex refers to
black mussels, from which bonito hooks are made.

<
POc *sapulu(q) ‘bivalve mollusc, possibly Pinna sp.’
  NNG:      Kove              ravulu       ‘k.o. razor shell’
  SES:      Gela              havulu       ‘k.o. mollusc, Pinna sp.’
  SES:      Bugotu            havulu       ‘scallop’ (Ivens: gloss dubious)
  SES:      ’Are’are          tahuri       ‘a black mussel’
  SES:      Arosi             tahuru       ‘black mussel sp., used to make bonito hooks’
  SES:      Sa’a              tehulu       ‘black mussel, used to make bonito hooks’
  SES:      To’aba’ita       fulu          ‘shellfish with black shell’
  Fij:      Bauan             savulu       ‘a shellfish, Pinna squamosa'
>


4.4.3.7 Lucinidae and allied families

Lucinoidea (Lucinidae and three other families) are often the dominant bivalves in shallow
sea grass bed habitats, esp. species of Codakia, Ctena, Lucina, Lucinisca, Loriges and Anon-
don tia, and are an important food source. The Lucinidae have certain unusual anatomical
features including a foot, used for burrowing, that can be extended 4 to 6 times the length
of the animal. There is no secure POc reconstruction for this family but the following is a
candidate.

<
POc *tu(q)e, *tu(q)e-tu(q)e ‘k.o. bivalve, possibly Lucinidae and allied families’
  NNG: Kove                  tue          ‘Geloina coaxans, a cockle-like clam of mangrove forest (Corbiculidae)’
  NNG: Kove                  tue-tue      ‘Codakia tigerina (Lucinidae), Quidnipagus palatum (Tellinidae)’
   SES:     Gela             tue          ‘Batissa sp., possibly B. unioniformis, a commonly harvested small bivalve used as a scraper’
   SES:     Gela             tue-lovo     ‘Pecten sp.’
   SES:     Gela             tue-koraga   ‘freshwater bivalve’
   SES:     Gela             tue-kunukunu ‘very long Batissa sp.’
   SES:     Gela             tue-tue      (1) Ce Ilina spp.’; (1) ‘young tue'
   SES:     Ghari            tue          ‘black freshwater oyster’
   SES:     Ghari            tue-tue      ‘small white edible shellfish’
   SES:     Lengo            tue          ‘mangrove shell’
   SES:     Lengo            tu-tue       ‘sea shell’
  SES:      Tolo             tue-tue      ‘small freshwater shellfish’
  Pn:       Tongan           tu?e         ‘k.o. shellfish with long sharp projections’
  Pn:       Maori            tua-tua      ‘bivalve, Amphidesma subtriangulata’ (syn. of kahi-tua, kai-tua)
>

196     Andrew Pawley


4.4.3.8 Reconstructions for bivalves of uncertain family

Some etyma have reflexes that are so semantically diverse or so vaguely glossed in the sources
that the reconstructed name cannot be associated with a particular family. For POc *sisira
‘a barnacle or k.o. small mollusc’ see §3.6. The following reconstruction is very tentative,
because the putative cognates are few and because the semantic agreement is weak.

<
POc *tape ‘k.o. bivalve’
  NNG: Bilibil               tave             ‘giant clam, Tridicna gigas’
  MM: Teop                   dave             'Polinices tumidua (in white sand)’
  Fij: Way an                tave             (1) ‘tellins, sanguins’; (2) ‘generic for a large class of bivalves, excluding oysters and giant clams’
>

   The following term may have applied to a kind of pearl shell, with a shift of referent in
Bugotu and Maringe arising from the use of pieces of nautilus shell for inlaying in woodwork.

<
PWOc *bio ‘k.o. mollusc or pearl shell’
  NNG:      Yabem            bi                ‘pearl shell’
  NNG:      Gitua            bio-bio           ‘pearl shell’
  NNG:      Tami             bin               ‘pearl shell’
  MM:       Nakanai          beo               ‘pearl shell’
  MM:       Tab ar           bio               ‘k.o. shellfish, Strombidae’
  MM:       Bola             bio               ‘pearl shell’
  MM:       Maringe          bio               ‘nautilus shell, used for inlaying in woodwork’
  SES:      Bugotu           bio               ‘nautilus’ (possibly borrowed from Maringe)
>

      The following cognate set appears to be restricted to Meso-Melanesian.

<
PMM *game ‘k.o. mollusc’
  MM:       Vitu             game              ‘k.o. shellfish: Trochns nilolicus’
  MM:       Tab ar           gam               ‘a shellfish’ (possibly from Tok Pisinga/w ‘baler shell, large cowry shells’)
   MM: Tangga                gem               ‘a bivalve, possibly a small Toigans’
cf. also:
   Adm: Mussau               kame-kame         ‘bait’
   NNG: Manam                gam               ‘squid’
>

                                                                         Aquatic invertebrates   197


    The following term may have referred both to a bivalve shellfish and to spoons or graters
made from its shell. Only a single WOc reflex has been noted. The Niuatoputapu reflex points
to PPn *tuquahi, with glottal stop, whereas the Tongan reflex points to *tuahi. Those Polynesian
forms that refer only to coconut grater may have spread by borrowing.

<
POc *tu(qu)asi ‘bivalve taxon, probably ark or cockle shell; possibly also grater or spoon made from this’
  NNG: Mangap            tuai         ‘shellfish type, shell used for scraping root vegetables’
PCP *tu(qu)adi ‘bivalve taxon, probably ark or cockle shell; possibly also grater or spoon made; from this’
  Fij:    Bauan          tuasa        ‘a bivalve, probably Area sp.’ (final -a irregular)
  Fij:    Wayan          tuaði        ‘ark shell, Anadara sp. (Arcidae)’
  Pn:     Tongan         tuahi        ‘k.o. shellfish’
  Pn:     Niuatoputapu tu?uasi        ‘a cockle, Laevicardium biradiata (Cardiidae)’
  Pn:     Samoan         tuai         ‘coconut grater’
  Pn:     Rennellese     tuai         ‘spoon or grater, formerly made of shell’ (for ]tu?uai)
  Pn:     Rarotongan     tuai         ‘coconut grater’
>


4.4.3.9 Bivalve families lacking definite POc reconstructions

There are several prominent families of bivalves for which no definite POc names can be
reconstructed. These include scallops (Pectinidae), thorny oysters (Spondylidae), jewelboxes
(Chamidae), tellins (Tellinidae), sanguins (Garidae), wedge shells (Donacidae), venus shells
(Veneridae), and olives (Olividae).

4.4.3.10 Generic term for bivalves

Some contemporary languages have a generic covering all or most bivalves. This is often a
polysemous term, which also refers to an important specific taxon. For example, the Bauan
generic kai is also the term for cockles, Wayan tave is also the term for tellins and sanguins.
In several Polynesian languages reflexes of PPn * pipi, probably originally referring chiefly
to cockles, has become a generic for a wide range of bivalves (§4.3.2).


4.4.4 Polyplacophora: chitons

Chitons are flattened, slug-like molluscs, most species covered with eight shingle-like plates.
They feed on algae. Chitons are usually represented in Oceanic languages by a uninomial
generic (e.g. Gedaged dabag) and some languages also have several binomials naming specific kinds.
There is a well-supported PEOc reconstruction but there are no certain cognates
in WOc.

<
PEOc *tadruku ‘generic for chitons’
  SES:      Gela             tadugu           ‘generic for chitons’ (Foale)
  Fij:      Bauan            tadruku          ‘chiton’
  Fij:      Wayan            tadruku          ‘chiton’
cf. also:
   MM: Marovo           tatadu         ‘generic for chitons’
>

198     Andrew Pawley

    In PPn *mama replaced *tadruku as the generic for chitons. PPn *mama is probably
cognate with Southeast Solomonic *mama, referring to a kind of anemone or jellyfish (see
§6.3).

<
PPn *mama ‘chiton’
  Pn:      Tongan       mama           ‘seaslug’
  Pn:      Niuean       mama           ‘various slug-like molluscs on reef, probably chiton family’
  Pn:      Tikopia      mama           ‘chiton’
  Pn:      Marquesan    mama           ‘Chiton magnifieus'
>


4.4.5 A term for shellfish in general

Did POc speakers have a name for shellfish (shelled molluscs) in general? As noted in section
1, POc had a broad collective term, *pinaijoda, denoting ‘marine invertebrates, sea animals
other than fish gathered on the reef’. In a few languages the reflex has become a general
term for bivalves and gastropods, sometimes also including sea urchins, e.g. Samoan fiŋota
‘generic for shelled molluscs and other invertebrates’, Tokelauan fiŋota ‘bivalves, gastropods
and sea urchins’.

    A term specifically denoting all and only shellfish is present in some Oceanic languages.
For example, Foale (1998) reports that Gela (SES) vaijuda is normally used as generic for
molluscs but can be extended to include crustaceans and echinoderms. Lau (SES) has a noncognate
form with similar function: karoŋo (i) ‘shelled mollusc, marine or land’; (2) ‘any
invertebrate collected on reef at low tide: shellfish, crabs, squids’, as does Niuean fua
‘shellfish and echinoderms’. Motu (PT) has bisisi ‘general name for all shellfish’ and Takia (NNG)
has sisei ‘generic for all varieties of shells’. Akimichi and Sakiyama (1991) report that Pen-
chal (Adm) m‘ el has two senses: (1) ‘shellfish’; (2)‘shellfish, sea urchins and sea cucumbers’
and that in nearby Lenkau the cognate term m‘e also has two senses: (1) ‘shellfish’ and (2)
‘shellfish, cephalopods and sea urchins and sea cucumbers’. We can conclude that POc may
well have had a general term for shellfish. However, in the absence of a widespread cognate
set no reconstruction can be made.


4.4.6 Cephalopoda: octopus, squid, nautilus

The cephalopods include (r) the octopus and argonaut group, with eight tentacles; (2) the
squid and spirula group, with ten, and (3) the chambered nautilus, which inhabits the deep
sea and is rarely encountered alive. Groups (1) and (2) are valued food sources.

4.4.6.1 Octopus

Several species of octopus occur in the Pacific, two common ones being Octopus cyanea, the
day octopus or common reef octopus, and the smaller O. oinatus, the night octopus. Some
Oceanic languages name several different taxa by size, shape and habits. There is a widely-
reflected generic going back to PAn.

                                                                 Aquatic invertebrates     199

<
PAn *kuRita ‘octopus’ (Blust 2002)
POc *kuRita ‘generic for octopus’
  Adm:      Titan      kwit
  Adm :     Mussau     uita
  NNG:      Gedaged    ulit
  PT:       Kilivila   kuita
  PT:       Motu       urita
  MM:       Tab ar     urita
  MM:       Sursurunga kurit
  MM:       Tolai      urita
  MM:       Teop       orita
  SES:      Tolo       hulita
  SES:      Arosi      ?uria           ‘a small octopus, squid’
  NCV:      SEAmbrym uit               ‘octopus, squid’
  NCV:      Raga       guita           ‘octopus; generic for cephalopods’
  NCal:     Jawe       ciia            ‘octopus’
  Mic:      Woleiaian  xiusa
  Fij:      Bauan      kuita           ‘octopus; generic for cephalophods’
>


4.4.6.2 Squid and cuttlefish

Squids have 10 arms and a thin, plastic-like internal shell, which in the cuttlefish (Sepia
spp.) takes the form of a flat rigid bone. Several squid and cuttlefish species occur in Pacific
shallow waters, ranging in size from just a few cm to quite large.

    POc had at least two terms for squid/cuttlefish taxa: *nusa (with doublet *nus) and *m‘'anagi
(with doublet *nTanTagi).

    *nusa and *nus seem to have referred to small squid and small cuttlefish. Blust (1986)
reconstructs PMP *nus ‘squid, cuttlefish’, based on forms such as Malay mis ‘generic for
cephalopods’ and Roti mis ‘octopus, squid’, with a doublet *kanuqus. * nusa is reflected by
the following:

200   Andrew Pawley

<
POc *nusa ^doublet *nus) ‘small reef squid (Loligo spp.) and smaller cuttlefish (Sepia spp.)’
   Adm:    Mussau       nusa           ‘small squid’
   NNG:    Bariai       gusa           ‘squid’
   NNG:    Gedaged      nui            ‘squid’
   NNG:    Manam        nuri           ‘squid’
   PT:     Motu         nuse           ‘small octopus’ (-5- irregular)
   MM:     Nakanai      luso           ‘cuttlefish’
   MM:     Bulu         guta           ‘squid’
   MM:     Maringe      nuho           ‘cuttlefish’
   SES:    Gela         nuho           ‘generic for reef squids, Sepioteuthis spp
   SES:    To’aba’ita   nuta           ‘cuttlefish sp., relatively small’
   SES:    Arosi        nnto, nito     ‘octopus, squid, smaller than monagf
   SES:    Lau          nuto           ‘squid’
   SV:     Anejom       niθ            ‘generic for squids’
   NCal:   Fwai         nit            ‘squid’
   Mic:    Puluwatese   ŋiit           ‘cuttlefish’ (ŋ for *n irregular)
cf. also
   MM:     Tolai        (mara)nua      ‘octopus sp.’
>

   POc *nus has reflexes in Admiralties, North New Guinea and Central Pacific.

<
POc *nus ‘squid’
  Adm: Titan            nu            ‘squid’
  NNG: Mangap           nus           ‘smaller squid type’
  Fij:     Rotuman      nu            ‘squid’
  Fij:     Bauan        (kuita) nu    ‘squid’
  Fij:     Wayan        (sulua) nu    ‘squid’ (sulua ‘octopus’)
PPn *//// ‘squid’ (pollex; ŋ for f*w)
  Pn:      Tongan       ŋu(feke)      ‘squid, cuttlefish’ (feke ‘octopus’)
  Pn:      Nukuoro      ŋu            ‘squid’
  Pn:      Maori        ŋu            ‘squid, Sepia apama’
>

    *mwanagi (dbl. *m‘ctm"ctgi) possibly referred to larger cuttlefish. This term has reflexes
in WOc and in SES.

<
POc *mwanagi, *m" am"agi ‘larger cuttlefish, Sepia sp. or spp.’
  Adm:     Lenkau        moman            ‘cuttlefish’
  Adm:     Penchai       mwamwak          ‘large red squid’
  Adm:     Titan         nfuctnfctk       ‘cuttlefish’
  NNG:     Lamogai-Rauto wonek            ‘squid’
  NNG:     Akolet        e-vunek          ‘squid’
  PT:      Kilivila      m'anagia         ‘cuttlefish shell’
  PT:      Motu          managi           ‘large octopus with shell’
  MM:      Tolai         managa           ‘squid’ (*i > a by assmilation)
  MM:      Tolai         munaga           ‘cuttlefish’
  SES:     Gela          managi           ‘Sepia spp., cuttlefish’
   SES:     ’Are’are        manaki         ‘cuttlefish’
   SES:     To’aba’ita      wawaki         ‘spp. of large cuttlefish’
   SES:     Arosi           monagi         ‘cuttlefish, larger than nuto'
   NCV:     Vera’a          mwanak         ‘cuttlefish, Sepia sp.’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Kove            mokave         ‘octopus’
   NNG:     Apalik          oyuk           ‘squid’
>

                                                                   Aquatic invertebrates     201


4.4.7 Parts of molluscs

Oceanic languages usually have names for various parts of molluscs including beak, tentacles,
suckers of octopus, mantle, foot, proboscis, gonads, innards of shellfish, shell, valve and hinge
of bivalves, etc. Only a few part names are reconstructable to the level of POc.

<
PEOc *buRu ‘octopus ink, sepia’ (Geraghty 1990)
  SES:      Arosi        buru          ‘cuttlefish ink’
  SES:      Sa’a         bulu          ‘octopus ink’
  Fij:      Bauan        bu(loa)       ‘octopus ink’ (loa ‘black’)
  Fij:      Wayan        bu(ld)        ‘octopus ink; ink sac of octopus; poisonous fluid ejected by certain fish’ (lo ‘black’)
>

<
PMP *gaway ‘octopus tentacles’ (Zorc 1994)
POc *kawe ‘tentacle of a cephalopod’
  PT:   Motu          gave         ‘tentacles of octopus’
  SES: Ghari          gae          ‘tentacles’ (loss of *v irregular)
  SES: Sa’a           ka-kave(na) ‘tentacle’
  SV:   Anejom        n-yeve       ‘tentacles of a cephalopod’
  Fij:  Bauan         kawe         ‘leg of a crab’
PPn *kawe ‘tentacle of a cephalopod’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan        kave         ‘tentacle of cuttlefish’
  Pn:   E Futunan kave(Pi)         ‘tentacle’
  Pn:   Samoan        Pave         ‘tentacle of an octopus
  Pn:   Hawaiian      Powe         ‘tentacle of squid, etc.’
>

<
POc *mata ‘the operculum or trapdoor of certain gastropod spp.’ (cf. POc *mata ‘eye, opening, most important part or focal point of a thing’)
  NNG: Gedaged           mala(n)                 ‘operculum’
  MM: Tolai              niata                 ‘ operculum ’
  MM: Poe                (mangasi) mata(na) ‘operculum of turban shell’
  SES: Lau               ma                    ‘operculum of a univalve’
  NCV: Port Sandwich mara(n)                   ‘operculum’
  Fij:    Wayan          mata                  ‘ operculum ’
>

202    Andrew Pawley

                                              Figure 4.9   Squid

4.4.8 Artefacts made from shell

As indicated in §4.1, POc speakers made a variety of artefacts from shell. Reconstructed terms
include a number which refer both to the shell and animal and to the artefact made from the
shell: *japi ‘crescent breast ornament made from pearl shell, probably worn by high status
men’ (§4.3.5), *lala(k) ‘rings or armlets of trochus shell’ (§4.2.8), *1apuRiq ‘trumpet, of triton
shell’ (§4.2.5), *buli(q) ‘cowry shell sinkers’ (§4.2.7), *kasiaRi, and *kuku(r) ‘cutting and
scraping instruments of bivalve shells’ (§4.3.2, §4.3.5). A few terms for artefacts sometimes
or usually made from shell can be reconstructed, e.g. *kiRam ‘adze or axe (generic but applied
to edge-ground axes made of tridacna shell), *kawil ‘fish-hook’, and *sabi-sabi ‘shell disk
used as ear-ring (in Massim made of Chamapacifica) (see vol. 1, p. 104).


4.5 Echinodermata: sea urchins, sea cucumbers, starfish, etc.

The echinoderms include sea urchins (sea-eggs), sea cucumbers, starfish, brittle stars, feather
stars and sand dollars. All possess tube feet and have a body pattern structured in fives. However,
the various groups are very diverse in form.


4.5.1 Echinoidea: sea urchins

Sea urchins are represented in Oceania by numerous genera and species. These include long-
spined echinoderms (esp. Echinothrix and Diadema spp,), short-spined rock-boring urchins
(Echinometra spp.) and slate pencil urchins, Heterocentrus mammilatus. Some sea urchins
are eaten. It is seems that few Oceanic languages have a folk generic covering all sea urchins.
In Wayan echinoderms are recognised as a covert taxon, sometimes referred to by a phrase
meaning ‘spiky animals of the reef’.

4.5.1.1 Echinometra spp., rock-boring urchins

There is a POc reconstruction for short-spined rock-boring urchins, Echinometra spp., and
possibly also Tripneustes spp.

                                                                    Aquatic invertebrates     203

<
POc *saRawaki ‘k.o. sea urchin, probably Echinometra sp. or spp.’
  NNG:      Takia          sarwag        ‘sea urchin’
  NNG:      Mangap         sarwok        ‘sea urchin type’
  SES:      Arosi          tawa?i        ‘k.o. echinus’
  Fij:      Bauan          ðdwaki        ‘k.o. sea urchin with short spikes’
  Fij:      Wayan          ddwaki        ‘k.o. sea urchin with brittle shell and with short spines, possibly Tripneustes sp.’
PPn *sawaki ‘sea urchin with short spines’ (pollex)
   Pn:    Samoan      sava?i        ‘k.o. sea urchin’
   Pn:    Rennellese sdbaki         ‘sea urchin, Echinometra sp.’
   Pn:    Hawaiian    hawa?e        ‘Tripneustes gratilla, round black short-spined urchin’
cf. also:
   PT:    Molima      salawa?e?e ‘a purple crab’
>


4.5.1.2 Long-spined sea urchins

The following POc term probably referred to certain long-spined urchins, including Diadema
spp., and possibly Astropyga and Echinothrix spp.

<
POc *sala(n,q) ‘k.o. sea urchin with long black spines, probably Diadema sp. or spp.’
   Adm:     Mussau         raraŋ(a)      ‘sea urchin’
   NNG:     Manam          sala          ‘Diadema setosum, black long spined sea urchin’
   NNG:     Kove           rarala        ‘sea urchin with long black spines’
   PT:      Motu           dala          ‘sea urchin’
   PT:      Kilivila       sanana        ‘sea urchin’
   MM:      Halia          salana        ‘spiny sea shell’
   SES:     Gela           hala          ‘an echinus, sea egg’
   NCV:     Paamese        sal (eimas)   ‘Diadema sp., sea urchin with long black spines’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Mangap         sailen        ‘sea urchin’
>

   A second term, *gina, is attributable to PEOc, having reflexes in S.E. Solomonic, North-
Central Vanuatu and Central Pacific.

<
PEOc *gina ‘k.o. sea urchin with long spines’
  SES: Ghari           gine         ‘k.o. sea urchin with sharp spines’
  NCV: Raga            gine(hi)     ‘sea urchin sp.’
  NCV: Namakir         gin          ‘sea urchin sp.’
  NCV: Nguna           gida         ‘sea urchin sp.’ (-d- for f*-n- irregular)
  Fij:   Bauan         gina         ‘k.o. sea urchin, Echinus sp.’
  Fij:   Wayan         gina         ‘k.o. sea urchin with long yellow spines, probably Echinometrix spp’
PPn *kina ‘sea urchin’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Niuean        kina         ‘sea urchin’
  Pn:       Samoan              ?ina     ‘k.o. sea urchin’
  Pn:       Maori               kina     ‘k.o. sea urchin with long sharp spines, Evechinus chlorolicus'
  Pn:       Hawaiian            ina      ‘small rock-boring urchins, Echinometra spp.’
>

204      Andrew Pawley


      The term *wana, for a long-spined urchin, is tentatively attributable to PCP.

<
PCP *wana ‘sea urchin, probably Diadema sp. and/or Echinothrix spp.’
  Fij:  Rotuman      va)na)        ‘k.o. sea urchin’ (possibly a Polynesian loan)
PPn *wana ‘sea urchin sp.’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Niuean       vɑnɑ          ‘sea urchin, Echinothrix sp.’
  Pn:   E Futunan vana             ‘sea urchin with long black spines’
  Pn:   Tikopia      vana          ‘Diadema sp., needle-spined sea urchin’
  Pn:   Samoan       vana          ‘edible sea urchins with long spikes, Diadema sp
  Pn:   Tokelauan vana             ‘Diadema sp., black sea urchin with long brittle poisonous spikes’
  Pn:   Hawaiian    wana           ‘Echinothrix spp., long-spined urchins’
cf. also:
   SV:    Anejom                na-hen   ‘k.o. sea urchin with small spikes’
>


4.5.2 Holothuroidea: sea cucumbers (beche de mer, trepang, holothurians)

4.5.2.1 Terms for specific taxa

Firm-bodied sea cucumbers are relatively short and fat, with tube feet on the ventral surface.
The thin-bodied, worm-like sea cucumbers lack tube feet. Some sea cucumbers are eaten by
Oceanic communities. Tongan distinguishes some 18 sea cucumber taxa (Churchward 1959)
and Wayan about 19 (Pawley and Sayaba 2003).

   Blust (2002) reconstructs PWMP *balat ‘sea cucumber’ but no Oceanic cognates have
been noted. Only one POc term for a sea cucumber taxon has been reconstructed, *(b,p)ula.

<
POc *(p,b)ula ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
  MM:       Tab ar              pura    ‘sea cucumber’
  MM:       Vitu                bula    ‘sea cucumber’
  MM:       Nehan               pul     ‘sea cucumber’
  MM:       Tangga              pul     ‘first element in compound terms for sea cucumbers’
  NCV:      Mwotlap     na-valval       ‘k.o. beche-de-mer’
  NCV:      NE Ambae burie              ‘k.o. beche-de-mer’
  NCV:      Pt Sandwich buelo           ‘k.o. beche-de-mer’
  NCV:      Paamese     vile(ŋd tomoru) ‘k.o. beche-de-mer (?)’
  NCV:      S Efate     na-pwlai (pako) ‘k.o. beche-de-mer, Synapta maculata’’
  Fij:      Rotuman     hula            ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
  Fij:      Bauan       (dri) vula      ‘k.o. sea-cucumber, chalk-fish’
  Fij:     Wayan        vula             ‘whitish sea cucumber, with nipple-like projections on upper body, possibly Bohadschia marmorata or Holothuriafuscopunctata’’
cf. also:
   SES: Gela            vula             ‘generic for cushion starfishes’
>

                                                                 Aquatic invertebrates    205


   The following three terms are attributable to PCP.

<
PCP *loli ‘sea cucumber taxon’
  Fij:     Bauan        loli         ‘a small sea cucumber, whose skin is scraped and used as a fish-poison’
  Fij:     Wayan        loli-loli    ‘Holothuria sp. or spp,, probably H. atra and/or edulis’
  Pn:      Tongan       loli         ‘k.o. sea cucumber, comparatively long and hard’
  Pn:      Niuean       loli         ‘generic for several kinds of sea cucumbers including Holothuria atra’
  Pn:      Samoan       loli         ‘k.o. edible sea cucumber, Holothuria sp.’
  Pn:      Hawaiian     loli         ‘generic for sea cucumbers’
>

<
PCP *tarasea ‘sea cucumber taxon’
  Fij:     Bauan        tarasea      ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
  Fij:     Wayan        tarasea      ‘sea cucumber with white speckles, possibly Actinopyga sp. or Holothuria impatiens, edible’
  Pn:      Tongan       telehea      ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
  Pn:      Rennellese   taŋasea      ‘k.o. reddish sea cucumber, edible’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Samoan        sea           ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
>

    The following term literally means ‘eight breasts’, in reference to the nipple-like lumps
on the upper body of this animal.

<
PCP *dudu-walu ‘k.o. sea cucumber, probably Holothuria sp.’
  Fij:     Bauan        suðu-walu
  Fij:     Wayan        ðuðu-walu    ‘sea cucumber with nipple-like spikes, possibly Holothuria pervicax‘
  Pn:      Tongan       huhu-valu    ‘k.o. sea slug [sea cucumber], similar to mokohumi'
>

    There is a POc reconstruction, *qanupe, whose meaning is indeterminate between ‘caterpillar’
and ‘k.o. sea cucumber’. All known WOc reflexes refer to sea cucumbers while all
Eastern Oceanic reflexes refer to caterpillars (see ch.7, §17). When glossing the POc etymon
one cannot, without external cognates, determine which of these two competing glosses was
original, or indeed whether the POc form has two senses. In Wayan Fijian the English loan
katavila refers both to caterpillars and to a kind of sea cucumber with caterpillar-like spiky
protrusions.

206   Andrew Pawley

<
POc *qanupe ‘caterpillar or k.o. sea cucumber (indeterminate)’
PWOc *qanupe ‘sea cucumber, holothurian’
 NNG: Kove          anu(w)e      ‘trepang’
 PT:   Dobu         kanue        ‘beche de mer’
 PT:   Kilivila     kariva       ‘a white beche de mer’
 PT:   Galea        anue         ‘general term for all sea cucumbers’ (Lawrence Rutter pers.comm.)
 MM: Nakanai        haluve       ‘trepang’
<

<
PEOc *qanupe ‘caterpillar’
  SES:     Ghari           nive             ‘caterpillar’
  Fij:     Rotuman         aniha            ‘caterpillar, maggot’
  Fij:     Bauan           (b)anuve         ‘caterpillar’
  Pn:      Tongan          ?unufe           ‘caterpillar (generic)’
  Pn:      Samoan          ?anufe           ‘worm, caterpillar’
  Pn:      Nanumea         anufe            ‘caterpillar, worm, slug, etc.’
>


4.5.2.2 General term for sea cucumbers

Oceanic languages commonly have a general term for sea cucumbers, or more specifically for
firm-bodied holothurids with tubular feet. (Long thin, soft-bodied holothurids lacking tubular
feet are often classified as ‘worms’.) In the Fijian languages the generic term for firm-bodied
holothurids is drl, in Marovo it ispuhaka, in Nelemwa it is imale and in Hawaiian and Niuean
it is loli. But in the absence of agreement across high-order subgroups no generic can be
attributed to POc.


4.5.3 Asteroidea: sea stars and Ophiuroidea: starfish

Oceanic languages usually distinguish by name a number of starfish. The sole POc term for
starfish reconstructed so far continues a PMP etymon.

<
PMP *saqa-saqa ‘starfish’ (Blust 1986)
POc *saqa-saija ‘a starfish’ (lit. ‘branching’; cf. POc *saqa ‘bifurcation, crotch’)
  Adm:     Lou            saŋesaŋ                    ‘starfish’
  Adm:     Titan          eaŋa-eaŋ                   ‘generic for starfish’
  Adm:     Nauna          eaŋa-eaŋ                   ‘starfish’
  Adm:     Nyindrou       saka-sak                   ‘starfish’
  Adm:     Lenkau         saŋu-saŋ                   ‘starfish’
  PT:      Mengen (Poeng) (kamva) saŋ-saŋ            ‘starfish, forked’
cf. also:
   Fij:   Bauan                  (ba)saga            (1) ‘branchy’; (2) ‘starfish’
>

                                                                  Aquatic invertebrates    207


   Cushion stars, Culcita spp., are plump, round starfish with short arms. No POc lexical
form is recoverable but it is noteworthy that Marovo and the Fijian languages agree in naming
cushion stars by expressions that mean ‘(possession) of a shark’; thus: Marovo beibeiani te
kiso (‘lit. ‘shark’s drinking water’), Bauan kali ni qio, Wayan kali ni iko (both lit. ‘shark’s
pillow’). This suggests that the naming pattern is of POc antiquity, even though the forms are
not cognate.


4.6 Cnidaria and Ctenophora: anemones, corals, jellyfish and hydroids

The phylum Cnidaria (formerly Coelenterata) consists of four classes of animals: Anthozoa
(anemones and corals), Scyphozoa (jellyfish), Ctenosphora (comb jellyfish) and Hydrozoa
(hydroids) which have nettle-like stinging hairs or tentacles used to capture prey.

    There are two main classes of Anthozoa, (i) soft corals, colonial polyps having flexible
skeletons that produce spicules of calcium carbonate, with feathery tentacles, and (2) stony
corals and sea anemones, with tentacles in multiples of six. Stony corals have a hard skeleton.
True anemones have no skeleton and a fleshy body, with circlets of tentacles, often brightly
coloured, in contrast to colonial anemones which form a green mat on rocks and rubble.


4.6.1 Anemones

No POc term denoting anemones is reconstructable on present evidence. A problem is that
few dictionaries of WOc languages provide a term for this group of animals. PROc *dru-
man(e,i) ‘anemone’ has reflexes in North and Central Vanuatu, Fijian, Rotuman and Polynesian.

<
PROc *druman(e,i) ‘anemone’
  NCV: Mota          runfane     ‘a sea anemone’
  NCV: S Efate       n-rimen     ‘a sea anemone’
  Fij:  Rotuman      nunami      ‘anemone’ (metathesis)
  Fij:  Wayan        dromani     ‘generic for anemones’
PPn *rumane ‘sea anenome’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan       umana       ‘anemone’
  Pn:   Samoan       lumane      ‘anemone’
  Pn:   W Futunan rumane         ‘sea anenome
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele (a)rumani     ‘anemone’
>

    *druman(e,i) has no certain antecedent in POc but may derive from POc *droman ‘leech’,
with semantic change and addition of a final vowel. Note that the NCV reflexes of *droman
show an initial high vowel and, in some cases, a labiovelar second consonant, pointing to
PNCV *ruma ‘leech’.

<
POc *droman ‘leech’ (cf. ch.7, §21)
  NNG:    Manga         domaŋ
  NNG:    Adzera        uaman
  PT:     Dobu          domana
  PT:     Molima        domana        ‘mountain leech’
  PT:     Motu          doma
  PT:     Nimoa         dome
  MM:        Tolai       domol
  NCV:       Raga        rim‘ a
  NCV:       NE Ambae    rim" e
  NCV:       Tam ambo    ruma
>

208   Andrew Pawley


4.6.2 Corals

Corals are colonies of small polyps which secrete a hard skeleton, forming a base on which the
colony grows. Soft corals include sea fans, sea whips, sea feathers and sea blades. Hard corals
include brain coral, staghorn coral and branching corals. Stony corals form a boulder, with
the polyps emerging only at night. The distinctive brain corals are formed by coralettes clustering
so close that they form sinuous valleys. Shallow underwater corals secrete limestone
skeletons. The limestone is useful for a variety of purposes, including rubble for building
house foundations and floors, and for making plaster. A rough, porous white coral is used as
an abrasive in woodwork.

    Oceanic languages generally have a generic name for living corals of the branching type
and often distinguish several kinds. The Arosi dictionary lists eight different coral taxa,
including six kinds of branching coral. However, dictionaries and wordlists seldom provide
clear zoological identifications.

<
PMP *lajay ‘coral’ (see vol. 2:102)
POc *laje ‘generic forbranching corals’
  NNG:       Gedaged     lad          ‘k.o. coral, short and flat’
  PT:        Motu        lade         ‘k.o. coral’
  MM:        Maringe     (glae)laje   ‘coral’
  SES:       Gela        lade         ‘generic for branching corals’
  SES:       Lau         lade         ‘branching coral’
  SES:       Arosi       lade-lade    ‘coral’
  SES:       Arosi       rade         ‘coral’
  NCV:       Mota        las          ‘live coral of branching kinds’
  SV:        Anejom     n-las        ‘live coral on a reef’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  Fij:       Rotuman     Ims          ‘coral, lime’
  Fij:       Wayan       lase         ‘generic for branching corals’
  Fij:       Bauan       lase         ‘common branchy coral’
  Pn:        E Futunan   lase         Time’
>

<
PMP *buija ‘flower, blossom’, *bwjani bain ‘coral sponge’ (see vol.2, p.103)
POc *bu/ja ‘smooth round coral’
  NNG:       Takia       buŋ          ‘large white coral’
  NNG:       Gedaged     buŋ          ‘a round coral growth’
  MM:        Nakanai     buga         ‘plate-shaped coral’
  MM:        Bola        buŋa         ‘k.o. coral’
  MM:        Babatana    buŋa-na      ‘large whitish stones found on the reef, calcified coral’
  NCV: Mota             puŋa           ‘k.o. coral (madrepore)’
  Fij: Bauan            vuŋa           ‘a porous coral rock in the sea’
PPn *
    puqa ‘coral rock’
  Pn:   Niuean        puŋa         ‘limestone, coral rock’ (puŋa-puŋa ‘limestone
                                   platform on the reef’)
  Pn:     Tongan        (mata)puŋa ‘k.o. rather soft rock or stone, apparently a compact
                                   form of coral’
  Pn:     Samoan        puŋa       ‘k.o. coral, used for polishing and as weights in
                                   breadfruit storage pits’
  Pn:     Rennellese    puŋa       ‘general name for flat or round sharp coral’
  Pn:     Tikopia       puŋa       ‘marine rock, probably coral’
  Pn:     Maori         puŋa-puŋa ‘pumice’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      puna       ‘coral’
>


                                                                  Aquatic invertebrates     209


4.6.3 Scyphozoa, Ctenophora and Hydrozoa: true jellyfish, comb jellyfish and hydroids

Figure 4.10   Physalis sp., Portuguese man o’ war

True jellyfish (Scyphozoa) are members of the
Cnidaria, whose tentacles face down. They represent the medusa or free-swimming phase of
Scyphozoa, preceding their polyp phase. Ctenosphora,
comb jellyfish, are colourless, oval blobs of jelly
that float slowly. Hydrozoa are polyps which form
fuzz-like colonies on rocks, after a brief phase as a
free-swimming organism. This group includes fire
corals, hydroids and siphonophores. Hydroids are
feathery colonial organisms growing on the surface
of coral.

    Oceanic languages often distinguish several different kinds of jellyfish, including the
spectacular Portugese man o’ war or bluebottle (Physalia
physalia) but no POc terms for any jellyfish taxa are
recoverable. Two PPn terms for jellyfish are reconstructable. One, referring to the Portuguese
man o’war, is well supported and has a cognate in Bauan
Fijian, where it refers to a hydroid.

<
PCP *bak(u)i ‘k.o. jellyfish or hydroid’
  Fij:    Bauan       bakui        ‘Hydra (colonial polyp)’
PPn *paki(paki) ‘Portuguese man o’ war (bluebottle), Physalia sp.’ (pollex gives *paki)
  Pn:     Tongan       peki-peki       ‘bluebottle, stinging jellyfish’
  Pn:     Niuean       pctki           ‘Portuguese man o’ war, Physalis sp
  Pn:     East Uvean   paki(a)         ‘Portuguese man o’ war, Physalis sp
  Pn:     Hawaiian     pctki (malau)   ‘Portuguese man o’ war, Physalis sp
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele   paki-paki       ‘jellyfish’
  Pn:     Tikopia      pakipaki        ‘Portuguese man o’ war, Physalis sp
>

210      Andrew Paw ley

<
PPn *kalukalu ‘k.o. jellyfish’
  Pn:       Tongan        kolukalu      ‘generic for certain kinds of jellyfish’
  Pn:       Samoan        ?alu?alu      ‘k.o. edible jellyfish’
  Pn:       Nanumea       kalikali      ‘jellyfish sp.’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Rennellese      kaŋukaŋu      ‘an insect’
   Pn:    Maori           karukaru      ‘spongy matter in a gourd, clotted blood, blood’
>

   A Proto SE Solomonic term for anemone, or possibly jellyfish, is reconstructable which
may be cognate with PPn *mama ‘chiton’ (see §4.4).

<
Proto SE Solomonic * mama ‘k.o. anemone or jellyfish’
  SES:      Gela          mama(ndao)     ‘sea creature, soft, no shell’
  SES:      Arosi         mama(nongi)    ‘a sea anemone; eaten’
  SES:      Lau           mama-e-lade    ‘small blue jellyfish on dead coral’ (Fox 1974)
  SES:      Lau           mama-i-lade    ‘sea anemone’ (Akimichi 1978)
>

    The following PCP term may have denoted a kind of hydrozoa but the diversity of vague
glosses given to its reflexes makes this uncertain.

<
PCP *bulewa ‘an organism growing on rocks, possibly encrusting brown rock coral’
  Fij:      Bauan         bulewa  ‘k.o. coral, clinging to rocks, eaten by fish’
  Fij:      Wayan         bulewa  ‘slimy brownish organism, growing on rocks and floating on sea, eaten by fish’
PPn *pulewa ‘marine substance/creature with stone-like or rough exterior’ (pollex)
  Pn:   K’marangi purewe          (i) ‘sandpaper-like growth on coral’; (2) ‘coral variety’
  Pn:   Uvean       puleva        ‘k.o. sea cucumber’
  Pn:   Mangarevan pureva         (1) ‘roe of fish’; (2) ‘yellow scum floating on the sea from about 17-21 Feb. Eaten by fish’
  Pn:   Hawaiian    pillewa       ‘k.o. stone, used as sinker’
>


4.7 Annelida: worms

Many annelid (segmented) worms live in tropical marine habitats. The two main groups
are Oligochaeta (with few bristles) and Polychaeta (with many bristles). Marine worms are
mainly Polychaeta and include fireworms, feather duster worms, sphagetti worms, Christmas
tree worms and bobbit or palolo worms. Reconstructions are available for just two marine
worm taxa.


4.7.1 Sipunculus sp,, sandworm

<
POc *ibo ‘k.o. sandworm, probably Sipunculus sp.’
  MM: Roviana             ibo           ‘small seaworm, much used for bait’
  Mic:    Kiribati      ibo           ‘a sandworm, Sipunculus indicits'
  Fij:    Bauan         ibo           ‘large edible seaworm’
  Fij:    Wayan         ibo           ‘k.o. sandworm, Sipunculus sp.’
  Pn:     Samoan        ipo           ‘edible sandworm, Sipunculus sp.
  Pn:     Nanumea       ipo           ‘sp. of worm found on the beach’
cf. also:
   MM: Teop             iobo          ‘seaworms’ (-0- unexpected)
>

                                                                  Aquatic invertebrates     211


Although this cognate set formally matches PMP *imbaw ‘marine mollusc sp.’ (Blust 1980a: 77)
the latter reconstruction rests on cognates in two WMP languages which both refer to
bivalves.


4.7.2 Fireworms (Polychaeta)

Fireworms, 5-18 cm long, bear many white bristles along their sides which can cause itching
when touched. They bear a superficial resemblance to centipedes and millipedes. A well-
supported PMP and POc reconstruction for ‘centipede’ exists, namely *qalipan, continued
in PCP as * qaliva ‘millipede’. A separate term for ‘fireworm’, sometimes called ‘sea centipede’,
is attributable to POc based on agreements between Saliba, a Papuan Tip language,
and Polynesian witnesses. It appears that in PPn a single term, Arc//, was applied both to
fireworms and to centipedes and furry millipedes. Glosses given to cognates in North-Central
Vanuatu and Southeast Solomonic suggest that this range of reference may well have existed
in POc.

<
POc *weli (i) ‘fireworm, sea centipede’; (2) ‘? k.o. millipede or centipede’
  PT:     Saliba        yeli-yeli    ‘fireworm, Pherecardia striata'’
  SES:    Arosi         weli         ‘black thickbodied millipede, lulus sp, found on near the coast’
  SES:    Arosi        weri(marumu) ‘sp. of millipede with furry body’
  NCV: Raga             weli, ueli   ‘small iridescent centipede’
  NCV: Uripiv           na-wel       ‘palolo worm’
PPn *weli (1) ‘centipede’; (2) ‘marine annelid like a centipede’ (cf. pollex)
  Pn:   E Futunan      veli             ‘a venomous creature found on the reef’
  Pn:    Tongan        veli             ‘a hairy worm that lives mostly in water’
  Pn:    Samoan        veli             ‘a fish that stings when touched’
  Pn:   Pukapukan veli                  ‘a variety of sea centipede’
  Pn:    Tikopia       veri             ‘marine animal on reef: long, segmented; stings painfully if trodden on’
  Pn:   Mangarevan     veli             ‘marine annelid like a centipede’
  Pn:   Hawaiian       weli             ‘a holothurian’
  Pn:   Maori          weri             ‘centipede’
  Pn:    Tahitian      veri             ‘centipede’
cf. also:
   PT:    Dobuan        p'`ali-keke      ‘millipede’
   PT:    Molima        p'aH-keke        ‘poisonous millipede’
   SES: Lau             fari-fari        ‘scorpion’
>

212   Andrew Pawley


4.7.3 Palolo worm (Eunice viridis, ^Palola viridis, Leodis viridis)

The palolo worm is distributed from Indonesia to the central Pacific. It burrows into coral.
When spawning, the posterior end, filled with sperm and eggs, breaks off and swims to the
surface. The annual spawning or ‘rise’, governed by the phase of the moon, occurs at regular
times in the months October to December and at these times people scoop up the worms
which are cooked and eaten.

    A name for the palolo worm is attributable to PEOc, based on cognates shared by SES
and NCV languages. The former reflect *odu, the latter *udu. The only known WOc cognate
occurs in a Santa Isabel language, Maringe: na-udu, where na- reflects the POC common
noun marker *na. The Maringe form may be a borrowing from a neighbouring SES language
but it is noteworthy that its first vowel agrees with NCV rather than SES witnesses.

__pre__
  MM: Maringe        na-udu         ‘Leodis viridis, palolo worm’

<
PEOc *(o,u)du ‘Leodis viridis, palolo worm’
Proto SE Solomonic *odu ‘Leodis viridis, palolo worm’
  SES Gela           odu
  SES Ghari          odu          ‘a worm that lives in coral’
  SES Arosi          ogu, oku
  SES Lau            ?odu, ?ogu
  SES Sa’a           oku
  SES ’Are’are       ?odu, ?oku
PNCV *udu ‘Eunice, palolo worm’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV:Mota          un
  NCV:Mwotlap       n-in
  NCV:Raga          udu
  NCV:Big Nambas n-ud
  NCV:Neve’ei       nu-wud
>

   A separate term is reconstructable for PCP, with reflexes in Fijian and Polynesian languages.

<
PCP * balolo (1) ‘Leodis viridis, palolo worm’; (2) ‘name of the months when this worm rises’
  Fij: Bauan          balolo
  Fij: Way an         balolo
PPn *palolo (1) ‘palolo worm’; (2) ‘name of the months when this rises’
  Pn:   Tongan         palolo
  Pn:    Samoan        palolo
  Pn:   East Uvean palolo
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele paroro            ‘red or green marine micro-organism with bad smell’
>

                                                                    Aquatic invertebrates     213


4.8 Poriphera: sponges

Sponges are conspicuous inhabitants of coral reefs. They come in a variety of shapes and
sizes, attaching themselves wherever they can find a space. Some Oceanic languages have
a general term for sponges, e.g. Lau losi, lo-losi, Gela loi-losi, Roviana puha, Dobuan halu,
Motu puta, Sa’a hulo, but no widespread cognate sets have been noted, other than the following
from Polynesian languages.

<
PPn *oma ‘sponge’
  Pn:     Tongan        oma
  Pn:     Niuean        omo(mi)
  Pn:     Samoan        omo(mi)
  Pn:     Tokelauan     oma
  Pn:     Marquesan     oma-oma         ‘k.o. jellyfish’
>


4.9 What proportion of POc taxa have been reconstructed?

Leaving aside the collective term *pinayoda, the number of fairly secure POc reconstructions
for aquatic (including semi-aquatic) invertebrate taxa is 42, with a few additional tentative
reconstructions at POc level and a number of other reconstructions attributable to PEOc or
PWOc. Taking the Wayan figure of about 240 taxa as fairly typical of those Austronesian
maritime communities which exploit fringing reefs and mangrove swamps, it follows that 42
is probably less than a fifth of the total number of aquatic taxa distinguished by POc speakers.
The breakdown in Table 4.2, comparing Wayan with POc, indicates the distribution of the
shortfalls across the main groups of aquatic invertebrates.

    The relative paucity of POc reconstructions can be attributed in large part to gaps in the
coverage provided by dictionaries of contemporary languages. Few dictionaries give anything
like an exhaustive listing of terms for invertebrates. However, a pattern is discernable
in the kinds of terms that can/cannot be reconstructed. One important category of terms
almost completely missing from our reconstructions is binomials. A run through the list of
reconstructions shows that all the POc terms are uninomials (unitary lexemes). By contrast,
about a third of the Wayan names are binomials, including 40 of the 105 gastropod taxa, but
only seven of the 35 bivalve taxa.

    Why are uninomials more stable than binomials? Berlin (1992) argues that in folk
taxonomies of wild animals and plants the most salient and well-marked categories for purposes
of identification are folk generics (see ch. 8, §1.2.3). Names of taxa at the level of folk generic
are usually uninominals (e.g. English owl, whale, oak, willow} or idioms, e.g. blackbird, she-
oak, pussy willow}. A folk generic may have a number of folk specifics, which are perceived
as closely related but distinct types. These are typically known by binomials, made up of a
folk generic plus a descriptive modifier which refers to one or another distinguishing feature
of the taxon - its characteristic habitat, colour, size, shape, etc., e.g. barn owl, grass owl,
sooty owl, hump-backed whale, blue whale. Folk generics commonly fall under high-order
taxa, particularly the type that Berlin calls a life-form, such as English fish, bird, snake, and
tree. Sometimes levels between life-form and folk generic are distinguished and Berlin calls
these intermediates.

214   Andrew Pawley

__pre__
 Table 4.2   Terms for aquatic invertebrate groups known for Wayan and Proto Oceanic
                                                     Wayan   POc
                        Crustaceans
                        lobsters                         3     1
                        prawns/shrimps                   7     1
                        crabs (Brachyura)               33     7
                        crabs (Anomura)                  4     4
                        Cirripedia                       1     0
                        subtotal                        48    13
                        Molluscs
                        gastropods                     105     7
                        bivalves                        35    10
                        chitons                          4     0
                        cephalopods                      4     3
                        subtotal                       148    20
                        Echinoderms
                        sea cucumbers                   19     1
                        sea urchins                      8     2
                        starfish, brittle starfish       4     1
                        subtotal                        31     4
                        Cnidaria
                        corals and anemones             11     2
                        jellyfish                        2     0
                        subtotal                        13     2
                        Worms                            T
                        Total                          245    42

                                                                   A quatic inverte brates   215


    The POc terms for aquatic invertebrates that have survived are exclusively generics of
some sort, either folk generics or high-order generics. The modifiers that distinguish folk
specifics have not been stable. There are, perhaps, several reasons why modifiers are unstable.
One is the variability of local species. Although the same orders, families and genera of
common reef and shoreline animals are usually common to different regions of the tropical
Pacific, the species are more variable from region to region. Migrants might be expected to
apply new modifiers to newly encountered species if these were clearly distinct from those
known in their former homeland. Another factor is the wide range of distinctive characteristics
exhibited by certain species and genera of the same family, such as colour, shape, size and
behaviour. Speakers can be expected from time to time to change the choice of the characteristic
used to distinguish one taxon terminologically from its sister taxa. Finally, particular
modifying terms may themselves be replaced by synonyms which come into favour, sometimes
leading to loss or change of meaning in the original modifier.

     Some groups of invertebrates show a much higher ratio of taxa reconstructed to POc level
than others, when compared with Wayan totals. Among the crustaceans, the Anomura (hermit
crabs) have a high ratio with 4/4, whereas the Brachyura (true crabs) score only 7/33. Prawns
and shrimps score much lower (1/7), the sole POc term reconstructed being the generic for
prawns and lobsters. Sea cucumbers and sea urchins also show a very low ratio: three POc
reconstructions compared with 27 taxa distinguished in Wayan. The cephalopods (3/4) have
by far the highest ratios among the molluscs. The bivalves (10/35) score much higher than
the gastropods (7/105), a difference not solely attributable to the fact that binomials make up
 40 of the 105 Wayan gastropod names but only 7 of the 35 bivalve names.

    These ratios can be taken as a very rough measure of how persistent POc names have
been for particular invertebrate groups: a high score for POc indicates a high retention rate
of terms in daughter languages, a low score the converse. Very likely there is a correlation
between how persistent a term is, and how salient or important the referent is to to members
of the speech community. Of course, a creature can be salient for any of a number of reasons:
economic importance, large size, unusual appearance, being dangerous, and so on. Closer
study of such matters must be left for another occasion.



5 Mammals, reptiles, amphibians

5.1 Introduction

This chapter is concerned with the Proto Oceanic lexicon for three groups of vertebrates:
mammals, reptiles and amphibians. Birds and fish each have a chapter to themselves.[1]

    Attempts to reconstruct POc names for land vertebrates face a number of difficulties. The
most fundamental of these relate to discontinuities in the fauna that reflect long-established
ocean gaps. Most mammal and reptile species, of course, live on land and cannot cross large
ocean gaps. As a consequence cognate sets for certain animal taxa have highly restricted
distributions. This is especially true of mammals.

    A major zoogeographical boundary divides the mammals native to the Austronesian-speaking
world. The Wallace Line, which runs north-south through the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago,
separating Sumatra, Borneo, Java and Bali from islands to the east, marks (among
other things) the westernmost limits of marsupial mammals. West of this boundary
only placental mammals occur. The native land mammals that would have been familiar to speakers of
Proto Oceanic, living in the Bismarck Archipelago, were almost entirely different from those
known to their ancestors in the Proto Malayo-Polynesian homeland, and from those found in
Remote Oceania, where most of the best-described Oceanic languages are now spoken.

    East of the Wallace Line there is a region of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago, Wallacea,
where relatively few land mammals occur but there is some overlap between placentals
and marsupials. Lydekker’s Line forms the eastern boundary of Wallacea. It separates the
Australia-New Guinea faunal zone, home to a rich marsupial fauna, from the islands of eastern
Indonesia: Sulawesi, Lombok, Flores, Timor, and the Moluccas. Only bats and rodents
are common to both the Asian and the Australia-New Guinea regions.

[1] Particular thanks are due to Malcolm Ross, Alexandre Francois and John Lynch for comments and additions
 to the data.

218   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


           Map 5    Major zoogeographical boundaries in Island Southeast Asia

    These faunal regions reflect geomorphological boundaries. The islands west of Wallace’s
Line lie on the Sunda Shelf, a shallow continental shelf that was dry land at various times
during the ice ages. As a consequence, the western islands of the Indo-Malaysian Archipelago
share a similar mammal fauna with the Southeast Asian mainland and, to a lesser extent,
with the Philippines and Taiwan. However, a deep trench separates Bali from Lombok, and
few Asian mammal species were able to cross this. Similarly, during parts of the ice ages
Australia and New Guinea formed a single land mass, Sahul (also known as Greater Australia
or Meganesia), but were always separated from the Moluccas and Timor by deep water. Also
part of Sahul were the Aru Islands southwest of New Guinea, but not the Kei Islands. Off
the Bird’s Head, the West Papuan islands of Batanta, Gebe, Waigeo, Salawati and Misool
(Mysol) were included, as were the islands of Cenderawasih Bay (Biak, Yapen, Numfoor)
and the islands of the north coast shelf (Kairiru, Manam, Karkar, Bagabag). At the south end
of New Guinea the D’Entrecasteaux Group, Louisiade Archipelago, Woodlark Island and the
Trobriands were all part of the mainland. However, New Britain, New Ireland, the Solomons
and the Admiralties were still separated from the New Guinea mainland and each other.


                                               Mammals, reptiles, amphibians                         219

  Map 6   Island Southeast Asia and Northwest Melanesia: island names

220    Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


    Robert Blust (1982, 2002, 2009) has demonstrated the relevance of the Wallace Line to
the subgrouping of Austronesian languages. In the most generally accepted subgrouping of
Austronesian languages, all the Austronesian languages of New Guinea fall into a lower order
group, namely Eastern Malayo-Polynesian. Blust writes

|       Since placental mammals are not native to areas east of the Wallace Line, PAN and PMP
|       must have been spoken west of that boundary. In crossing the Wallace Line [Austronesian]
|       speakers would have encountered marsupials for the first time. If this happened
|       through separate migrations into eastern Indonesia and the western Pacific there would
|       be no basis for expecting that the terms for marsupial mammals would be cognate, since
|       they would have been independently invented (or borrowed) at different times and in
|       different places. As it happens, however, many languages of eastern Indonesia and the
|       Pacific reflect *kcmdoRci ‘cuscus‘ and * mcmsarlmcmser ‘bandicoot/marsupial rat’ which
|       could not have been present in PAN or PMP.
|       ... it is simplest to attribute these innovations to a single speech community that was
|       ancestral to the [Central Malayo-Polynesian, South Halmahera-West New Guinea and
|       Oceanic] languages (2009:715-716).

Further significant zoogeographical boundaries occur within Oceania. As one travels from
the New Guinea mainland to the Bismarck Archipelago, then east down the main Solomons
chain and on into Remote Oceania, the land masses become smaller and the island groups
further apart, and the faunal range declines markedly. Relatively few species of terrestrial
mammals are widely distributed across Oceania. A good many taxa are restricted to New
Guinea or to New Guinea, New Britain and New Ireland.

    Reptiles and amphibians are not subject to the same geographical division. Terms for
both crocodile and turtle occur on both sides of the Wallace Line and are reconstructable to
PAn. Crocodiles were formerly present in Taiwan (see footnote on p.251), and their present
breeding range extends from south-west India and the Philippines to the Santa Cruz group.
Lizards and snakes are capable of swimming short distances, and are readily transportable on
floating logs or rafts of vegetation, but the number of species shrinks as land masses decline
in size and island groups become more widely scattered.

    In the most generally accepted subgrouping of Austronesian languages, all the Austronesian
languages of New Guinea fall into a lower order group, namely Eastern Malayo-
Polynesian. It follows that for kinds of mammals found only in New Guinea we will not
find a Proto Austronesian (PAn) or Proto Malayo-Polynesian (PMP) reconstruction.

    The mammals known to POc speakers may be divided into those indigenous to the
Bismarck Archipelago[2] and perhaps the north coast of New Guinea and those that humans
brought to this region from island southeast Asia, namely the pig and dog and certain rat
species.

[2] For the location of the presumed POc homeland see vol.2, pp. 17-34.


5.2 Indigenous terrestrial mammals

5.2.1 Introduction


                                                             Mammals, reptiles, amphibians   221


The indigenous mammal groups of Melanesia recorded in historic times are listed by Flannery
(1995a: 13-15). The main island of New Guinea has one tree kangaroo genus and four genera
of wallabies. It has several species of bandicoot and a large variety of possums, including
cuscuses, pygmy possums, ringtail possums and gliders. It has two genera of spiny ant-eaters
(monotremes). A less well known family is the Dasyuridae (formerly known as Phascogale),
a family to which Tasmanian devils belong. The New Guinea dasyurids consist of quolls
and antechinuses. The Bismarcks have only one bandicoot, one wallaby, and two species
of phalanger. The Solomons have one phalanger. Murids and bats are represented by many
different genera throughout New Guinea, the Bismarcks and the Solomons. In Vanuatu, New
Caledonia, Fiji, Polynesia and Micronesia, the only native terrestrial mammals are bats. The
range of a few indigenous mammals has been extended by human introductions.


5.2.2 Macropodidae

5.2.2.1 Wallabies (GeneraDorcopsis, Dorcopsulus, Macropus, Thylogale)

Four genera of wallabies occur in the New Guinea area. Dorcopsis is a genus of small
rainforest wallabies with an extensive range round the perimeter of New Guinea. One species,
the black dorcopsis, is common on mountainous Goodenough Island in the D’Entrecasteaux
group. A second genus, Dorcopsulus, the smallest of all the Macropodids, lives in mountain
forests. A third genus, Macropus, the large sandy or agile wallaby, is primarily a savanna
woodland animal of the south-eastern New Guinea mainland, but is also found on many of
the Trobriand and D’Entrecasteaux islands and around Merauke in West Papua. It is hunted
by many coastal people, an activity no doubt contributing to its somewhat erratic distribution.
Flannery mentions several reports of a large wallaby, possibly Macropus agilis, from southern
New Ireland, which he has so far been unable to verify (1995a:82). The fourth genus,
Thylogale, is the small scrub wallaby or pademelon. Its range includes the lowlands of
northern New Guinea as far west as Jayapura, the hills round Port Moresby, the Huon Peninsula,
New Britain and New Ireland. Bali-Vitu, spoken off the north-west coast of New Britain, has
a term for wallaby. Lapita sites in the Arawe Islands, off the south-west coast of New Britain,
have yielded bones of Thylogale browni as well as the cuscus Phalanger orientalis and the
flightless cassowary, all introduced species.

    One wallaby species is found on the islands west of the Bird’s Head, and others on Aru
and on Kei. No wallabies are present in the Solomons or the Admiralties group. Although
wallabies are now absent from the St Matthias group, bones of wallabies and a cuscus (Spi-
locuscus maculatus) have been recovered from Lapita middens excavated from the low flat
coral island of Eloaue south-east of the high island of Mussau (Green 1979:37). Flannery and
White state that the northern pademelon, Thylogale browni, was introduced into New Ireland
some 7000 years ago, and that animals were possibly carried from there to the St Matthias
group, although the species never became established there (Flannery 1995a:83).

    The general pattern seems to be that different species adapt to particular areas, and are
restricted to those areas. Although it may happen that two or three species are found within
the territory familiar to a single language community, sources for each language usually give
only one term for wallaby and it is likely that this is the generic.

    A PWOc term for wallaby, *wakin, is well supported, with reflexes in North New Guinea,
Papuan Tip and Meso-Melanesian languages. If terms in two non-Oceanic languages spoken
on the West Papuan coast are cognate, then *wakin is reconstructable to PEMP and POc. The
non-Oceanic terms, from Smits and Voorhoeve (1992:241), are glossed ‘kangaroo’, but the
reference must be to small macropod species, popularly known as wallabies, as the larger
species known as kangaroos are absent from New Guinea.

222 Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

<
PEMP *wakin ‘wallaby’
  SHWNG: Dusnew              waen         ‘kangaroo’ [wallaby]
  SHWNG: Mor                 u?ana        ‘kangaroo’ [wallaby]
POc *wakin ‘wallaby’
  NNG         Lukep (Pono) ok              ‘wallaby’
  NNG         Mangap        wok            ‘wallaby’
  NNG         Bing          woy            ‘wallaby’
  NNG         Bilibil       wei            ‘wallaby’
  NNGr:       Gedaged       woi            ‘kangaroo (generic), incl. Macropus, l)oreopsis'
  PT:         Kilivila      waila          ‘wallaby’
  PT:         Iduna         wayi(tuli)     ‘large grey wallaby’
  PT:         Gabadi        vai(aru)       ‘wallaby, Macropus agdis'
  PT:         Hula          wayi           ‘wallaby, Macropus agdis'
  MM:         Sursurunga    wak            ‘wallaby, includes Agile Wallaby, Forest Wallaby’
  MM:         Konomala      uakin          ‘wallaby’
  MM:         Minigir       okin           ‘wallaby’
  MM:         Tolai         okin           ‘wallaby’
  MM:         Tolai (Nodup) okini          ‘wallaby’
  MM:         Label         uakin          ‘wallaby’
  MM:         Siar          uakin          ‘wallaby’
>

   Several additional Papuan Tip terms support a PPT reconstruction *wagita ‘wallaby’
These appear to be compounds derived from *wakin + *ta(u), the second element possibly
from POc/PPT *1au ‘person, body’.

<
PPT *wagita ‘wallaby’
  PT:     Diodio        vayita       ‘wallaby’
  PT:     Bwaidoga      vayita       ‘wallaby, Agile wallaby’
  PT:     Molima        wagilita     ‘bandicoot-like animal that eats coconuts’
  PT:     lam al el e   vagitau      ‘opossum’
>

    Agreements between NNG and PT languages point to a PNGOc term, *makan. Reflexes
in PT languages predictably add a final -i. Retention of final */7 plus the added vowel is
unexpected in Motu and Magori, and suggests borrowing from a SE Papuan source, perhaps
a dialect of Suau. At least two Central Papuan languages use reflexes of * makan ‘wallaby’
as a generic for ‘fish’. Ross (1994:422) uses the example of the two Sinaugoro dialects, one
inland (Taboro), the other coastal (Balawaia), to suggest that the term was in some places
generalised to cover protein food, and then restricted in some coastal languages to the main
protein food available, namely fish.

<
PNGOc *makan ‘wallaby, Macropus agHis’
  NNG:    Dami          maga         ‘wallaby’
  NNG:    Tumleo        magə         ‘wallaby’
  PT:     Magori        magani       ‘wallaby, M. agihs'
  PT:     Hula          mani         ‘wallaby’
  PT:     Tawala        makani       ‘wallaby type’
  PT:       Taboro       mayani            ‘wallaby’
  PT:       Balawaia    mayani             ‘fish’
  PT:       Motu        mayani             ‘wallaby, M. agilis'
  PT:       W Mekeo     maka               ‘fish’
  PT:       Mekeo       ma?i               ‘wallaby, M. agilis'
cf. also:
   NNG:     Matukar     maku(sik)          ‘wallaby’ (-sik perhaps from POc *
                                                                            siki ‘small’)
   NNG:     Kairiru     meik               ‘wallaby’
   NNG:     Ali          meik              ‘wallaby’
   PT:      Kuni        man                ‘wallaby, M. agilis`
>

                                                            Mammals, reptiles, amphibians   223


                      Figure 5.1   Dendrolagus dorianus, Doria’s tree kangaroo


5.2.2.2 Tree kangaroos (Genus Dendrolagus)

224   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

Within the Oceanic region, tree kangaroos (genus Dendrolagus) are restricted to mainland
New Guinea and some close offshore islands. There are about eight species in the region.
D. inustus, the grizzled tree kangaroo, is found in a wide band across northern New Guinea
from the Bird’s Head Peninsula to the Torricelli Mountains. Dendrolagus scottae, Scott’s tree
kangaroo, occurs in lowlands forests in Sandaun Province, Papua New Guinea. The other
species have distributions that make them less likely to be known to speakers of Oceanic
languages. D. matschiei, the Huon tree kangaroo, with chestnut-red pelage and long yellow
tail, is restricted to the heavily forested mountains of the Huon Peninsula. D. dorianus. Doria’s
tree kangaroo, is a large brownish-black animal that lives in the cloud and moss forests of
montane New Guinea. D. goodfellowi and the closely related D. pulcherrimus, the smallest
species, are found in mid montane zones, D. stellarum in the highlands of west-central New
Guinea, Dendrolagus spadix, in the south-western lowlands of Papua New Guinea and D.
mbaiso in the highlands of west-central New Guinea.

     To date, tree kangaroos are known outside the New Guinea mainland only on Umboi
(presumably carried by humans from the nearby Huon Gulf area), Yapen and Salawati and
Cape York, Australia (Van Deusen 1972:713, Flannery 1995a: 126-143). There is no record of
their existence in the Admiralties or the Solomons, although we have a term for tree kangaroo
from Sursurunga, New Ireland, and another from Kaulong, New Britain, presumably because
people there are aware that they exist elsewhere.

     Fewer than twenty terms for Dendrolagus have been collected in total, all bar one from
North New Guinea, the odd one out being Meso-Melanesian: Sursurunga atal ‘wallaby, includes
Matschie’s tree kangaroo’. Of the NNG terms, one is from New Britain (Kaulong elan
‘possum, also tree wallaby’), two are from a Schouten Chain language on the north coast (Sis-
sano nep and ?apar, both apparently meaning ‘tree kangaroo’) and one is from Bing, a Vitiaz
Strait language north of the Huon Peninsula (dagyiebiy ‘tree kangaroo’). The remainder are
from Huon Peninsula languages. No reconstructions are possible from these data other than
a single low level term, Proto Buang *kekuij.


5.2.3 Cuscuses (Phalangeridae)

The phalangerids include the cuscuses of the New Guinea region and the brushtail possums of
Australia. They are large arboreal herbivores. Several species of cuscus are present in
mainland New Guinea and in the D’Entrecasteaux, Louisiade and Trobriand Islands. Phalangers
are common in the islands immediately to the west and southwest of New Guinea, including
Sulawesi, Timor, Ambon, Seram, Burn and Kei. Groves (1984) notes that Ambon and Seram
have a distinct variety of Phalanger orientalis, and concludes that it got there without human
intervention.

    In prehistoric times certain species were translocated by humans to Island Melanesia and
the Moluccas. New Britain, New Ireland and the Solomons each have an introduced species.
Phalanger orientalis, the northern common cuscus (aka grey cuscus) is an abundant lowland
species native to New Guinea that about 20,000 years ago was taken to New Ireland, where
it became an important prey species (Leavesley 2005). It was introduced to the Solomon
Islands and also to Timor at some time in the last 7,000 years (Flannery and Wickler 1990,
Glover 1986). A single species, Spilocuscus maculatus, is found in the Admiralties, including
Manus, Wuvulu and Ninigo. It is commonly hunted on Manus.

    There is a well supported POc reconstruction for ‘cuscus’, *kP v)adroRa. For a number of
languages, sources give the gloss ‘possum’ to its reflexes (‘possum’ is often used loosely in
Australian English to refer to any member of the superfamily Phalangeroidea), but this can
only refer to a phalanger.

                                                      Mammals, reptiles, amphibians   225

                     Figure 5.2   SpHocuscus maculatus, spotted cuscus

<
PCEMP *kandoRa ‘cuscus’ (Blust2002)
  CMP: Watubela          kadola        ‘cuscus’
POc *k^ w)adroRa ‘phalanger, cuscus’ (Ross 1988: *kadroRa)
  Adm:   Mussau        aroa             ‘phalanger; cuscus’ (Smythe)
  Adm:   Bipi          koxa             ‘cuscus’ (metathesis)
  Adm:   Sori-Harengan ohay             ‘cuscus’ (metathesis)
  Adm:   Penchai       kotay            ‘cuscus’ (metathesis)
  Adm:   Nauna         kocay            ‘cuscus’ (metathesis)
  NNG:   Mangap        kendere          ‘opossum’
  NNG:   Gedaged       kodol            ‘k.o. phalanger with tan or greyish fur’
  NNG:   Manam         ?odora           ‘cuscus’
  PT:    Dobu          k'ado/ya         ‘possum’
  PT:    Kilivila      k'adoya          ‘cuscus’
  PT:    Muyuw         k'adoy           ‘cuscus, possum’
  MM:    Tabar         adora            ‘cuscus’
  MM:    Lungga        yadora           ‘possum’
  MM:    Simbo         yadora           ‘possum’
  MM:    Maringe       kadara           ‘possum’
>

226     Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


    The following Southeast Solomonic terms reflect *kadora, with -r- for expected -/-. This
is consistent with borrowing from Meso-Melanesian neighbours in the western Solomons.

__pre__
      SES:    Gela         kadora      ‘cuscus
      SES:    W G’canal    kadora      ‘cuscus
      SES:    Talise       kadora      ‘cuscus
      SES:    Malango      kadora      ‘cuscus

    A second reconstruction is more weakly supported. It is well represented in the Cristobal-
Malaitan branch of SE Solomonic but otherwise is reflected only in Gela, where the reflex
refers to a juvenile cuscus, and in one Papuan Tip language.

<
POc *pu(dr,d,j)(o,u) ‘species of possum or cuscus’
  PT:        Suau          hudu       ‘striped possum’ (Flannery 1995b:203)
  SES:       Gela          vuto       ‘a young cuscus’
  SES:       Owa          futu        ‘possum’
  SES:       ’Are’are      huto       ‘possum’
  SES:       Kahua         huto       ‘cuscus’
  SES:       Longgu        vuto       ‘cuscus’
  SES:       Lau          fiito       ‘cuscus’
  SES:       To’aba’ita   fiita       ‘cuscus’
  SES:       Sa’a          huto       ‘cuscus, phalanger’
  SES:       Arosi         huto       ‘cuscus’
>


5.2.4 Other possum families (Acrobatidae, Burramyidae, Petauridae, Pseudocheiridae)

Besides the cuscuses, four other families within the super-family Phalangeroidea are
represented in New Guinea. They include little feather-tailed possums (Acrobatidae), pygmy
possums (Burramyidae), sugar gliders, striped possums and long-fingered striped trioks (all
Petauridae) and ringtail possums (Pseudocheiridae). The Acrobatidae and Burramyidae are
restricted to the Australian-New Guinea land mass. Sugar gliders are also found in the
D’Entrecasteaux, Louisiade and Trobriand Islands and New Britain, and outside the Oceanic region
on Halmahera, Kei and Aru. They are absent from New Ireland, the Solomons and the Admiralties.
The Pseudocheiridae are poor dispersers who prefer montane forests, and are confined
to New Guinea and a few of the larger islands off the coast of western New Guinea. A PNGOc
term for ‘sugar glider’ is supported by probable cognates shared by several Papuan
Tip languages and at least one North New Guinea language. However, reflexes show a number of
irregularities, and it is necessary to reconstruct doublets.

<
PNGOc *si(r,R)(a,e)si(r,R)(a,e), *di(r,R)(a,e)di(r,R)(a,e) ‘Petaurus breviceps, sugar glider’
  NNG:       Gedaged      salesale    ‘sugar glider, P. breviceps’ (vowel metathesis)
  NNG:       Riwo         silesile    ‘k.o. marsupial’
  PT:        Molima       selasela    ‘sugar glider’
  PT:        Iduna        selasela    ‘flying squirrel, sugar glider’
  PT:        Tawala       selasela    ‘sugar glider’
  PT:        Wedau        sira-sira   ‘squirrel’ [sugar glider]
  PT:       Lala      dilodilo        ‘glider phalanger’ (-o unexpected)
  PT:       Motu      diledile        ‘sugar glider, P. breviceps'
cf. also:
   PT:      Gapapaiwa surasura        ‘flying squirrel’
   MM:      Tolai     diradira        ‘flying squirrel’ (d- for t0)
>

                                                        Mammals, reptiles, amphibians     227

                         Figure 5.3   Petaurus breviceps, sugar glider


5.2.5 Bandicoots (Peroryctidae)

New Guinea is home to several genera of the family Peroryctidae, the bandicoots. They include
Echymipera (common or spiny bandicoot, long-nosed bandicoot), Peroryctes (giant
bandicoot, Raffray’s bandicoot), and Microperoryctes (mouse bandicoot, striped bandicoot).
The mouse bandicoot is found only in the west of West Papua but the other genera are
distributed widely on mainland New Guinea. Bandicoots are not present in the Solomons.
Spriggs (1997:54) writes that at Pamwak, in Manus, bandicoots appear suddenly in the
archaeological record at about 13,000 BP and quickly become dominant in the faunal record.
This suggests human introduction. To the west of New Guinea, outside the region occupied
by speakers of Oceanic languages, bandicoot species are present on Seram, Yapen, Waigeo,
Kei and Aru. Compilers of wordlists are often unfamiliar with bandicoots, describing them
as ‘large bush rats’, ‘marsupial rats’ or similar.

    A POc term for ‘bandicoot’, * m wajar, is well supported. There are reflexes in the
Admiralties, North New Guinea, Papuan Tip and Meso-Melanesian subgroups referring to the
bandicoot, and a probable reflexes in Ponapean and certain Fijian dialects with change of
referent. External cognates are found in several CEMP languages of the Moluccas and islands
to the south of the Bird’s Head of New Guinea, where the reference is often to cuscus rather
than bandicoot.

228      Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                  Figure 5.4   Microperoryctes longicauda, long-tailed bandicoot

<
PCEMP *mansar ‘bandicoot, marsupial rat’ (Blust 1982, 2002)
  CMP: Ujir (Aru)    meday               ‘cuscus’ (Antoinette Schapper, pers. comm.)
  CMP: Ambelau mate                      ‘bandicoot, marsupial rat’
  CMP: Kei           medar               ‘cuscus’
  CMP: Yamdena mande                     ‘cuscus’
POc *mwajar ‘bandicoot’
  Adm:      Lou        mwas              ‘bandicoot, marsupial rat’
  Adm:      Nauna     m‘'ac              ‘bandicoot, marsupial rat’
  NNG:      Mangap     mozo              ‘bandicoot’
  NNG:      Wogeo     mwaja              ‘cuscus’
  NNG:      Ali       maic               ‘bandicoot’
  PT:       Sudest    mw aja-m‘' aja     ‘bandicoot’
  PT:       Taboro    moda               ‘bandicoot’
  PT:       Motu      mada               ‘k.o. bandicoot’
  MM:       Meramera maso                ‘bandicoot’
  MM:       Tolai     md(ŋ)              ‘bandicoot’
  MM:       Ramoaaina ma(n)              ‘bandicoot’
  Mic:      Ponapean   (keli)mpet        ‘k.o. small bat’ (keli- ‘prefix signifying danger, connection with spirit world’; Blust 2001)
  Fij:      Namosi       rjwada          ‘k.o. large rat’ (Blust 1993)
>

The following are probably borrowed from a pre-Oceanic or early Oceanic language (Ross
1988:21):

__pre__
  NNG: Megiar             madar           ‘bandicoot’
  NNG: Takia              madar           ‘bandicoot’
  NNG: Yabem      mojaŋ                 ‘marsupial rat, cuscus, possum, tree kangaroo’
  NNG: MaposBuang masaŋ                 ‘possum, Pseudocheirus eorinnae`. yellow-green
                                        ring-tailed possum’

                                                       Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       229



5.2.6 Marsupial carnivores (Dasyuridae)

The Dasyuridae are a family of carnivorous and insectivorous marsupial rodents, including
various antechinus species and quolls and, most famously, the Tasmanian devil. Five genera
of dasyurids are unique to New Guinea and three genera are common to New Guinea and
Australia. Most dasyurids are small, weighing between 100-500 grams, although quolls of the
New Guinea rainforest may exceed half a kilogram in weight (Flannery 1995b: 83). Dasyurids
may be either diurnal or nocturnal, and some antechinus species are partly arboreal. Many
species are found in rainforest, often at middle to high altitudes. Few members of the family
have been recorded from coastal Austronesian-speaking areas, although one antechinus is
found on Normanby in the D’Entrecasteaux Group, and other dasyurids have been recorded
from the Aru Islands. Flannery (1995b:84) comments that quolls will enter villages to catch
rats, and are respected as fierce predators by most New Guineans familiar with them, who
show great caution when handling them.

    No Oceanic terms for dasyurids have been recorded. It is likely that compilers of wordlists
have generally not been familiar with dasyurids as such, and in some cases have referred to
them by a term such as ‘small marsupial rodent’.


5.2.7 Echidnas (Tachyglossidae)

Monotremes are represented in New Guinea by two genera of echidna: Tachyglossus (short-
beaked echidna) and Zaglossus (long-beaked echidna). Both are regarded as rare. Flannery
(1995b:67) suggests that hunting pressure has severely reduced their numbers. Very little is
known about the distribution and natural history of Tachyglossus, but it has been recorded
in the Markham valley and around Port Moresby, and from the island of Salawati off the
Bird’s Head. Zaglossus has also been reported from both the western and eastern extremities
of New Guinea, but is found only where population densities are low. A term for the echidna
is present in only two languages in our sample (Sinaugoro modagini ‘anteater’ (cf. moda
‘bandicoot’) and Motu miyu ‘short-beaked echidna’) and no reconstructions are possible.


5.2.8 Rats (Muridae)

Rats were a significant source of protein for many Oceanic communities in prehistoric times.
The diversity of rat species diminishes sharply as one moves from New Guinea to the Bismarcks
and Solomons. In New Guinea the murid fauna is ‘abundant and diverse, and for
the size of the land mass, one of the most species-rich found anywhere on earth’ (Flannery
1995b:231). There are some 27 genera there, including Hydromys, Leptomys, Mallomys,
Melomys, Pogonomys, Uromys, Rattus and Stenomys, although only a subset of these are
present in any one region. Most New Guinea area species are endemic.

    Nine murid species are endemic to the Solomons, including two that are extinct. Three
species of Solomys and one of Uromys have evolved into large or very large arboreal rats,
which are probably the evolutionary counterparts of the possums of Sahul. However, single
islands in the Solomons seldom have more than two or three species. No rat species were
present in Remote Oceania before the advent of humans.

230   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                                 Figure 5.5   Rattus exulans, rat


    Five commensal rat species have been introduced to Oceania: Rattus rattus, R. exulans,
R. tanezumi, R. norvegicus and Mus musculus. Rattus rattus, the black rat, and Mus musculus,
the mouse were introduced into the Pacific within the past few centuries by European voyagers.
The other three species were carried to Oceania in prehistoric times. R. exulans, the Pacific rat,
is a commensal animal whose original range was in Asia, probably from Bangladesh
to Vietnam (Groves 1984). It was carried to Oceania by humans several millenia ago and today
is found widely in Melanesia, Polynesia and Micronesia. R. exulans has in recent years
come to play an important role in tracing the directions of early human settlement of Oceania,
especially Remote Oceania. Because it is an introduced animal and because it is common
in archaeological sites, it provides sufficient prehistoric and contemporary populations for
reliable genetic analysis (Matisoo-Smith and Robins 2004, Matisoo-Smith 2007). R. rattus
occurs in Lapita sites from the Bismarcks to western Polynesia and was clearly associated
with the initial Lapita dispersal into Remote Oceania. It was the only one of the commensal
rats to reach Polynesia in ancient times.

    Rattus praetor, the spiny rat, considerably larger than exulans, is native to New Guinea,
where it is widespread north and south of the central ranges as far east as the Sepik-Ramu
basin. It also occurs on offshore islands in the Bismarck Archipelago where it appears in
archaeological assemblages dated to at least 13,000 years ago (White, Clark and Bedford,
2000) and in the Solomon Islands, where its introduction is probably of similar antiquity. R.
praetor is now extinct in Remote Oceania but occurs in archaeological sites in Vanuatu and
Fiji, though not in Polynesia or Micronesia.

                                                             Mammals, reptiles, amphibians         231


    A third commensal species, Rattus tanezumi, the Asian house rat, has a narrow distribution
in Oceania, being securely attested only in archaeological sites in the Caroline Islands
and the northern Marianas, dated to within the last 1,000 years. R. tanezumi is native to South
Asia and Southeast Asia and its Oceanic distribution is consistent with transport direct from
Island Southeast Asia to the Carolines, rather than via Melanesia.

    Sources for Oceanic language seldom give precise identifications for rat terms. Glosses
tend to be of the order of ‘bush rat’ or simply ‘kind of rat’, glosses which fail to capture
genuine taxa in the language. One investigator (Futscher 1959) recorded at least 10 terms for
kinds of rat in Tolai but the glosses simply say ‘mouse’.

    POc *kasupe, continuing PEMP *kanzupay, has reflexes applied to one or more species of
the genus Rattus, rats living in and around human settlements. Reflexes in Cristobal-Malaitan
and Vanuatu languages preserve initial syllable *-a~. Those in Western Oceanic and Guadalcanal
languages and in Western Fijian show initial u-. These may represent several independent cases
where the first vowel assimilated to the following u. However, the assimilation is
so widespread it is reasonable to reconstruct a POc doublet, *kusupe.

<
PCEMP *kanzupay ‘rat’ (Blust 1993)
POc *kasupe, *kusupe ‘rat taxon, probably Rattus exulans and possibly other small commensal sp. or spp.’
  Adm: Drehet         (n)osop          ‘marmot’ (sic) (cd p'' ek ‘rat’)
  Adm: Seimat        usuh              ‘k.o. rat’
  NNG Malai          uzuv              ‘rat’
  NNG Mangap         kuzi              ‘rat/ mouse’
  NNG Malasanga kui                    ‘rat’
  NNG Mindiri        kusue             ‘rat’
  NNG Wogeo          kusive            ‘rat’
  NNG Ulau-Suain isup                  ‘bandicoot’
  PT:   Lala        uduve             ‘rat’
  PT:    Ouma        ureve             ‘rat’
  MM: Tolai          kaupa             ‘rat, mouse, Mus browni'
  MM: Vitu           kuðuve, kuvuðe ‘rat’ (metathesis)
  MM: Bali           kuzuveke          ‘rat’ (final -ke unexpected)[3]
  MM: Bola           kuruve            ‘rat’
  MM: Madak          kisap             ‘rat’
  MM: Siar           kusup             ‘rat’
  MM: Kandas         kusupu            ‘rat’
  MM: Teop           kuho              ‘rat’
  MM: Vari si        kuzu              ‘rat’
  MM: Ririo          kuj               ‘rat’
  SES: W G’canal yusuve                ‘rat’
  SES: Talise         yusuve           ‘rat’
  SES: Malango       husuve            ‘rat’
  SES: Lau           ?asufe            ‘rat’
  SES:    Kwaio         ?asufe            ‘rat’
  SES:    ’Are’are      ?asuhe            ‘rat’
  SES:    Sa’a          ?asuhe            ‘rat’
  SES:    Arosi         kasuhe            ‘rat’
  NOV:    Mota          yasuwe            ‘rat’
  NOV:    Mwotlap       (najyhdw          ‘rat, Rattus rallus`
  NOV:    Paamese       asue              ‘rat’
  SV:     N Tanna       kahap             ‘mouse, rat’
  SV:     Lenakel       kahau             ‘rat’
  SV:     Kwamera       (i)esukw          ‘mouse, rat’
  Fij:    Way an        kuðuve            ‘generic for rats and mice
>

[3] The Bali term reflects POc y*kusupeq. On non-Oceanic evidence *-q was not present in the POc fonn. and
 the Bali reflex is a mystery.

232   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

   Reflexes of the root PAn *-labaw ‘rat’ occur alone or in combination with a preposed CV-
formative in various daughter languages, yielding a number of related terms including PAn
*kulabaw and PMP *balabaw (Blust 2002:107).

   As an independent form * labaw is traceable back to PMP, with Oceanic reflexes from the
Te Motu group and, less certainly, the Malakula languages of Vanuatu.

<
PMP *labaw ‘rat, mouse’
  WMP: Kagayanen ambaw                 ‘mouse, rat’
  CMP: Manggarai lavo                  ‘rat’
  CMP: Rotinese          lafo          ‘mouse, rat’
POc *la(b,p)(o,u) ‘rat taxon’
  TM:      Aiwoo         lapii         ‘rat’ (Wurm 1969:69, Tryon & Hackman 1983:190)
  TM:      Natiigu       lopii         ‘rat’ (Wurm 1969:69)
  TM:      Tanibili      no-uvo        (Tryon & Hackman)
  Pn:      Pileni        lepil         (probable borrowing from TM)
cf. also the following terms for ‘rat’ from Malakula languages:
   NCV: Neve’ei          ne-labut
   NCV: Nati             ne-lemput
   NCV: Nam an            labet
   NCV: Nahavaq           lambut
>

    The latter forms exhibit a final -t which is unexpected in comparison with PMP *labaw.
Tagbanawa (Kalamian), a Philippines language, has a similar word laput ‘rat’ but this is likely
to be an accidental resemblance.

    PMP * bualabaw has probable Oceanic reflexes in Admiralty and NNG languages. The
expected POc form is *b‘'alapo or * p walapo, and Bingpaldf supports the latter. However,
the final vowels of the Admiralties forms are unexplained. The Titan and Aua forms also
show irregular loss of *-p~.

<
PMP *bnalabaw ‘rat, mouse’ (acd: *balabaw)
  WMP:    Malagasy     vualavu          ‘rat’ (Blust 1972a)
  WMP:    Ngaju Dayak belawaw           ‘rat’ (Blust 1972a)
  WMP:    Uma         flulehu?          ‘mouse, rat ‘ (Tryon 1995, 03.630)
  WMP:    Buginese     balawo           ‘mouse, rat’
  CMP:   Konjo          balaho         ‘mouse, rat ‘ (Tryon 1995, 03.630)
  CMP:   Burn           blafe(n)       ‘marsupial rat’ (Grimes, pers. comm
    p‘alapo ‘rat taxon’
POc *
  Adm: Titan            buley          ‘rat’ (Blust 1996:43)
  Adm: Wuvulu           balafa(i)      ‘rat’ (Blust 1993, 1996:43)
  Adm: Aua              bald           ‘rat’(Blust 1993)
  NNG: Bing            paldf           ‘bush rat with very strong teeth’
>


                                                       Mammals, reptiles, amphibians     233


    PAn *kulabaw ‘rat, mouse’, with reflexes in Taiwan (Paiwan kulavaw ‘mouse, rat’, Rukai
kolabaw ‘rat in the fields’) as well as in MP languages is reconstructed by Blust (2002). A
probable Oceanic reflex has been recorded in Bauan Fijian: kalavo ‘rat’. Amber (SHWNG)
agrees with Bauan in having initial ka rather than ku, pointing to PEMP *kalabaw, POc
*kalapo.

<
PAn *kulabaw ‘rat, mouse’ (Blust 2002)
PEMP *kalabaw ‘rat, mouse’
  SHWNG: Amber             kalubu        ‘mouse’ (Smits)
POc *kalapo ‘rat taxon’
  Fij:       Bauan         kalavo        ‘rat (Rattus spp.)’
>

    Two distinct cognate sets are widespread in Polynesia. The terms are simply glossed ‘rat’
in the sources, unless otherwise noted, but the proto-forms must all have referred to Rattus
exulans.

<
PPn *kuma ‘rat’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan        kurnd
  Pn:    Niuean        kurnd
  Pn:    E Uvean       kurnd
  Pn:    Anutan        kuma
  Pn:    Tikopia       kuma(ri)  (final -ri unexpected)
  Pn:    Marquesan     kuma-kuma
>

   The second set is confined to Nuclear Polynesian languages.

<
PNPn *kimoa ‘rat, R. exulans'
  Pn:    Samoan        ?imoa
  Pn:    Tuvalu        kimoa
  Pn:    Nukuoro       kimoo
  Pn:    Ifira-Mele    kimoa
  Pn:    Rennellese    kimoa
  Pn:    W Uvean       kimoa
>

    Lincoln (2007) points to terms for ‘rat’ in various PT languages from Milne Bay Province
that do not correspond regularly to *kimoa but show more than a passing resemblance. The
Milne Bay terms are from unpublished wordlists recorded by Pawley (1969).

234   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                   Figure 5.6   Dobsonia moluccensis, greater bare-backed bat

__pre__
   PT     Oyaoya         gimau
   PT     Logea          ghri'au
   PT     Tubetube       gind’au
   PT     Saliba         yhri'au
   PT     Gilagila       gibwau

   The following reconstruction is attributable to Proto Western Oceanic on the basis of
cognates in North New Guinea, New Ireland and NW Solomonic.

<
PWOc *kotu ‘rat’
  NNG:    Sio           koto           ‘rat’
  MM:     Tab ar        kotii          ‘rat’
  MM:     Tangga        knt            ‘rat’
  MM:     Hoava         kutii          ‘rat’
  MM:     Marovo        kutii          ‘rat, common type’ (kiitu vaka ‘big rat that eats coconuts’) (Hviding)
  MM:     Vangunu       kutii          ‘rat’
>


5.2.9 Bats (Order: Chiroptera, Suborders Megachiroptera, Microchiroptera)


                                                         Mammals, reptiles, amphibians        235


Bats form a very large order consisting of two suborders and at least six families (Flannery
1995b). The Megachiroptera include the fruit-sucking bats (flying foxes and fruit bats) and
bats which feed on nectar and pollen. Figure 5.6 shows the greater bare-backed fruit bat,
Dobsonia moluccensis (aka D. mapna). This species and others of the genus Dobsonia are
widespread in New Guinea and Island Melanesia, as far east as the Solomons, as are other
members of the family Pteropodidae (fruit-bats). The Microchiroptera include tube-nosed
bats, sheathtail bats, horseshoe bats and leaf-nosed bats, typically insectivorous, although at
least one genus preys on small fish (Flannery 1995b:455). Several species of Microchiroptera
are recently described, and revision of the genera is ongoing.

    Reflexes of PMP *paniki ‘fruit bat, flying fox, Pteropns spp. ’ occur in the Philippines and
Indonesia, but have not been located in Oceanic languages. POc *b weka is a well supported
reconstruction. It has reflexes denoting ‘fruit bat’ in most major subgroups of Oceanic, an
exception being Papuan Tip. In NCV languages *b v'eka is generally lost but in a few languages
the form is continued as the name for the barn owl, Tyto alba. For North New Guinea
reflexes see under *mali-b weka below.

<
POc *b‘ eka ‘flying fox, large fruit bat’
  Adm : Drehet          pwek           ‘rat’
  Adm : Titan           pWQ            ‘bat, flying fox’
  MM Bali                beya          ‘flying fox’
  MM Vitu                beya          ‘flying fox’
  MM Nakanai             beka          ‘flying fox’
  MM Meramera            bea           ‘flying fox’
  MM Sursurunga          bek           ‘generic, fruit bat, flying fox’
  MM Patpatar            beka          ‘flying fox’
  NCV: Araki            peka           ‘Tyto alba, bam owl’
  NCV: Tangoa            beka          ‘Tyto alba, bam owl’
  NCal: Nemi             b''ek         ‘flying fox’
  NCal: Jawe             b'vek         ‘bat, flying fox’
  Mic: Kosraean         fak            ‘bat’
  Mic: Mokilese         p`'ek          ‘bat’
  Mic: Ponapean         pwek           ‘bat’
  Fij:  Way an           bekwa         ‘bat (generic)’
  Fij:  Bauan            beka          ‘fruit bat’
  Pn:   Niuean          peka           ‘flying fox, fruit bat’
  Pn:   Tongan          peka           ‘bat, flying fox’
  Pn:   Rennellese      peka           ‘flying fox: formerly important for teeth and food, and for the sport of snaring’
  Pn:     Samoan        pe?a           ‘flying fox’
  Pn:     Tikopia       peka           ‘fruit bat, both large and small’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      pe?a           ‘bat’
>

    A few Admiralties and North New Guinea languages reflect a complex form *mah-b'' eka.
The etymology of *mali- is uncertain but it is most likely a modification of POc *manuk ‘bird,
bat’.

236     Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

<
POc *mali-b weka ‘flying fox, large fruit bat’
  Adm:      Nyindrou       balimek        ‘large fruit bat’ (metathesis of two foot-initial consonants)
  Adm: Drehet     pelemik                 ‘bat/flying fox’
  NNG: Vehes       mebek                  ‘fruit bat’
  NNG: Mapos Buang malibək                ‘large fruit bat, flying fox’
cf. also:
   Adm:     Titan         pdlimet         ‘flying fox, fruit-eating bat’
>

    The next reconstruction is also plainly a compound of *mali- and * boiji ‘night’, reflecting
the fact that bats are nocturnal. In one of the Motu forms and in Mwotlap a different qualifier
has been substituted for the first morpheme, and in the Tarpia reflex that morpheme is
missing.

<
POc *mah-boiji ‘flying fox’
  SJ:       Tarpia boni                 ‘bat’ (Smits and Voorhoeve 1992:244)
  NNG:      Tami   malimboŋ
  NNG:      Wab    malboŋ
  NNG:      Bing   malbaŋ-boŋ           ‘flying fox (mid size)’
  NNG:      Bing   malboŋ               ‘flying fox, fruit bat’
  NNG: Manam       malaboŋ
  PT:  Suau (Daui) malibon
  PT:  Molima      niboi                (unexpected loss of first syllable)
  PT:  Motu        mariboi              ‘large fruit bat, flying fox’ (Oram n.d.) (for ^maiboi)
  PT:  Motu         (sisi)boi      ‘small bat’ (sisi ‘small’)
  PT:       Gabadi       (manu)bo?i     ‘flying fox’ (for Onaiboni, possibly a folk etymology: manu < *manuk ‘bird’)
  MM: Tiang              mələbiŋ
  MM: Nalik              məlbuŋ
  NOV: Mwotlap           ilb'`dŋ      (1) ‘a small dark bat’; (2) ‘Vanikoro swift’ (unexpected loss of initial nasal)
cf. the following, which are glossed’flying fox’ and appear to reflect *mali + *eba or *oba.
   Adm: Mussau          marieba       ‘flying fox ’ (-/'- for f-/-)
   PT:      Ouma        maiba
   PT       Balawaia    maioba
   PT:     Maopa       maopa
   PT:     Hula        maopa
>

    In many Oceanic languages small insectivorous bats (Microchiroptera) have a separate
name from fruit bats. It is uncertain whether this was also the case in POc. In parts of Polynesia
reflexes of *peka-peka are given both to a small bat and to a swift whose behaviour, form and
habitat resemble superficially that of insectivorous, cave-dwelling bats. The Fijian languages
have cognate reduplicated forms referring only to small cave bats. Reduplication is commonly
used to show diminutives in some Oceanic languages (see also vol.3, pp.50-51).

                                                        Mammals, reptiles, amphibians      237

<
PCP *beka-beka ‘small insectivorous, cave-dwelling bat’
  Fij:   Wayan        bek'a-bek'a ‘a small insectivorous cave-dwelling bat’
  Fij:   Bauan        beka-beka        ‘insect-eating bat’
PPn *peka-peka (i) ‘small bat’; (2) ‘white-rumped swiftlet’
  Pn:    Niuean       peka-peka        ‘bird, white-rumped swiftlet, nests in caves
  Pn:    Tongan       peke-peka        ‘swallow’
  Pn:    E Futunan peka-peka           ‘small bat’
  Pn:    E Uvean      peka-peka        ‘k.o. small swallow’
  Pn:    Rennellese   peka-peka        ‘glossy swiftlet’
  Pn:    Samoan       pe?a-pe?a        ‘white-rumped swiftlet’
  Pn:    Maori        peka-peka        ‘bat’
  Pn:    Hawaiian     (?d)pe?a-pe?a ‘bat’
>

   An unrelated Mwotlap term, il-h'dij fb''oŋ from POc *boi]i ‘night’) refers to the same
two creatures, a small dark bat and a Vanikoro swift, a bird with wholly dark plumage (A.
Frangois, pers. comm.), while Kwamera (SV) has kiri ‘flying fox’ and kiri-kapou ‘glossy
swiftlet’.


5.3 Introduced terrestrial mammals

5.3.1 Pigs (genus Sus, family Suidae)

Island Southeast Asia is the centre of genetic diversity of the genus Sus, containing six of
the 10 generally recognised species: S. verrucosus (the Javan warty pig), S. barbatus (the
bearded pig of Malaysia, Sumatra and Borneo with a subspecies in Palawan), S. celebensis
(the Sulawesi warty pig), S. cebifrons (the Visayan warty pig), S. philippensis (the Philippines
warty pig) and S. scrofa (the common wild pig, endemic to Europe, North Africa, parts of
Asia and parts of the Indo-Malaysian archipelago). No pig species is native to New Guinea
or any part of Oceania.

     Most pig species have never been domesticated. The most important exception is Sus
scrofa, which was domesticated in the Middle East and in China around 10,000 years ago and
subsequently introduced to many regions. A wild variety of this species, Sus scrofa vittatus,
the banded pig, inhabits Sundaland from the Malay Peninsula to Sumatra, Java and Bali.
It is also present east of Wallace’s Line on Sumbawa and Lombok, possibly due to human
transportation.

     Sus celebensis occurs domesticated only in Timor and Roti. Groves (1984) argues that its
natural range is Sulawesi and offshore islands, and that its presence on Timor, Roti, Flores,
Halmahera (and even more surprisingly, on Simalue, west of Sumatra) is the result of human
agency. A similar conclusion, based on genetic evidence, is drawn by Larson et al. (2007).
Groves (1984:3) suggests that the wild and domestic pigs of New Guinea are a cross between
the banded pig and the Sulawesi warty pig.

     Pigs, domesticated and wild, appear to have been part of the Austronesian world since
PAn times. A number of terms associated with pigs and pig husbandry can be reconstructed
for PAn and PMP. In his Austronesian Comparative Dictionary (1995), Blust writes that

238   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


|       Although PAn *beRek evidently meant ‘domesticated pig’ PAn *babuy referred to pigs
|       in general, with qualifications where needed.[4] In other words, the glosses of *babuy and
|       *beRek were not perfectly complementary, but partially overlapping. ... Reflexes of both
|       *babuy and *beRek are found in Formosan and WMP, but only *babuy is reflected in
|       CMP and only *beRek in Oceanic.

[4] PAn *babuy ‘pig (generic)'. PMP *babuy banua ‘domesticated pig'. PMP *babuy halas ‘wild pig’, PMP
 *babuy lebu ‘domesticated pig'. PAn *babity-an ‘pigpen, pigsty, piggery' (ACD).

The history of the introduction of pigs into Oceania has been a matter of debate. Pig bones
occur in early Lapita sites from the Bismarck Archipelago to the Reef Is. in the period
 3300-3100 BP. A recent genetic study supports the view that although Lapita pigs reached
Melanesia via Indonesia they ultimately stem from Vietnam or nearby parts of mainland
Southeast Asia, rather than from Taiwan (Larson et al. 2007), but domestic pig bones dated
to 4000 BP have been found in cultural deposits in the Philippines (Piper et al. 2009). Some
archaeologists argue that the wild pigs of New Guinea are feral descendants of Lapita pigs.
Others hold that pig teeth are present in New Guinea highland assemblages predating Lapita,
although it has proved difficult to securely date these finds.

    POc *boRok is continued in all the major subgroups of Near Oceania and in parts of
Remote Oceania as far east as western Fiji. However, no reflexes are found in New Caledonia
and the Loyalty Is., where pigs have been absent since initial settlement by Lapita peoples,
or in eastern Fiji and Polynesia.

<
PAn *beRek ‘domesticated pig’ (ACD)
POc *boRok ‘pig, Sus serofa'
  Adm: Seimat       pou
  Adm: Lou          puo
  Adm: Nyindrou      bou
  NNG: Takia         bor
  NNG: Manam         boro
  NNG: Yabem         bo?
  NNG: Mumeng        h'`'ok
  PT:   Tubetube     buluka
  PT:   Kilivila     bulukva
  PT:   Bwaidoga bulukva
  PT:   Gapapaiwa poro
  PT:   Wedau       poro
  MM: Bali           boroko
  MM: Tab ar         boro
  MM: Nakanai        bolo
  MM: Tolai          boro(i)
  MM: Simbo          boroyo
  SES: Gela          bolo
  SES: Tolo          bolo
PNCV *boe ‘pig, male pig’ (final -e unexpected)
  NCV: Mota        p``oe            ‘pig, male pig, barrow pig’
 NCV: Kiai         poe
  NCV: Raga              boe
  NCV: Nokuku            poe
  Fij: Way an            go
>

                                                     Mammals, reptiles, amphibians     239

    Reflexes of *boRok in many Solomons languages are irregular. Irregular loss of *R is
exhibited in this term in most Cristobal-Malaitan languages, e.g. Longgu bo, Sa’apd, Santa
Ana Mo, some Guadalcanal languages, e.g. Ghari bo, and many NW Solomonic languages,
e.g. Roviana boko. North Malaitan languages show unexpected s as the medial consonant, as
in Fataleka boso, suggesting borrowing from Santa Isabel languages, which typically show
the same replacement.

    POc *boRok is not retained in Polynesian languages, being replaced by PPn *puaka. This
appears to continue POc *b(o,u)kas(i), which has reflexes in PT, NCV and SV. Reflexes of
both *boRok and *b(o,u)kas(i) persist in PT and NCV. It is not clear whether there was a
meaning difference between the two terms.

<
POc *b(o,u)kas(i) ‘pig’
  PT:    Sudest        voyadi          ‘wild pig that dogs can’t kill’
  PT:    Dobu          bo?as(a)        ‘village pig’
PSOc *bukasi ‘pig (generic), and probably by default male pig, boar’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Mota            puyas           ‘to rear with food, tame by feeding
  NCV: Paamese          vuasi          ‘pig (generic)’
  NCV: Nguna            (na-)p'' okasi ‘meat, flesh’
  SV:    Lenakel       pukas           ‘Pig’
  SV:    Kwamera pukah                 ‘Pig’
  SV:    Anejom        pikaθ           ‘pig’
PPn *puaka ‘pig’
  Pn:    Tongan        puaka           ‘Pig’
  Pn:    Samoan        puaʔa           ‘pig’
  Pn:    Tikopia       puaka           ‘pig’ (archaic)
  Pn:    Hawaiian      puaʔa           ‘Pig’
The following are all Polynesian loans.
  PT:    Saliba        puaka
  PT:    Magori         uaka
  PT:    Yob a          uaʔa
  NCal: Nixumwak puaka
  NCal: Iaai            buaka
  Fij:   Bauan          vuaka
>

  Another term, *b‘ ’asa, may have referred specifically to sows. This term has reflexes in
NNG, PT, MM and SES.

<
POc *Masa ‘pig, possibly sow’
  NNG:    Bilibil     bas            ‘pig’
  PT:     Ouma        bura           ‘Pig’
  MM:     Patpatar    pes            ‘female pig’
  SES:      Gela           baha           ‘sow’
  SES:      Lau            g''ata         ‘sow’
  SES:      To’aba’ita     g‘ ata(kw ala) ‘sow that has had young more than once’ {kwala
                                          ‘bear young’)
   SES:     ’Are’are       ata            ‘sow’ (for ''``paia)
   SES:     Kwara’ae       gwat           ‘pig’ (Tryon & Hackman 1983: 185)
cf. also:
   SES:     Arosi          bwa-bwa          ‘female (only of pigs)’ (zero for f-/)
   SES:     Sa’a           pwa-pwa          ‘female of an animal; lay eggs’ (zero for f-/)
>


240    Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


In NCV there is a widespread cognate set pointing to PNCV *b wara-h' ara ‘female pig’.

<
PNCV *bw arabw ara ‘female pig’ (Clark 2009)
  NCV:      Uripiv         b‘er-[)"er        ‘pig (generic)’
  NCV:      Lonwolwol      ba-bar            ‘female pig, sow
  NCV:      Aore           mbara-mbara       ‘sow’
  NCV:      Naman          ba-bar            ‘pig, esp. sow’
  NCV:      Neve’ei        (ne-)bw ebar      ‘sow’
>


5.3.2 Dogs (Canis sp.)

Dogs were brought by humans to Island Southeast Asia, Oceania and Australia from mainland
SE Asia within the last few millennia. The pre-European dogs of Oceania and Australia did
not bark, but rather howled.

     PAn and PMP *asu ‘dog’ is reflected in many languages of Taiwan, the Philippines,
western Indonesia, the Lesser Sundas and much of the southern and central Moluccas, but to date
is unattested in any Eastern Malayo-Polynesian language. As others (Hudson 1989, Lynch
1991, Donohue 1995) have discovered, names for ‘dog’ are notoriously variable in Oceanic
languages. This variability is consonant with a hypothesis, first suggested by Andrew Sharp
(1956), that on small remote islands in Oceania the dog lost much of the economic value
it had in insular Southeast Asia, became a competitor for food, and was itself eaten to
extinction in many locations and then reacquired from areas where it had managed to survive.
Lynch (1991:427) suggests that the Polynesians reintroduced the dog to various parts of
Island Melanesia in their back-migrations from the Polynesian Triangle, with variants of
Polynesian terms for ‘dog’ appearing in Vanuatu, the Reefs and parts of the Solomons. Various
Micronesian languages also appear to have borrowed from Polynesia.

     It is unclear whether or not POc speakers had dogs. No dog remains have been found in
early Western Lapita sites in the Bismarck archipelago. The earliest dog remains associated
with the Oceanic dispersal are those found in late or post-Lapita assemblages in the Reef Is.,
dated to around 2600 BP (R. Green pers. comm.). No POc term for dog can be reconstructed
with any confidence. A number of languages of Bougainville reflect a term reconstructable
as *kasi. but we hesitate to associate this term with PAn *asu because the initial *k- is unex
plained.[5]

[5] Blust (ACD) does note Ifugao kahu ‘dog’ from the northern Philippines, and Tontemboan ka-asu ‘canine companion’
from northern Sulawesi, but both languages have corresponding asu tenns (Ifugao ahii ‘dog. hound’,
 Tontemboan asu ‘dog; also used of domesticated animals in general’). The k- initial terms are considered un related to the Oceanic ones.


                                                                  Mammals, reptiles, amphibians              241

<
Proto North Bougainville *kasi ‘dog’
  MM:      Halia (Selau) kas
  MM:      Taiof         kas
  MM:      Hahon         kas
  MM:      Tinputz       keh
  MM:      Teop          kahi
cf. also
   MM:     Solos              kus
   MM:     Petats             kus
   SES:    Longgu             ?usu
   SES:    Sa’a               ?usu
>

    Donohue (1995:226) has identified forms resembling *kapuna that are present in Western
Oceanic languages and in various languages of eastern Indonesia, both Austronesian and
non-Austronesian. The Austronesian languages include Sangir kapuna (Sangiric, WMP), Geser
kafuna (Seram, CMP) and Mor auna (WNG). He argues that ‘this (the presence of this term
in eastern Indonesia), and the patterned distribution of the reflexes of *kapuna in Oceania
point to an origin of the form in eastern Indonesia with spread to Oceania, and not the other
way round.’

<
PWOc *kapuna ‘dog’
  NNG:      Sissano (Arop) aun
  NNG:      Uvol           kaune
  NNG:      Kaiwa          uvun
  MM:       Notsi          kapuna
  MM:       Tab ar         kapune
>

    Compare also the following which point to a very similar form in PNNG *gavurr [6]

<
PNNG *gavun ‘dog’
  NNG       Tuam         gavun
  NNG       Malai        gavun
  NNG       Kilenge      (na)yaune
  NNG       Lukep (Pono) gaunu
  NNG       Gedaged      gaun
>

    The following series offers some support for reconstructing PWOc *ka(u,w)ak, but there
is probably onomatopoeic influence.

[6] Blust (2002:92) considers that the only serious candidate for a POc term for ‘dog’ is *gaun, which ‘is evidently
 onomatopoeic, and possibly a convergent innovation’. As reflexes of *gaun we assume he had in mind some
 of the forms assigned here to *kapuna, *gavun and possibly *kawak(a).

242    Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

<
PWOc *ka(u,w)ak ‘dog’
  NNG:      Kove         kawa, kauwa
  NNG:      Bariai       kaua
  PT:       Kilivila     kauk'`a
  PT:       Muyuw        awukw
  MM:       Bali         kanaka
  MM:       Bola (Harua) kaua
  MM:       Lavongai     kauek
cf. also:
   MM:      Torau        kau-kau
   MM:      Mono-Alu     ?au-?au
   MM:      Roviana      ka-kau(la)    ‘indigenous dog, gen. reddish brown. Always howls, never barks’
  SES:      Gela         kau
  SES:      Birao        kau
  SES:      Tolo         kau
  SES:      Lengo        kau
>

   The two reflexes in the following set are too close geographically to exclude borrowing,
possibly at post-POc dates.

<
PWOc (?) *paia ‘dog’
  NNG: Mengen (Poeng) paia
  MM: Nakanai         paia
cf. also:
   Adm:     Mussau          paua
   Adm:     Seimat          paua
   SES:     W G’canal       pai
   SES:     Ghari           pai
   SES:     Malango         pai
>

    PPn *kuli ‘dog’ is well-attested but has no secure non-Polynesian cognates. All apparent
cognates in languages of Melanesia and Micronesia are almost certainly borrowings from
Polynesian sources. A sample of such borrowed forms, all glossed ‘dog’, is listed below.
Although a term from Mota is included, Codrington and Palmer note in their 1896 dictionary
that there were no dogs on Banks Islands at first contact.

__pre__
    NCV:    Mota        kurut
    NCV:    Paamese     hul
    NCV:    Lewo        kuli
    NCV:    Raga        v'`iriu
    SV:     Anejom      kuri
    SV:     Lenakel     kuri
    Mic:    Kiribati    kiri
    Mic:    Marshallese kiriw
    Mic:    Ponapean    kiti

                                                      Mammals, reptiles, amphibians      243


5.4 Aquatic mammals

The aquatic mammals of tropical Oceania consist of various cetaceans (whales and dolphins)
and the dugong. In Oceanic languages these animals are often classified as kinds of fish (POc
*ikair, cf ch.8, §2).


5.4.1 Cetaceans

5.4.1.1 Whales

POc speakers probably occasionally sighted certain species of whales. Few surveys appear
to have been done of whale populations in Melanesia but sperm whales, Physeter macro-
cephalns, and a number of smaller whales, in particular pilot whales, Globicephala melaena,
and orcas or killer whales, Orcinns orca, have been reported in New Guinea waters. Pilot
whales are more visible, being highly gregarious and occurring in large schools. Large numbers
of pilot whales have been reported in Astrolabe Bay, while orcas have been sighted in
Kimbe Bay off the north coast of New Britain (website reportings, 2003). Whales were not
hunted by Oceanic communities in pre-contact times but when strandings occurred communities
made use of the meat and teeth.

    Reflexes of *rato ‘whale’ are well represented in Micronesian languages. Elsewhere
probable reflexes are known only in Nyindrou and Wuvulu in the Admiralties. Borrowing
cannot be ruled out.

<
POc (?) *rato ‘whale’
  Adm:    Nyindrou    rak
  Adm:    Wuvulu      xa?o
  Mic:    Kiribati    ato
  Mic:    Marshallese rac
  Mic:    Woleaian    zaso
  Mic:    Mokilese    roc            ‘whale, porpoise, any sea mammal’
  Mic:    Ponapean    rac
>

    There is a widespread tendency in Oceanic languages to refer to whales by terms that
otherwise describe the action of blowing something out or spraying or spurting, e.g. Teop kavuhu
‘to spray’, kavn-kavuhn ‘whale’. POc * puRa-puRas ‘whale’, which is attested in NNG, PT
and SES, is evidently an extension of * puRas ‘spray water from the mouth’. It has as
antecedents PAn * bnReS, PMP *bnRah ‘spray water from the mouth’ (ACD).

<
POc *puRa-puRas ‘whale’
  NNG:     Lukep (Pono) puru           (-u by regular assimilation)
  NNG:     Bing         fnr-fiir
  PT:      Molima        wula-wula
  PT:      Tawala        ula-ulasi
  PT:      Diodio        ula-ula       ‘dugong’
  PT:      Sudest        ura-urasi
  PT:      Misima        ula-ulas      ‘whale (generic)’
  SES:     Bugotu        vua-vula
cf. also:
   NCV: NE Ambae           vure(gi)
>

244   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                         Figure 5.7   Stenella longirostris, spinner dolphin

   PPn *taf(o, u)raqa ‘whale’ is well attested. Possible cognates occur in several non-Polynesian
languages of central and southern Vanuatu, but these forms are probably borrowings from the
Polynesian Outlier speech communities in these regions.

<
PPn *taf(o,u)raqa ‘whale’ (pollex)
   Pn:      Tongan       tofuaPa
   Pn:      Niuean       tafua
   Pn:      E Uvean      tafolaPa
   Pn:      Pukapukan    tawold
   Pn:      Rennellese   tahogaPa
   Pn:      Samoan       tafold
   Pn:      Tuvalu       tafold
   Pn:      K’marangi    tohold
   Pn:      Tikopia      taford         ‘cetacean, including whale, porpoise, dolphin’
   Pn:      W Futunan    tafora
   Pn:      Hawaiian     kohold
cf. also:
   NCV:     Namakir      taviraP
   NCV:     S Efate      tafra
   SV:      Sye          tovura
   SV:      Kwamera      tafra
   Fij:     Way an       tavuto         ‘generic for all large whales’
   Fij:     Bauan        tavuto         ‘sperm whale, whose teeth furnish the tabua''
>

                                                             Mammals, reptiles, amphibians          245


5.4.1.2 Dolphins (Delphinidae)

Several species of dolphins, including Tursiops truncatus, the bottlenose dolphin, Stenella
longirostris, the spinner dolphin and Grampus griseus, Risso’s dolphin, are found in Oceania
(Dawbin 1972:270-276). Wordlists and dictionaries of Oceanic languages give only generic
terms for ‘dolphin’. The synonym ‘porpoise’ is commonly used in glosses.

    POc *ku[r,R]iap, with final *-ap, is indicated by reflexes in North New Guinea, Papuan
Tip and Meso-Melanesian languages and by kulef ‘dolphin’ in an external witness, Sawei, an
Eastern Malayo-Polynesian language of South Halmahera. Southeast Solomonic and Vanuatu
reflexes point to PEOc *giRio(p). Admiralties and SES languages reflect medial *-r-, while
reflexes from NCV indicate *-R-. Other reflexes are compatible with either.

<
PEMP *kuriap ‘dolphin’
POc *ku(r,R)iap ‘dolphin’
  Adm: Nyindrou           11777'
  Adm: Lou                11777'
  Adm: Lenkau             uhi
  Adm: Loniu              wi?r
  NNG Mangap              kuri
  NNG Lukep (Pono)        kuri
  NNG Mengen (Maenge) kule                           ‘dugong’
  NNG Uvol                ulia                       ‘dugong’
  NNG  Numbami            kuliawa
  NNG Mengen (Poeng) kulia
  PT:  Dobu               kuli-kuliya
  PT:  Tawala             uli-uliyawa
  PT:  Kilivila           k''alivia
  MM: Tolai               kuriap
  MM: Ramoaaina           kuriap
  MM: Siar                ku-kuriap
  SES: Bugotu             kirio
  SES: Sa’a               ?irio
  SES: Kwaio              kilio
  SES: Lau                kirio
  SES: Bauro              kirio
  SES: Arosi              girio
PNCV *guRio ‘dolphin (generic)’ [7]
  NCV:     Hiw                    k''hi              ‘dolphin
  NCV:     Lo-Toga                k''uriz            ‘dolphin
  NCV:     Mota                   kio                ‘whale’
  NCV:     NE Ambae               kio                ‘dolphin
  NCV:     Raga                   gio                ‘dolphin
  NCV:     Lewo                   (le)kio-kio        ‘dolphin
 NCV: Shark Bay                     Aw                 ‘dolphin’
 NCV: Namakir                 qio-qi                   ‘dolphin’
 NCV: Nguna                   giio                     ‘dolphin’
PMic *kua ‘dolphin’[8]
   Mic: Kiribati                    te-kua             ‘dolphin, whale’
   Mic: Marshallese           ke                       ‘dolphin’
   Mic: Woleaian              xuw                      ‘dolphin’
   Mic: Puluwatese                  kuw                ‘porpoises, believed to be whales when fully grown’
cf. also:
   SV:    Sye                 (so)furwav(oh)           ‘dolphin’[9]
   SV:    Ura                 (so)furwav(os)           ‘dolphin’
   Fij:   Bauan               gio                      ‘shark (generic)’
   Fij:   Kadavu              gio                      ‘shark (generic)’
>

[7] Clark (2009) reconstructs PNCV *gu(R)io, but two Torres languages, Hiw and Lo-Toga. support inclusion of
 *-/(‘-(Francois In press).

[8] PMic *kua is likely to be a continuation of POc *kuRiap. *R is usually lost in Micronesian languages. Loss
 of *R would have yielded *kuia, and the reduction to *kuya and then *kua would follow a natural path.

[9] John Lynch (pers. comm.) notes that both the SV forms appear to continue *kuriap, albeit with an additional
 initial and final syllable.

246    Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                                  Figure 5.8    Dugong dugon, dugong


5.4.2 Dugong (Dugong dugori)

Dugongs are large aquatic mammals, with paddle-like forelimbs, no hindlimbs and a fluked,
dolphin-like tail. They graze on beds of seagrass and are found in shallow coastal waters
throughout the Indo-Malaysian archipelago, New Guinea and nearby islands including the
Admiralties and Bismarcks, and in the Solomons, Vanuatu and New Caledonia, but not in
Fiji or places further east (Chambers et al. 1989:1). Dugongs are prized by Pacific Islanders
for their flesh, oil and small ivory tusks. Spears and nets are the main methods of capture. In
the Trobriands and Manus very strong nets made from pandanus leaves are used while in the
Siassi islands nets are made from the bark of a tree (Pyne 1972:276).

    There is a well attested PMP etymon, *duyuq ‘dugong’. While most Oceanic reflexes
point to *rui, evidence that POc continued PMP *duyuy as */7/17//; survives in the Tiang
(New Ireland) reflex, which preserves the final velar nasal, and in Marovo (New Georgia),
which retains a nasal, though this is m for expected *-#.

                                                       Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       247

<
PMP *duymj ‘dugong’ (Blust 2002)
POc *ruyuij ‘dugong’
  Adm:    Pak           hu
  Adm:    Bipi          xu
  Adm:    Nauna         tuy
  Adm:    Drehet        kxu
  NNG     Kove          lui
  NNG     Bariai        rui
  NNG     Gitua         rui
  NNG     Bing          rui
  NNG     Malasanga     rui-rui
  NNG     Sio           (gu)rui
  NNG     Lamogai       du
  NNG     Takia         rui
  PT:     Iduna         lui
  PT:     Motu          rui
  PT:     Magori        rui
  MM:     Bulu          rui
  MM:     Tiang         iuŋ
  MM:     Marovo        rumu
cf. also:
   NNG Kai ep           kuoi
   NNG Kairiru          qui
   MM: Babatana        jui
>

    No reflexes of POc *ruyu/j have been found in Eastern Oceanic languages. For Proto
Southeast Solomonic, *paipu ‘dugong’ can be reconstructed. For Proto North Central Vanu
atu *boe-ni-tasi ‘dolphin’ (literally ‘pig of the sea’) has been reconstructed by Clark (2009).


5.5 Reptiles

5.5.1 Marine turtles (Chelonidae)

At least four large species of marine turtles are common to the Oceanic region: the hawksbill
(Eretmochelys imbricatd), with its beak-like mouth, the green turtle (Chelonia mydas), with
brown or black carapace, the loggerhead (Caretta caretia), with its very large head, and the
leatherback (Dermochelys coriacea), distinguished from other turtles by its lack of a bony
shell, its carapace being covered by thick leathery skin. The much smaller olive fidley (Lep-
idochelys olivacea) spends almost all of its time in the open ocean and is less familiar to
Pacific Islanders. Turtles are prized by Oceanic communities for their flesh and fat and (in
the case of the hawksbill) for their shells.

    As well as having a generic for ‘turtle’, a number of languages have distinct names for all
four species and some distinguish male and female turtles, as the following examples show.

248   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                       Figure 5.9   Chelonia mydas, green turtle

__pre__
NNG: Lukep (Pono) pon                    ‘turtle’
                  olol                   ‘hawksbill turtle’
                  padodo                 ‘green turtle’
                  kawadui                ‘leatherback turtle’
 MM: Kia             tege                ‘turtle generic’
                     tege ŋapo           ‘hawksbill turtle’
                     tege mogaha         ‘green turtle’
                     tege babaru         ‘leatherback turtle’
                     tege kakapodoko     ‘loggerhead turtle’
 MM: Marovo          vonu                ‘turtle (generic)’
                     vonu pede           ‘hawksbill turtle’
                     vonu ihana          ‘green turtle’
                     kariatolu           ‘leatherback turtle’
                     kakapodoko          ‘loggerhead turtle’
 SES: Sa’a           honu                ‘turtle (generic)’
                     honu hapa           ‘hawksbill turtle’ (hapa ‘turtleshell’)
                     honu iʔe            ‘green turtle’ (iʔe ‘fish’)
                     kule oŋo            ‘leatherback turtle’ (kule ‘shore’, oŋo ‘mangrove’)
 SES: Arosi          honu                ‘turtle (generic)’
                     honu hapa           ‘hawksbill turtle’
                     honu hau            ‘soft-shelled turtle’?
                     honu marabona       ‘large sp. of turtle’
                     honu orobiu         ‘leatherback turtle’
                        honu ?e?ero       ‘female turtle’
                        honu maraw        ‘male turtle’
 Mic: Chuukese          win               ‘generic for sea turtles’
                        maw               ‘hawksbill turtle’
                        winiccen          ‘hawksbill turtle’
                        winim'`en         ‘green turtle’
                        woŋ               ‘leatherback turtle’
 Fij:   Wayan           ika-bula          ‘turtle generic’
                        taku              ‘hawksbill turtle’
                        ika-du            ‘green turtle’
                        tosiviwalu        ‘leatherback turtle’
                        tu-vonu           ‘loggerhead turtle’
                        bala              ‘male turtle’
 Pn:    Tikopia        fonu               ‘turtle (generic)’
                       fonu koroa         ‘hawksbill turtle’ koroa ‘goods, treasure’)
                       fonu tea           ‘green turtle’ (tea ‘white, light-coloured’)


                                                     Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       249


Three terms for turtle taxa are attributable to POc. POc *ponu, continuing a PAn etymon,
was clearly the generic term, and is very well supported.

<
PAn *pehu ‘turtle’ (ACD)
POc *pohu ‘turtle (generic)’
  Adm:   Mussau        onu
  Adm:   Wuvulu       fonu            ‘large hard-shelled sea turtle
  Adm:   Aua          fonu            ‘large hard-shelled sea turtle
  Adm:   Lou          puon            ‘sea turtle’
  Adm:   Loniu        poh             ‘sea turtle’
  NNG:   Manam        poŋ             ‘turtle’
  NNG:   Lukep (Pono) pon             ‘turtle, l)ermoehehdae'
  NNG:   Gedaged      fan             ‘leatherback turtle’
  NNG:   Kove         ponu            ‘turtle’
  PT:    Tubetube      wonu           ‘turtle’
  PT:    Kilivila      wonu           ‘turtle’
  MM:    Tigak         un             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Kara (East)  fun             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Nalik        fun             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Tab ar        vo             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Lihir         on             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Sursurunga    hun            ‘turtle’
  MM:    Tangga       fan             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Patpatar      hun            ‘turtle’
  MM:    Nehan         won            ‘turtle’
  MM:    Marovo        vonu           ‘turtle (generic)’
  MM:    Tai of       fan             ‘turtle’
  MM:    Banoni        yom            ‘turtle’
  MM:     Babatana        vunii         ‘turtle’
  MM:     Lungga          vonu          ‘turtle’
  SES:    Bugotu          vonu          ‘turtle’
  SES:    Gela            vonu          ‘turtle (generic) for hawksbill and green turtle’
                                        (Foale)
  SES:    Lau            fonu           ‘turtle’
  SES:    Kwaio          fonu           ‘turtle’
  SES:    Sa’a            honu          ‘turtle’
  SES:    Arosi           honu          ‘turtle’
  NCal:   Jawe           p''en          ‘turtle’
  NCal:   Nemi           p''en          ‘turtle’
  NCal:   Xaracuu        p‘e            ‘turtle’
  Mic:    Kiribati        on            ‘turtle’
  Mic:    Chuukese        woij          ‘leatherback turtle’
  Mic:    Carolinian      wðŋ           ‘turtle’
  Mic:    Woleaian        woij          ‘turtle’
  Mic:    Ulithian        wðl           ‘turtle’
  Fij:    Bauan           vonu          ‘turtle (generic)’
  Fij:    Wayan           (tu)vonu      ‘loggerhead turtle’
  Pn:     Tongan         fonu           ‘turtle (generic)’
  Pn:     Niuean         fonu           ‘turtle’
  Pn:     Rennellese      honu          ‘green turtle’
  Pn:     E Futunan      fonu           ‘turtle’
  Pn:     Tikopia        fonu           ‘turtle (generic)’
  Pn:     Hawaiian        honu          ‘turtle’
>

250   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

    The shell of the hawksbill turtle is prized, being used to make ornaments like earrings
and bracelets as well as bonito hook tips and cutting tools. In Tonga and E. Futuna this turtle
is called fonu koloa, in Tikopia fonu koroa, the term for ‘property, treasure’ being used to
identify the turtle with valuable shell.

    A term for the hawksbill turtle, *keRaiy is well supported. In Oceanic languages, the
beaked profile of the hawksbill turtle is identified with that of a parrot rather than a hawk.
In Lou (Admiralties), the same term refers to both the turtle and a red parrot. In Maori the
term survives only for the parrot. (For discussion of the atypical /e/ vowel, see Blust 1983-
84:8-10). All the Admiralties terms have problematic reflexes of *R and all show vowel
metathesis.

<
PCEMP *keRaŋ ’hawksbill turtle’ (Blust 2002)
POc *keRaij ‘hawksbill turtle, Eretmochelys imbricata’’
  Adm:    Lou           kareŋ         ‘hawksbill turtle; red parrot’
  Adm:    Lenkau        kareŋ         ‘hawksbill turtle’
  Adm:    Pak           kareŋ         ‘hawksbill turtle’
  Adm:    Titan         kareŋ         ‘parrot turtle’
  Adm:    Andra         kareŋ         ‘hawksbill turtle’
  PT:     Motu          era           ‘turtle, shell turtle’
  Mic:    Kiribati      (taba)kea     ‘parrotbill turtle, brilliant shell’
  Mic: Ponapean      (sapwa)ke               ‘hawksbill turtle’
PPn *
    kea ‘hawksbill turtle’
  Pn:   Pukapukan kea                        ‘k.o. turtle’
  Pn:   Nanumea      kea                     ‘a small turtle’
  Pn:   Rennellese kea                       ‘qualifier for small turtles’
  Pn:   Maori        kea                     ‘parrot sp.’
  Pn:   Hawaiian     ?ea                     ‘hawksbill turtle; also term for its shell
>


                                                                  Mammals, reptiles, amphibians             251


   The green turtle is the most abundant and widespread turtle of tropical Oceania and the
one most valued for food. It may weigh up to 200 kg, with carapace length around 150 cm.
A POc term is reconstructable but reflexes have been found only in a few North New Guinea
and Micronesian languages.

<
POc *manak(V) ‘green turtle, Chelonia mydas’
  NNG:      Takia           manak            ‘green turtle’
  NNG:      Gedaged         manak            ‘green turtle’
  Mic:      Carolinian      mwel             ‘turtle with thin shell, good for eating’
  Mic:      Chuukese        (wini)m'' bn     ‘green turtle, eaten’
  Mic:      Puluwatese      mwol             ‘green turtle, commonly caught and distributed to entire island’
>

    The leatherback turtle, Dermochelys coriacea, is the largest turtle in the world with an
average carapace length of two metres and average weight of around 360 kg. It nests widely
along the north coast of New Guinea, Manus, New Britain and Bougainville, but always in
very low densities. It is generally not favoured for eating because of its very oily and smelly
meat (Mueller 1985:195). No widespread cognate set has been found.


5.5.2 Crocodiles (Crocodylidae)

The archaeologist Simon Best has published a comprehensive review of the distribution of
crocodiles in the Pacific (Best 1988). Two species occur in Melanesia: Crocodylus porosus,
the estuarine or saltwater crocodile and C. novaeguineae. The latter is found in freshwater
swamps and lakes in lowland New Guinea. The normal (breeding) range of C. porosus extends
from south-west India to the Solomons, and from the Tropic of Capricorn in Australia
to the Philippines. The easternmost limit for breeding populations is the Santa Cruz group.
Individual animals are capable of very long journeys, over 1000 km, and have been reliably
recorded in northern Vanuatu, Fiji and Kiribati, but these occasional occurrences do not
represent an extension of their breeding range.

[10] The only reflex in a Formosan language is Puyuma buaya ‘shark’. Blust (ACD) writes that there are at least
three pieces of evidence that *buqaya meant ‘crocodile’ not only in PMP, but also in PAn, in spite of the fact
that the Formosan Puyuma reflex is glossed ‘shark’. These are (1) that a general term for shark, PAn *qiSu, is
already available, (2) outside Taiwan reflexes of * buqaya invariably carry the primary sense ‘crocodile’, (3)
crocodiles were earlier present in at least the southern portion of Taiwan, but disappeared before the historical
period. Under these circumstances the application of the name of a dangerous reptilian aquatic predator to its
functional equivalent in the world of fishes is not surprising.

252   Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                    Figure 5.10   Crocodylus porosus, saltwater crocodile

    POc *puqaya ‘crocodile’ continues PMP *buqaya and, probably, PAn *buqaya w Re
flexes of *puqaya are found widely in languages of the Bismarck Archipelago, New Guinea
and the main Solomons group, i.e. where crocodiles are common, and are also present in a
few languages of Vanuatu. No reflexes have been recorded in Micronesian or Central Pacific
languages.

<
PAn *buqaya ‘crocodile’ (ACD)
POc *puqaya ‘crocodile’
  Adm:   Mussau     ua
  Adm:   Nyindrou   buwa
  Adm:   Lou       pua
  Adm:   Aua       fuara
  NNG:   Kilenge    na-pua
  NNG:   Malasanga pua
  NNG:   Roinji    puyaia
  NNG:   Adzera   fugai
  PT:    Arifama    uaya
  PT:    Dobu       uaya
  PT:    Hula       vuya
  PT:    Motu       huala
  MM:    Vitu       vuya
  MM:    Lavongai   uaia
  MM:    Patpatar   huaia
  MM:    Petats     hua
  MM:    Marovo     vua
  SES:   Gela       vua
  SES:   Lau       fuasa
  SES:   ’Are’are   huara
  SES:   Sa’a       huasa
  NCV:   Mota       via
  NCV:   Mwotlap    ne-ve
>

                                                           Mammals, reptiles, amphibians   253

                             Figure 5.11   Varanus indicus, water monitor

5.5.3 Lizards

5.5.3.1 Introduction

Lizards are discussed here under the following headings: monitors (§5.3.2), iguanas (§5.3.3),
geckos (§5.3.4), skinks (§5.3.5) and indeterminate (§5.3.6), but there is frequent transfer of
name within cognate sets from one family to another. Monitor lizards and iguanas belong
to different families, although these names are used interchangeably in some wordlists. The
Australian goanna bel ongs with the monitor lizards of Indonesia, New Guinea and the western
Pacific. The iguana is of South American origin, and is found in the Pacific today only in the
Galapagos Islands, Fiji, Tonga, Wallis and Futuna. In many sources the gloss ‘iguana’ is
incorrectly applied to monitor lizards.

5.5.3.2 Monitors (Varanidae)

Nearly a score of different species of monitors are to be found in the Indo-Pacific region. The
best known, because of its great size, is the komodo monitor, a species confined to the Lesser
Sundas. The most widespread species in Oceania is Varanus indicus, a water monitor, valued
as an important food source. Its range extends from Sulawesi through to the Aru and Kei
Islands, the New Guinea land mass including the Schouten Islands, the D’Entrecasteaux and
Trobriand Islands, New Britain, New Ireland, the Admiralties, the Solomons and northwards
to the Carolines, Marianas and Marshalls (Loveridge 1946:60-64, de Rooij 1970:149). Water
monitors can grow to over two metres in length, with the tail about one and a half times as
long as the head and body. They are excellent swimmers, and have been seen swimming far
out to sea.

254 Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

    De Rooij lists five other Varanus species in New Guinea (V. salvadorii, V. kalabeck, V.
gouldi, V prasinus, V kordensis), but none are found outside the main island except for the
last-named which is found also on Aru. The fact that Arosi has two terms for monitor lizard
(incorrectly glossed ‘iguana’ by Fox), haha, ‘the larger’, ?ara?u, ‘the smaller’, may indicate
sub-species or a distinction based on sex or age. The skin of the larger monitors is used in
New Guinea to cover the end of hourglass drums. The POc term *ka(rj)(i,u)pa(s) probably
referred to large monitor lizards.

<
POc *ka(rf)(i,u)pa(s) ‘large monitor lizard, Varanus indicus and possibly other species’
  PT:    Muyuw          kalevas       ‘tree goanna, big lizard’
  PT:    Motu           ariha         ‘large lizard, iguana’ (= monitor) (r for *1 unexpected)
  SES:    Tolo          kolahe        ‘k.o. lizard’ (vowel metathesis)
  SES:    Lau           kurafe        ‘k.o. large lizard with smooth shining body’ (vowel metathesis)
PMic *kalufa ‘monitor lizard’
   Mic: Chuukese      konuf           ‘ Varanus indicus, monitor lizard’
   Mic: Mortlockese kaluf             ‘lizard’
   Mic: Puluwatese koluf              ‘giant lizard’
   Mic: Satawalese kaluf              ‘lizard’
   Mic: Carolinian xaluf              ‘black and green forest lizard: gecko
   Mic: Woleaian      xarufa          ‘k.o. big lizard’
cf. also:
   SES: To’aba’ita    gwalu(aʔa)      ‘green-blooded skink, Prasinohaemc
>

   There is a second, more weakly supported POc reconstruction, * wak(i,e) ‘k.o. lizard,
possibly monitor lizard’. It may be a contraction of PMP *bayawak ‘monitor lizard’ (Blust
2002).

<
POc *wak(i,e) ‘k.o. lizard, possibly a monitor’
  Adm: Lou             wak            ‘monitor lizard, Varanus sp.’
  PT:  Minaveha        wake(neta)     ‘lizard, rough-skinned’
  PT:  Dobu            waki-waki      ‘small gecko’
  PT:  Dobu           waki(balu)     ‘large gecko’
  SES:    ’Are’are     we?e           ‘k.o. big lizard that eats the inside of the nari nut’
>

   Reflexes of the next reconstruction, POc *(k,g)uma, form a compound in many PT languages with
reflexes of POc *ka(r,R)ak ‘creep, crawl’.

<
POc *(k,g)uma ‘monitor lizard’
PPT *(k,g)uma-kara ‘monitor lizard’
  PT:    Ubir        umar           ‘lizard, general term’
  PT:    Gapapaiwa kuma-kara ‘lizard (monitor type?); the skin of this lizard is used for drum heads’
  PT:    Saliba      kuma-kala      ‘k.o. lizard’
  PT:    Minaveha    kuma-kana ‘lizard which lives near ocean’
  PT:    Minaveha    um-ana         ‘larger lizards, speckled or striped, with smooth skin’
  PT:      Dobu             goma-?ara     ‘monitor lizard’
  PT:      Wedau            umara         ‘k.o. lizard’
  PT:      Tawala           umwala        ‘iguana, large black lizard’
  PT:      Iduna            uma-?ala      ‘goanna; goanna skin of drum’
  PT:      Galea            guma-?ala     ‘monitor lizard’
  PT:      Molima           goma-?ala     ‘monitor lizard’
  MM:      Tolai            gom           ‘k.o. small lizard’
  Mic:     Woleaian         xum'a(sere)   ‘k.o. small lizard’ (sere ‘gruel’)
>

                                                            Mammals, reptiles, amphibians     255

<
PWOc *paRia ‘k.o. big lizard’
  NNG      Manam        paria               ‘k.o. big lizard’
  NNG      Bariai       paria               ‘lizard (generic)’
  NNG      Kove         pahia               ‘monitor lizard’
  NNG      Sengseng     a-pahiya            ‘monitor lizard’
  NNG      Lukep (Pono) pari                ‘large ground lizard’
  NNG      Gedaged      paliu               ‘k.o. lizard, edible, skin used as drum head. Gets to be seven feet long’
  PT:      Motu              aria           ‘lizard (generic); monitor lizard’ (for Sharia)
  MM:      Roviana           vari(lazu)     ‘k.o. lizard’
cf. also:
   MM: Nakanai                vareki        ‘monitor lizard, skin used for drum-head’
>

    There is a well supported Proto Admiralties reconstruction for monitor lizard.

<
PAdm *watiRi ‘monitor lizard, Varanus spp.’
  Adm:     Wuvulu           wa?i
  Adm:     Seimat           wat
  Adm:     Penchai          wati
  Adm:     Nali             wariy
  Adm:     Lele             watiy
  Adm:     Titan            wati
  Adm:     Loniu            wati
  Adm:     Bipi             wati
>


5.5.3.3 Iguanas (Iguanidae)

True iguanas, in contrast to monitor lizards, would not have been known to speakers of POc.
Iguanas (Brachylophus spp.) are present in the Oceanic region only in Fiji, Tonga, Wallis
and Futuna. They are of South American origin and probably arrived in the central Pacific
on floating vegetation. They are diurnal and strongly arboreal in behaviour. A Proto Central
Pacific name for ‘iguana’, * vokai, is reconstructable from cognates in Fijian and Polynesian
languages. No non-CP cognates have been recorded. In Rennellese the reflex of *vokai
is applied to monitor lizards. The Tongan term identified in the dictionary as ‘chameleon’
probably refers to a lizard with chameleon-like ability to change colour; true chameleons are
natives of Africa. Paddy Ryan reports that Brachylophus vitiensis, the crested iguana, has the
ability to change colour when frightened or angry and will turn a very dark green, almost
black, within five minutes (Ryan 1988:106).

256      Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                     Figure 5.12     Hemidactylus frenatus, common house gecko

<
PCP *vokai ‘k.o. lizard’
  Fij:      Bauan           vokai         ‘banded iguana (Brachylophusfascialns) and crested iguana (B. vitiensis)
   Fij:     Wayan       vokai             ‘crested iguana’
   Pn:      Tongan     fokai              ‘chameleon’
   Pn:      Rennellese hokai              ‘general name for monitor lizards, Varanus indieus'
cf. also:
   NCV:     Tamambo         vohare        ‘k.o. lizard’
>


5.5.3.4 Geckos (Gekkonidae)

Geckos are widely distributed across mainland Southeast Asia, Indonesia and the tropical
Pacific. They are one of the few reptiles with voices; they make small chirruping noises.
They are mostly nocturnal, and many species frequent buildings, although others are forest
dwellers. Most are less than 15cm long, and, in common with skinks, have the ability to
discard their tails when threatened. They are generally welcomed by households, both for
their efforts in keeping down moths, mosquitos, cockroaches and other household pests, and
because they are widely regarded as good omens (Loveridge 1946:73).

    A number of Western Malayo-Polynesian terms for gecko are onomatopoeic, typically
reflexes of PMP *tektek. Although there are numerous gecko species throughout the Oceanic
region, only one term which might be considered a reflex of PMP * tektek has been noted.

<
PMP *tektek ‘gecko, house lizard (onom.)’ (doublet *cekcek) (ACD)
POc *tok ‘gecko’
  NNG: Hote                 (kamu)tok     ‘small gecko, found on the wall’
>

                                                        Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       257


    We have reconstructed POc *bili ‘k.o. lizard’, which may be an irregular reflex of a PAn
term, * bulilik ‘lizard sp.’ (Blust 2002), but on present evidence the connection is uncertain.
Its reflexes in Polynesian languages carry two meanings, ‘gecko’ (or sometimes ‘lizard
(generic)’) and ‘adhere to’, pointing to a lizard name that reflects its character.

    Some of the Polynesian reflexes may be compounded with the generic term for lizard,
PPn * moko, from POc *mo(g,k)o ‘k.o. snake’ (see §5.4.1).

<
POc *bili ‘k.o. lizard’
   MM: Tolai           bil-bil      ‘k.o. lizard’
PPn *pili ‘gecko; adhere to’ (pollex)
   Pn:    Tongan      pili          ‘k.o. bluish lizard’
   Pn:    E Futunan pili(moko)      ‘gecko’
   Pn:    Pukapukan (ŋd)pili        ‘gecko’
   Pn:    Samoan      pili          ‘lizard’
   Pn:    Takuu        (moko)pili   ‘small house lizard’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Tikopia      (moko)pili   ‘gecko’ (for ^piri)
>


5.5.3.5 Skinks (Scincidae)

Most skinks are slim lizards capable of moving at high speed, although the family includes
the more heavily built blue-tongue lizards. Skinks usually emerge during the day to feed and
bask in the sun. The New Guinea blue-tongue skink, Tiliqua gigas, is widely distributed across
eastern Indonesia, the New Guinea mainland, the Admiralty islands and Bismarck Archipelago
(http://www.anapsid.org/bluetong.html). Various Emoia species are widely distributed
through New Guinea and the Pacific. Contemporary languages often distinguish a number of
skink taxa but no POc reconstructions that refer specifically to skinks are supported. However,
John Lynch (pers. comm.) has proposed a reconstruction for Proto Southern Oceanic,
based on cognates in NCV and New Caledonia, and there is evidence for a second term attributable
to Proto Eastern Oceanic.

<
PSOc *gala ‘green lizard, Emoia sp.’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV:      Mota             kala           ‘small blue lizard’
  NCV:      Dorig            kal            ‘green lizard’
  NCV:      Raga             yala           ‘lizard, probably green skink, Emoia sanfordf
  NCV:      Tamambo          kala           ‘small green lizard, about 30 cm long, generally reviled.’
  NCV: NE Ambae              kala           ‘shiny green lizard w. long tail, grows to about 20cm, lives on coconut palms’
  NCV: Lonwolwol       gal                  ‘green lizard’
  NCV: Paamese (South) a-kal                ‘green lizard, Emoia sanfordV
  NCal: Nemi           gena                 ‘lizard (generic)’
>


258    Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

                                       Figure 5.13   Skink

    The presence of *kali in the following reconstruction raises the question as to whether this
is an echo of the old qali-/kali- prefix that in pre-Oceanic times evidently meant something
like ‘Warning. Take care!’ (See ch. 7 for detailed discussion.) Although the evidence is that
the morpheme was no longer productive in Oceanic languages, an association of danger with a
kind of iridescent lizard persists, at least in Tamambo (NCV) and Tikopia (Pn). Jauncey (pers.
comm.) notes that in Tamambo they are generally reviled, people shuddering at the sight of
them. Firth (1967:233) observes that Tikopia atua, which applies primarily to a supernatural
entity, is extended as a category name to any natural species which should not be eaten.
Among the latter he includes iridescent lizards.

<
PEOc *kalis(i,u) ‘k.o. skink’
  SES: Owa              ga-garisu     ‘a brown skink’
PPn *kalisi ‘skink, k.o. lizard’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan         kalihe-lihe ‘k.o. lizard’
  Pn:    Rennellese kagisi             ‘skink (Emoia cyanuray
  Pn:    Nanumea        kalihi         ‘skink’
  Pn:    K’marangi galiha              ‘skink’
  Pn:    Tikopia        kali-lisi      ‘green lizard, small, iridescent’
>


5.5.3.6 Indeterminate kinds of lizards

There is a weakly supported reconstruction based on an imperfect agreement between Southeast Solomonic languages and Tolai.

<
POc *knk(o,u) ‘k.o. lizard’
  MM:       Tolai            kukii     ‘lizard (generic) name’ (kuku alira ‘small lizard w bronze tail’ (also ‘green’)
   SES:     ’Are’are         ?u?o      ‘small lizard, green and gold’
   SES:     Sa’a             ll?O      ‘house lizard, green and gold; first element in several lizard names’
>

   A second weakly supported reconstruction rests on putative cognates in Mussau, Kokota
and N Tanna.

                                                       Mammals, reptiles, amphibians     259

<
POc *kapoRu ‘k.o. lizard’
   Adm:        Mussau       kapou         ‘monitor lizard, Varanus sp.’
   MM:         Kokota       kopro         ‘gecko’
   SV:         N Tanna      kap'`er       ‘lizard’ (-r for ^0) (Tryon 1995)
  cf. also:
   SHWNG:      Serui-Laut   kafei         ‘house lizard’ (Smits 1992:239)
   PT:         Molima       kekepa        ‘green tree skink’
   MM:         Nakanai      kavega        ‘lizard’
   MM:         Tolai        keveu         ‘k.o. iguana’ (monitor)
>


5.5.4 Snakes (sub-order Serpentes)

5.5.4.1 Land snakes

Around 100 species of land snakes occur in New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago and the
Solomon Islands. They include pythons and boas (family Boidae), both of which constrict
their prey, and a range of tree snakes and ground-dwelling snakes, some of which are highly
venomous. The best known include the Papuan taipan, Oxyuranus scutellatus, the Papuan
black snake, Pseudechispapuanus, and the death adder, Acanthopis antarcticus.

    Only two species of snake have been reported for Vanuatu: the Flowerpot Snake, Typhlops
braminus of Efate and the Pacific Boa, Candoia bibroni, also with restricted distribution
(Medway and Marshall, quoted in Walsh et al. 2000:248). Fiji has two terrestrial snakes, the
Pacific boa and the rare Ogmodon vitianiis, the latter found only in Fiji (Ryan 1988:111-114,
Morrison 2003:90). In Polynesia land snakes are found only in Samoa, while the only land
snake reported for Micronesia is the miniature blind snake found on Chuuk (Davis 1999:188).
For PMP */?zpo> ’’snake’ only a single Oceanic reflex has been located.

<
PMP *nipay ‘snake’ (ACD)
POc *nipe ‘snake’
  MM: Mono-Alu           nihe         ‘snake’
>

   POc *m‘ata is the most widely reflected generic for ‘snake’ in Oceanic languages. It has
no known non-Oceanic cognates, raising the possibility that this term entered Proto Oceanic
from a non-Austronesian source.

<
POc *m‘ata ‘snake (generic)’ (Ross 1988)
  Adm:     Wuvulu        waʔa
  Adm:     Aua           waʔa
  Adm:     Loniu         mwat
  Adm:     Nauna         mwat
  Adm:     Bipi          mwak
  SJ:      Ormu          mata-mata
  SJ:      Sobei         matu
  NNG:     Yabem         moa?
  NNG:     Manam         moata
  NNG: Gedaged         mot           ‘collective term for snakes and certain kinds of worms’
  NNG:     Kove        mota
  NNG:     Malasanga   mota
  NNG:     S Watut     rrivar
  PT:      Are         mota
  PT:      Tawala      mota
  PT:      Molima      mwata
  PT:      Tubetube    mwata
  PT:      Sudest      mwata
  MM.      Bola        mata
  MM:      Bali        (gu)mata
  MM:      Tigak       mwata
  SES:     Bugotu      umata
  SES:     Gela        umata
  SES:     Longgu      mwa
  SES:     Lau         wa
  SES:     Kwaio       wd            ‘snake; various kinds of worms; other snake-like creatures’
  SES:     Sa’a        mwa
  SES:     Arosi       mwa
  NCV:     Mota        mwata
  NCV:     Mwotlap     na-m''al
  NCV:     S Efate     mwat
  SV:      Lenakel     mwati(kalo)    ‘worm’
  Mic:     Kiribati    mwata          ‘worm’
  Mic:     Woleaian    mwata          ‘worm’
  Fij:     Way an      ŋ'ala
  Fij:     Bauan       ŋata          ‘snake (generic)’
  Pn:      Tongan      ŋata          ‘snake’ (There are no snakes in Tonga, but Tongans know snakes exist in Fiji and Samoa.)
  Pn:      Niuean      ŋata          ‘snake’ (Refers only to land snakes, even though there are none on Niue.)
  Pn:      Samoan      ŋata
  Pn:      Tokelauan   ŋata
>


260     Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

    The gloss for a third POc reconstruction, *mo(g,k)o ‘k.o. snake’, is supported by reflexes
in three Meso-Melanesian languages and one Southeast Solomonic language. In Central Pacific
languages the cognate form is applied to lizards in general.

<
POc *mo(g,k)o ‘k.o. snake’
  MM:      Laghu       mogo               ‘snake’
  MM:      Blablanga   mogo               ‘snake’
  MM:      Maringe     mogo               ‘snake (generic)’
  SES:     Gela        mogo               ‘k.o. inert black snake’
  Fij:     Wayan       moko               ‘lizard (generic)’
  Fij:     Bauan              moko            ‘lizard’ (Capell); ‘gecko’ (Ryan)
PPn *moko ‘lizard’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan        moko                    ‘k.o. lizard, light brown’
  Pn:  Niuean         moko                    ‘generic for most creeping and crawling creatures’
  Pn:   Samoan        mo?o                    ‘gecko’
  Pn:   Rennellese moko                       ‘geckos’
  Pn:   Tikopia       moko                    ‘lizard (generic); incl. black lizard (moko-uri), small gecko (moko-pili), large dark coloured gecko (moko-fala), crocodile (moko-tord)
  Pn:      Hawaiian           mo?o            ‘lizard; reptile of any kind’
cf. also:
   PT:    Saliba              (kenokeno)mugu ‘lazy snake’ (keno Tie down’)
>


                                                           Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       261


  The Ubir gloss of ‘cobra’ in the next set is wrong, as Asian cobras are not present in the
New Guinea region (Cogger 1972a: 1013).

<
PWOc *sibi ‘k.o. snake’
  PT: Ubir                    sib         ‘cobra’
  MM: Nakanai                 sibi        ‘small snake’
  MM: Nakanai                 si-sibi     ‘red snake which turns black after death’
>


5.5.4.2 Sea snakes (Elapidae)

Sea snakes are venomous elapid snakes that have adapted to living in the sea. Many are
found in shallow coastal waters and estuaries. They have an eel-like appearance, with laterally
compressed bodies and (in many species) paddle-like tails that aid swimming. Sea snakes are
widespread in the Pacific, with one species, Pelamis platurus, the yellow-bellied sea snake,
found across the entire Pacific region. Four species are known in Fiji, two of which, Laticauda
colubrina and L. laticaudata, are semi-terrestrial (Ryan 1988:111-114).

   Agreement between Central Pacific and Vanuatu languages allows reconstruction of Proto
Remote Oceanic *takulasi or *takusali ‘sea snake’. Metathesis of consonants has occurred
more than once in the final two syllables, making the original form uncertain.

<
PROc *takulasi ‘sea snake’ (PSOc *ta(k,g)ulasi or *ta(k,g)usali ‘sea snake’; John Lynch,
  pers. comm.)
  NCV: Lo-Toga        tayleh                 ‘sea snake’
  NCV: Lonwolwol      telsil                 ‘snake’
  NCV: Paamese        tousali                ‘sea snake’
  SV:     Sye         tuŋklah                ‘sea snake’
  SV:     Ura         duŋlas                 ‘sea snake’
  Fij:    Wayan       da-dakulaði            ‘Laticauda colubrina, black and white banded sea snake’
  Fij:    Bauan       dakulaði, da-dakulaði ‘black and white banded sea snake’
PPn *takuhali ‘black and white banded sea snake’ (pollex)
  Pn:     Tongan      tukuhalo               ‘sea snake with black and white bands’
  Pn:     Niuean        katuali                 ‘sea snake, banded black and white’(metathesis; loss of *h unexpected)
  Pn:      E Futunan    takuali                 ‘sea snake, blue and white bands’
  Pn:      Tokelauan    takuali                 ‘k.o. very rare and small but most dangerous sea eel which attacks’
>


262     Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


    In the Banks languages of northern Vanuatu the sea snake, Laticauda semifasciata, is
referred to by reflexes of *m wai.

__pre__
   NCV: Mota             mwai           ‘sea snake’
   NCV: Mwotlap          mwe            ‘sea snake characterised by black and white stripes;
                                        succubus, female demon, harmful’


5.6 Amphibians

The only amphibians present in Oceania are frogs. Menzies (2006:3) writes that ‘at the latest
count, New Guinea [including the Admiralties and Bismarck Archipelago] and the Solomon
Islands have a total of 35 genera and 322 recognised species ... and, despite lacking several
frog families present in southeast Asia, the region remains one of the most species-rich in
the world’. East of the Solomons the native frog population is almost negligible. Codrington
(1891:17) notes that frogs are absent in Santa Cruz. An account by Medway and Marshall
(quoted by Walsh et al. 2000:235) contains the following observation: ‘There are no amphibians
native to the New Hebrides [Vanuatu], and none was taken by Dr Felix Speiser who
collected herpetological material in these islands in 1910-12.’ Morrison (2003:11) reports
that there are two endemic species of frogs in Fiji, the Fiji tree frog, Platymantis vitiensis,
and the Fiji ground frog, P. vitianns. There are no endemic frogs in Micronesia, nor, with the
exception of New Zealand, in Polynesia. New Zealand has four native species, all belonging
to the genus Leiopelma, an ancient and primitive group of frogs.

    Four families occur without human intervention in New Guinea, Australia and islands of
the western Pacific (Menzies 2006:6): the Hylidae (mostly climbing frogs, found throughout
New Guinea and the Solomons, and on Timor, Seram and Halmahera), Myobatrachidae
(mainly ground-dwelling frogs, with distribution confined to Australia and New Guinea),
Ranidae (pond frogs and some others, a vast family of almost world-wide occurrence), and
Microhylidae, a wide variety of morphologically distinct types. Menzies (2006:172) writes
that Microhylidae ‘is almost worldwide in distribution but reaches its greatest diversity in the
tropics, and the origin of the New Guinean genera almost certainly lies with some currently
unknown southeast Asian ancestor’. The families are unevenly distributed, with 89 percent
of the New Guinea mainland population from just two families, Hylidae and Microhylidae,
while in the Solomon Islands 92 percent are Ranidae. The occurrence of Bufonidae (toads)
in Oceania is due to deliberate or accidental introduction in recent times. The native species
occupy a wide range of habitats, many found well away from water provided humidity is adequate.
A substantial number lack a tadpole stage, the young hatching on land. Complex topography and
close juxtaposition of different habitats have facilitated species differentiation
so that few species are widespread over the whole region. Most species for which adequate
data exists have relatively restricted distribution.

                                                          Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       263


     Certain species of frog are eaten in parts of Melanesia, but we have very limited information
as to which Oceanic communities eat frogs.

     Although onomatopoeia plays a large part in naming kinds of frogs, the picture is
complicated by the fact that different species may have very distinctive calls. Mussau ropa-ropa, Lou
rek-rek, Dobuk‘e-k"e, Yabem k'` ei]-k'` eij: Takia            Molima b'''e-b'`'e, Tolai rok-rok are
all frog names presumably reflecting particular calls. Only the males utter the characteristic
species-specific calls.

    None of the glosses for the several reconstructions proposed here are at all specific. It
seems that wordlist compilers are generally content to collect one or two terms, probably
generic or perhaps identifying a well-known frog of the area, but few sources give more than
minimal details. However, Kalam speakers of the Central Highlands (a non-Austronesian
language of the Trans New Guinea family) distinguish 35 different taxa (Bulmer & Tyler
1968), and it is probable that many Oceanic communities name more than have been recorded.
In any event, as most species have limited distribution, species names are likely to be local
innovations.

     PMP * palakaq ‘frog’ (acd: PWMP) has possible cognates in a few Oceanic languages,
although correspondences are irregular.

<
POc *pa(R,r)a(C) ‘frog’
  NNG:      Bing        far                    ‘frog (generic)’
  PT:       Ouma         (a)para-para          ‘frog’
  PT:       Hula        pala(keo)              ‘frog’
  PT:       Balawaia    fara(keo)              ‘big frog’
  PT:       Motu        para-para              ‘frog’
  MM:       Vangunu     para(goa)              ‘large frog’
  MM:       Marovo      para(goa)              ‘frogs (generic)’
cf. also:
   MM: Nakanai           pere                  ‘small frog’
   MM: Tolai             per                   ‘frog’
   SES: Arosi            haro                  ‘tadpole’
   SES: Arosi           pw aro(?ama-?ama)     ‘k.o. large frog’
>

   The term *kuRau, for a kind of frog, is attested by reflexes in a single Sarmi Coast language
and in Southeast Solomonic, with possible cognates in a number of other groups.

<
POc *kuRau ‘frog taxon’
   SJ:      Ormu         kurau          (Smits 1992:896)
   SES:     Bugotu       kulau          ‘tree frog’
   SES:     Gela         kulau          ‘a small frog’
   SES:     Lau          ?ulao, ?ulou   ‘k.o. very large frog, Rana guppy?
   SES:     Bauro        urau           ‘frog’ (initial k- or ?- expected)
cf. also:
   NNG:     Manam        kuru(basi)     ‘k.o. green tree frog’
   PT:      Mekeo        kulua          ‘k.o. tree frog’
   PT:      Sudest       kula           ‘small frog’
   PT:      Balawaia     kura(fege)     (fege ‘small frog’)
  MM:       Halia        kvra          ‘frog, lives in dry places’
  MM:       Tinputz      kiira         ‘frog, Ranid’
  MM:       Kia          kule          ‘frog’
  MM:       Nduke        (pa)karau     ‘frog’
  MM:       Lungga       (ba)karau     ‘frog’
  MM:       Roviana      (ba)karao     ‘frog’
  SES:      Bugotu       kui-kuli      ‘frog’
  SES:      Arosi        wairau        ‘frog’
>


264     Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley

      The following set is almost certainly onomatopoeic.

<
PNNG *karok ‘frog’
  NNG:      Gedaged      gazok         ‘various kinds of frog’
  NNG:      Kaulong      kahok
  NNG:      Sengseng     kahok
  NNG:      Kove         kalo
  NNG:      Lusi         kalo
cf. also
   PT:      Saliba       k'`ahi-k'ahi
   PT:      Wedau        qeru
   MM:      Nakanai      karu-karu    ‘frog, not eaten’
   MM:      Halia        karou        ‘frog, stays in fresh water
>

An additional POc reconstruction, *k wekwe, is indicated by agreements between Admi
ralties, North New Guinea, Papuan Tip and Southeast Solomonic witnesses. However, the
nature of the form suggests onomatopoeia, and the possibility of parallel development cannot be ruled out.

<
POc *[kwe]kwekwe ‘k.o. frog’
  Adm:      Seimat   keke(u)              ‘k.o. frog’
  NNG:      Mangseng keki                 ‘frog’
  NNG:      Hote     kokwek               ‘frog’
  PT:       Saliba   k‘ekwe               ‘tree frog’
  PT:       Tawala   k‘ekwe               ‘k.o. frog’
  PT:       Tubetube k‘ekwe               ‘frog’
  PT:       Dobu     k‘ekwe               ‘frog’
  PT:       Dobu     (sikwesi) kwekve     ‘small frog, undeveloped’
   PT:      Gumawana k''ek'`'e            ‘frog’
   SES:     Gela     kekeke               ‘k.o. frog’
   SES:     Lau      ?iki-?iki            ‘k.o. frog’
cf. also:
   PT:      Gapapaiwa    k''ere           ‘frog’
   SES:     ’Are’are     ko?e             ‘frog’
   SES:     Gela         kere(rao)        ‘k.o. frog’
   SES:     Lau          k''ere           ‘k.o. frog’
>

                                                               Mammals, reptiles, amphibians            265


    The following cognate set is confined to Vitu, the New Ireland group, Nehan and Buka.
The fact that rokrok is also Tok Pisin for ‘frog’, from Tolai, makes this set problematic.
However, a portion of Tok Pisin vocabulary has its origins in southern New Ireland languages.

<
PMM ? *rokrok ‘bullfrog’
  MM:      Vitu            rok-rok          ‘frog’
  MM:      Sursurunga      rok-rok          ‘frog, incl. marine toad’
  MM:      Patpatar        rok-rok          ‘k.o. frog that stays on ground’
  MM:      Tolai           rok-rok          ‘k.o. frog’
  MM:      Ramoaaina       rok-rok          ‘frog’
  MM:      Nehan           rok-rok          ‘frog’
  MM:      Tinputz         rok-rok          ‘bullfrog’
cf. also
   Adm : Lou               rek-rek          ‘large green frog, bullfrog’
>

<
Proto SE Solomonic *bwari ‘large frog’
  SES:     Gela            bari             ‘k.o. large frog’
  SES:     Tolo            bari             ‘large water frog’
  SES:     ’Are’are        pari             ‘small frog’
  SES:     Longgu          Mari             ‘big frog, lives near river; bush frog’
>

    A POc term for ‘tadpole’ has proved elusive. The etymon Masi ‘tadpole’ is found in two
closely related Papuan Tip languages, Molima and Bwaidoga. Elsewhere we find Masi ‘k.o.
frog’ in Lau, a SE Solomonic language. However, Lau M reflects POc *w, so the term is
evidently a borrowing. No other cognates have been located.

    From the following cognate set, it appears that *kuni may be reconstructed as a PWOc
term for ‘frog’, and with variable modifier as a term for ‘tadpole’ in PT languages.

<
PWOc *kuni        ‘frog, tadpole’
  PT:      Gapapaiwa       kuni(goagoa), kunu(goagoa)          ‘tadpole’
  PT:      Molima          (Mali)kunu-kunu                     ‘tadpoles’
  PT:      Dobu            (wari)kunu-kunu                     ‘tadpoles’[11]
  MM:      Simbo           kuni                                ‘frog (generic)’
  MM:      Roviana         kuni                                ‘small noisy frog’
>

[11] In Dobu the term for crocodile is warigoa and that for seahorse or pipefish wariwarigoa, reduplication of
the first two syllables being a common way of indicating an inferior or diminutive form of the named item. It
 seems that here the prefix is being used by analogy.



5.7 Body parts

5.7.1 Mammal body parts

266 Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pawley


Most mammal body-part terms are also terms for human body-parts. For instance, ‘fur’
equates with ‘body hair’ (typically from POc *pulu), both ‘hind leg’ and ‘fore leg’ with ‘leg’
(POc *qaqe ‘leg, foot’ or POc *paqal ‘thigh’), ‘paw’ with ‘hand’ (POc *lima), and ‘claw’
with ‘nail’ (POc *kuku). The generic term for teeth, animal or human, was POc *[l,n]ipon, a
term which could also include ‘tusk’ (see §7.1.2 below).

5.7.1.1 Canine tooth

POc *bati evidently referred specifically to canine teeth. These teeth may have been singled
out for special naming in POc times because of their distinctive shape, which made them
suitable for decoration, but cognates occur in Vanuatu with particular reference to pigs. There,
boars sometimes had their upper canine teeth removed to enable the lower tusks to grow in
a circle and re-enter the jawbone. These pigs played a significant role in status rituals, and
languages had numerous terms for boars at various stages of tusk growth.

<
POc *bati ‘tusk, canine tooth’
  NNG: Gedaged          bali         ‘canine tooth of dog; ornamental band for forehead made of dog’s teeth’
PSOc *bati ‘tusk, upper canine tooth’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Mota           pati(u)        ‘upper tusk in a boar, knocked out to let the lower tusk grow long; the corresponding teeth in man’
  NCV: Uripiv         bati-n         ‘upper canine tooth, of pig, porpoise or person’
  NCV: Avava          bas-n          ‘upper tusk of a pig, incisor’
  SV:     Sye         ne-pati        ‘pig tusk’
  SV:     Kwamera     nə-pati-       ‘tusk, horn’
  SV:     Anejom      ni-pat         ‘tusk, horn, tusked pig’
  Fij:    Bauan       bati-na        ‘tooth (generic); tusk’
cf. also:
   MM: Nduke            patu           ‘tooth’ (polite) (reflects *p)
>


5.7.1.2 Pig tusk

POc *[l,n]ipon ‘tooth’ has reflexes across subgroups which indicate that pig tusks were included within its meaning.

<
POc *[l,n]ipon ‘tooth, tusk’
  Adm:     Lou          lia-n puo      ‘tusk of pig’
  NNG:     Tuam         livo           ‘tooth’
  SES:     Lau          lifo           ‘tusk, tooth, porpoise teeth used as money’
  SES:     Sa’a         niho           ‘tusk, tooth’
  SES:     Arosi        riho-na        ‘tusk, tooth’
  NCV:     Mwotlap      nɪ-hw          ‘pig tusk’
  NCV:     Sa           lio bwe        ‘pig tusk’
  Pn:      Tongan       nifo           ‘tooth, tusk, nippers’
  Pn:      Samoan       nifo           ‘tooth, tusk, horn’
>

    ANGOc term, *joqa, which apparently referred to ‘pig’s tusk’, is also reconstructable.

                                                         Mammals, reptiles, amphibians        267

<
PNGOc *joija ‘(boar’s) tusk’
  NNG:       Tami         joŋ          ‘boar’s tusk’
  NNG:       Manam         zoŋo        ‘tusk’
  PT:        Kilivila      doga        ‘pig’s tusk’
  PT:        Wedau         tona        ‘tusk’
  PT:        Saliba        dona        ‘horn’
  PT:        Motu          doa         ‘tusk’
  PT:        Muyuw         dog         ‘tusk, horn’
cf. also:
   MM:       Nakanai      logo         ‘tooth, tusk, claw’ (/- for fʌ-)
   MM:       Tolai        lokono       ‘tusk, pig with tusks’
>


5.7.1.3 Tail

POc *iku(R) ‘tail’ continues a PAn etymon. Although many Oceanic wordlists simply give
‘tail’ as the gloss, a substantial number indicate that reflexes of this term relate primarily to
tails of quadrupeds. It is likely that more spectacular tail feathers of birds would have been
separately named (Clark reconstructs POc *lawe, tail feathers, plume’ in ch. 6) but more
commonplace bird tails were probably referred to by *ikuR. Tails of fish are possibly also
included.

<
PAn *ikuR ‘tail’ (ACD)
POc *iku(R) ‘tail, of quadruped, some birds and possibly fish’ (cf ch. 6, p.277)
  Adm :      Nyindrou     kiwi-n       ‘tail’
  NNG:       Wogeo        iku          ‘tail’
  NNG:       Gitua        igu          ‘tail’
  PT:        Motu         iu           ‘tail (of animals)’
  PT:        Tawala       giu-na       ‘tail’
  MM:        Nakanai      kiu          ‘tail of dog +’ (metathesis)
  MM:        Bulu         iku          ‘tail of dog’
  MM:        Tolai        uku-na       ‘tail’
  SES:       Gela         iyu          ‘tail’
  SES:       Bugotu       iu-iyu       ‘tail, of dog, bird, fish’
  SES:       Longgu       iku-iku      ‘tail of dog, pig, etc.’
  SES:       Lau          ki-kiu       ‘tail of animal, fish (not bird)’
  SV:        Anejom       n-iye        ‘tail of fish’
  NCal:      Xaracuu      kwi          ‘tail, general term, can include fish’
  Mic:       Woleaian     iux          ‘tail of bird’
  Mic:       Puluwatese   wik          ‘tail, as of birds, chickens, fish, hindquarters as of dog’
  Pn:        Tongan       iku          ‘tail (esp. of a quadruped)’ (hiku ‘tail of fish or reptile’)
  Pn:        Samoan       iʔu          ‘tail (as of a fish); tail of a shark (as a portion) when it is divided according to custom’
>

268      Meredith Osmond and Andrew Pciwley


     A number of Polynesian languages use reflexes of PPn *siku to refer to fish and animal
tails. These may show contamination from POc *siku(n) ‘elbow, corner’, PPn * siku ‘extremity; end; tail (esp. of fish)’


5.7.2 Reptile body parts

5.7.2.1 Turtle shell

A POc term for the shell or carapace of turtles rests on agreement between Proto Micronesian
*pwdca and a cognate in an Admiralties language, Wuvulu. The Wuvulu word may be a
borrowing from Micronesian.

<
POc *bo(dr,d)a ‘turtle shell’
 Adm: Wuvulu           poxa            ‘turtle shell’
PMic *p' oca ‘turtle shell’ (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Chuukese         pwoc            ‘armour-plating of turtle’s or crocodile’s back’
 Mic: Mortlockese p''os
 Mic: Puluwatese p''or                 ‘outer layer of turtle shell, used for fishhooks, earrings etc.’
 Mic: Carolinian        b''ðs          ‘k.o. shell from turtle or coconut, used to make jewellery, bowls etc.’
 Mic: Woleaian          ({rose         ‘turtle shell’
 Mic: Kiribati          te-bwora       ‘turtle shell’
>

    In many Polynesian languages and at least one Southeast Solomonic language, reflexes
of POc *qunap ‘fish scales’ also refer to the shell of a turtle. (See also chapter 2, §66.3)

<
PEOc *qunap ‘turtle shell, fish scales’
   SES:     Arosi          una-na      ‘turtle shell, tortoiseshell’ (unahi ‘to remove shell from turtle, scale a fish’)
   Pn:      Niuean         una         ‘turtle shell’ (hinafi ‘fish scales’)
   Pn:      Tongan         ?uno        ‘scale of fish, shell of turtle’
   Pn:      Rennellese     Puna        ‘outer shell, as of turtle’ (Punahi ‘fish scales’)
   Pn:      Samoan         una         ‘shell of hawksbill turtle, fish scale’ (unafi ‘to scale’)
   Pn:      Tikopia        una         ‘carapace of marine turtle’ (imafi ‘fish scale’)
   Pn:      Hawaiian       una         ‘turtle shell’ (unahi ‘fish scales’)
cf. also:
   MM: Kia                 ŋapo        ‘turtle shell’
>


5.7.2.2 Gaps in reconstruction

POc speakers almost certainly had names for several different parts of a turtle in addition to
the shell. Arosi, for instance, has terms for ‘flat back plates of shell’, ‘curved side plates of
shell’ and ‘turtle fat’. However, most dictionaries fail to record such details and we are unable
to make secure reconstructions for other turtle parts.

                                                         Mammals, reptiles, amphibians       269


    From the few items located, it seems that in Polynesia flippers of turtle, stingray and whale
may have been denoted by a derivative of the verb POc *kaba ‘wing’, PEOc *kaba-kaba ‘to
flap wings’, reflexes of which can also refer to pectoral fins of fish (see ch.2, §66.4 and ch.6,
§2). Terms for ‘turtle egg’ are commonly reflexes of the generic term for egg, POc *qatoluR.
However, at least one language, To’aba’ita (SES) has a term, k‘ alarum applying specifically
to ‘a collection of turtle or spider eggs’. Sa’a (SES) has apota ‘eggs of turtle or crocodile’.



6 Birds

6.1 Introduction

There may not have been a domain of the Proto Oceanic lexicon corresponding precisely
to the Class Aves. The creatures referred to by reflexes of POc * manuk (below) almost always
include bats and sometimes other flying animals. For example, Kwaio laŋasi (a taboo
replacement for manu) ‘in the broadest categorical sense, includes birds, butterflies, moths,
bats, dragonflies and one species of frogs (Pseudophryne sp.)’ (Keesing 1975:119). At its
widest *manuk may have encompassed the entire non-aquatic animal kingdom (for discussion see
chapter 8, §§5 and 6). More restrictive expressions are often coined by adding a
modifier to *manuk, typically the verb ‘to fly’, for example Chuukese mac ‘living creature of
land or air (other than human)’, maeeaŋ ‘bird’ (ef. eaŋ ‘fly’). The organisation of this book,
however, follows the Linnaean classification, and bats will be found in chapter 5, with only
a couple of cross-references below to connect the two.

<
POc *mamik (i) ‘flying creature’; (2) ‘animal’
  Adm: Lou                mon-mon ‘bird’
  NNG: Mangap             man   ‘bird, also includes bats and other flying creatures with bones’
  NNG:      Lukep (Pono) man       ‘bird (generic)’
  NNG:      Lukep (Pono) manu-manu ‘bird sp., flycatcher’
  NNG:      Bariai       man       ‘bird’
  NNG:      Manam        may       ‘bird, chicken’
  NNG:      Hote         menak     ‘bird’
  NNG:      Mapos Buang mank       ‘bird’
  MM:       Bali         manuku    ‘bird’
  MM:       Bola         manu      ‘fish’
  MM:       Bulu         manu      ‘bird’
  MM:       Kara (East)  manu      ‘bird’
  MM:    Nalik           mani          ‘bird’
  MM:    Lihir           mon           ‘bird’
  MM:    Sursurunga      man           ‘bird, flying thing (not insects)’
  MM:    Banoni          manuyii       ‘bird’
  MM:    Simbo           manuyu        ‘all creatures, including animals, human beings, birds, marine mammals and possibly fish; thing thingummybob’
  PT:   Iduna           manuga         ‘bird’
  PT:   Tawala          manuwa         ‘bird’
  PT:   Balawaia        manu           ‘bird’
  PT:   Motu            manu           ‘all creatures that fly, including flying foxes’
  SES: Bugotu           manu           ‘bird’
  SES: Gela             manu           ‘bird, flying creature’
  SES: Kwaio            manu           ‘bird’
  SES: Lau              manu           ‘bird’
  SES:  Sa’ a           menu           ‘bird, insect’
  SES: Longgu           manu           ‘bird’
  SES: Longgu           manu-manu ‘insect’
  SES: Arosi            manu           ‘bird, winged creature’
  TM: Burna             menuko         ‘bird’
  NCV: Mota            manu           ‘bird, flying creature, beetle, bat’
  NCV: Raga            manu           ‘bird’
  NCV: Big Nambas      nanay          ‘bird’
  NCV: Malua Bay       na-menox       ‘bird’
  NCV: Paamese         a-manu         ‘bird’
  NCV: Uripiv          nu-mon         ‘bird’
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-man           ‘bird’
  NCV: Nguna           manu           ‘bird’
PSV *manuy ‘bird’ (Lynch 2001)
  SV:   Sye             menuy          ‘bird’
  SV:   Lenakel         menuk          ‘bird’
  SV:   Kwamera         menu           ‘bird’
  SV:   Anejom          in-man         ‘bird’
PMic *manu ‘living creature of land or air’ (Bender et al. 1983)
  Mic: Kiribati          te-man        ‘animal, bird’
  Mic: Kosraean         mæn            ‘animal, insect’
  Mic: Chuukese         man            ‘living creature’
  Mic: Puluwat          man            ‘living creature’
  Mic: Carolinian       mdl            ‘living creature’
  Mic: Ponapean         man            ‘animal, insect’
  Fij:  Bouma           manu-manu      ‘animal, bird’
  Fij:  Wayan           manu-manu ‘animal, living thing, creature, being, normally excluding human beings’
  Fij:  Rotuman         man-manu ‘bird, animal, insect’
  Pn:   Tongan          manu           ‘animal, bird’
  Pn:   Niuean          manu           ‘animal’
  Pn:     Anutan           manu          ‘bird or flying insect’
  Pn:     Anutan           manu-manu     ‘animal’
  Pn:     Pileni           manu          ‘bird, flying animal’
  Pn:     Pileni           manu-manu     ‘bird’
  Pn:     Rennellese       manu          ‘fauna except human beings’
  Pn:     Tikopia          manu          ‘creature, ranging from mammal to arthropod; especially including birds’
  Pn:     E Futunan        manu          ‘animal, animal, bird’
  Pn:     E Uvean          manu          ‘animal’
  Pn:     Samoan           manu          ‘animal, bird’
  Pn:     Luangiua         maŋu          ‘bird, animal’
  Pn:     Tuvalu           manu          ‘animal’
  Pn:     Hawaiian         manu          ‘bird’
  Pn:     Maori            manu          ‘bird’
>

272   Ross Clark


                                                                                   Birds   273


     Birds played varied roles in the life of Oceanic speakers. Besides the domesticated fowl
(Gallus gallus), some types of birds (including frigate birds and parrots) were caught and kept
as pets. Others were prized as food (pigeons and doves, some seabirds). The large eggs of
the megapode were gathered for food. The feathers of many species had decorative uses, and
their bones were used for a range of artefacts from needles to flutes. Birds could be caught
with snares, nets or traps of various kinds, or shot with bow and arrow. (Special blunt-tipped
arrows avoided damage to valued feathers.) Apart from direct exploitation, some birds could
be sources of useful information, such as flocks of terns indicating the location of schools of
fish, or landbirds far out at sea, indicating the presence of land nearby. Some, on the other
hand, were harmful, such as the raptors that preyed on domestic fowl, or the swamp-hen with
its destructive effects on taro gardens.

     A widespread belief was that the voices of certain species could foretell such events as a
death or the arrival of visitors. In eastern Polynesia, the visitors themselves were referred to
as ‘birds’ (Proto Central Eastern Polynesian * manu-firi ‘chosen (?) birds’). And in myth, folk
tale and religious belief, birds play almost as varied a range of roles as do humans. Among
the Dobuans, ‘the native term for totem is the term for bird ... [and] one stranger may ask
another, “what is your bird?”’ (Fortune 1963:32).


6.2 The life and parts of birds

A few aspects of avian anatomy and behaviour are different enough from their human (or
mammalian) analogues that they might be expected to be separately lexicalised. In most cases,
however, POc appears to have found commonalities with more general anatomical features
of the animal kingdom.

    Perhaps the most emblematic features of birds are feathers and wings. But the most general
term for feathers is the same as that for human body hair and animal fur:

<
PMP *bulu ‘body hair, fur, feather, down, floss’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *pulu ‘body hair, fur, feathers’
  Yap:    Yapese        wul            ‘feather’
  NNG:      Hote             vulu-k            ‘hair, feathers’
  PT:       Motu             hui-tia           ‘hair, feather’
  PT:       Mekeo           pin                ‘feather’
  MM:       Nakanai          vulu              ‘feathers, feather headdress’
  MM:       Nehan            ulu-              ‘feather’
  SES:      Bugotu           vulu-fia          ‘feather, hair’
  SES:      Gela             vu-vulu           ‘hair, feather’
  NCV:      Mota             iilu-i            ‘hair, feathers’
  NCV:      Paamese          hilin             ‘hair (of head), feathers’
  NCV:      Lewo             vilu-iia          ‘feather, hair’
  NCal:     Pije            pim-               ‘hair, feather’
  NCal:     Ajie            piirii             ‘feather’
  Fij:      Way an           vulu              ‘hair, fur, feathers’
  Pn:       Tongan          fulu-fulu          ‘hair (esp. on the body), fur, feathers’
  Pn:       Rennellese       hugu              ‘body hair, feathers, fur’
  Pn:       Maori            huru              ‘hair, feather’
>

274      Ross Clark


      A second set with this meaning is connected with PMP *ibut ‘pull, uproot’ (Blust 1995):

<
POc *ipu ‘hair, feather’
  MM:       Bola             ivu              ‘hair, feather’
  MM:       Nakanai          ivu-la           ‘head hair, plumage of bird’
  MM:       Tolai            ivu              ‘body hair, fur, feathers’
  SES:      Tolo             ivu-na           ‘hair, fur, feathers’
  SES:      Kwaio            ififu-na         ‘feather, hair’
  SES:      Sa’a             ihit             ‘hair, feather’
>

    Both of the above refer to the overall covering of birds that is analogous to the hair
covering of mammals. Feathers particularly conspicuous by length or colour have probably always
been of special interest and valued as decoration. A term for such feathers is reconstructed
for PMP, but its unambiguous Oceanic reflexes are restricted in scope:

<
PMP *lawi ‘tail feather’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *lawe ‘tail feather, plume’
  Fij:      Rotuman          lalovi           ‘feather’
  Fij:      Bauan            lawe             ‘the larger feathers of a bird’
  Pn:       Tongan           lave             Tong tail-feather’
  Pn:       Samoan           lave             ‘a part of a head-dress, a crest’
>

    A number of forms suggested a variant reconstruction *la-lau[1]

__pre__
    NNG: Manam               la-lau            ‘feather’
    NNG: Bing                la-lahaw          ‘tail feathers of poultry’
   MM:     Tangga       o-lo-lo       ‘hair, feathers
   MM:     Nehan        la-le         ‘feather’
   SES:    Kwaio        la-la(ŋala)   ‘feather’
   NOV:    Raga         la-lau        ‘feather’
   SV:     Anejom       na-lau        ‘feather’
   Fij:    Wayan        lau-lau       ‘tail’


[1] This is distinct from POc *raun ‘leaves, head hair’, reflected in Titan (Adm) laun ‘leaf, hair, feathers’, Bariai
 (NNG) i-laun ‘his/her hair, its feathers’.

                                                                                Birds   275


    A distinct lexical item POc *banic ‘wing, arm, hand, fin (probably pectoral)’ is widely
attested. Its PMP ancestor *panij denoted only wings, but its meaning had clearly been extended
in POc (see chapter 2 for a fuller cognate set and discussion).

<
PMP *panij ‘wing’ (Dempwolff 1938, acd)
POc *banic ‘arm, hand, wing, fin (probably pectoral)’
  Adm:    Kaniet      pani               ‘wing, hand, fin’
  Adm:    Nyindrou    bani-n             ‘wing’
  Adm:    Nauna       pin                ‘wing’
  Adm:    Mondropolon pani-n             ‘wing’
  Adm:    Drehet      peni-ŋ             ‘wing’
  NNG:    Gedaged     bani-n             ‘fin, wing’
  NNG:    Wampur      bani-t             ‘wing’
  NNG:    Mapos Buang bani-s             ‘fin, wing’
  PT:     Gumawana    pane-pane-na       ‘fish fins, bird’s wing’
  PT:     Balawaia    vane               ‘wing, fin’ (expected '`'bani)
  PT:     Motu        hani               ‘wing, fin (expected '`'bani)
  PT:     Mekeo       pa-pani            ‘wing-like object, incl. fins’ (expected Xfani)
  MM:     Vitu        baniti-            ‘wing, upper arm’
  NOV:    Mota        panei, paniu       ‘hand and arm, wing, pectoral fin, pig’s shoulder’
  NOV:    Merlav      bani               ‘wing’
  NCV:    Atchin      na-'''ben          ‘wing, sail, armlet’
  NCal:   Iaai        beni-n             ‘hand, arm, fin’
  NCal:   Iaai        la-beiii-n         ‘wing’
  Mic:    Marshallese pa                 ‘arm, hand, wing, fin’
  Mic:    Carolinian  ppwan              ‘pectoral fin and attached bone of fish’
  Mic:    Ulithian    pal                ‘ventral fin; hand’
>

   Dempwolff (1938) reconstructs PMP *kapak ‘wings; flutter’ on the basis of Oceanic data
and Malay kepak, Ngaju Dayak kapak. This etymon appears to be reflected by the widespread
etymon POc *kabct (n) ‘wing’, (v) ‘flap wings’.

<
PMP *kapak ‘wings; flutter’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *kaba (n) ‘wing’, (v) ‘flap wings’
  SES:    Lau         ?aba            ‘wing, hand, arm, foreleg’
  SES:    Lau         ?aba-?aba       ‘to flap the wings’
  SES:    Kwaio       ?aba-?aba       ‘wing’
  SES:    ’Are’are    apa             ‘wing’
  SES:    ’Are’are    lapa-a          ‘flap wings’
  SES:     Sa’a         ?apa-?apa      ‘wing’
  TM:      Burna        ava            ‘wing’
  TM:      Burna        -ava           ‘to fly’
  TM:      Tanema       -apa           ‘to fly’
  NCV:     Mota         yava           ‘flap wings, fly’
  NCV:     Nokuku       kave-n         ‘wing’
  NCV:     Tolomako     kava-kava      ‘wing’
  NCV:     Tolomako     kava           ‘fly’
  NCV:     Raga         yaba           ‘wing’
  NCV:     Malua Bay    gs-gep         ‘fly’
  SV:      Lenakel      nə-kav-kavə-   ‘wing’
  Fij:     Wayan        kd-kava        ‘wing’
  Fij:     Rotuman      kap-kapo       ‘to flutter downwards as if about to alight (of birds flying)’
PPn *kapa (v) ‘beat, of wings, fins, flippers’ (pollex)
PPn *kapa-kapa (n) ‘fish fins’; (v) ‘flap wings’ (pollex)
  Pn:   Tongan        kapa-kapa        ‘side fin; flap wings’
  Pn:   Samoan        ?apa-?apa        ‘fin; flap wings’
  Pn:   Samoan        ?apa             ‘to beat, of bird’s wing, turtle flipper etc.’
  Pn:   Pukapukan kapa-kapa            ‘fish fin, turtle flipper, bird wing, arm of baby’
  Pn:   Tikopia       kapa-kapa        ‘pectoral fins; flap wings’
  Pn:   E Futunan kapa(td)             ‘beat wings’
  Pn:   Tuvalu        kopa             ‘flap wing’
  Pn:   Maori         kapa-kapa        ‘flap wings, flutter’
>

276     Ross Clark


   Derived from PPn *kapa is PPn *kapa-kau ‘wing, fin’:

<
PPn *kapa-kau ‘wing, fin’ (pollex)
  Pn:      Tongan       kapakau        ‘wing, winged’
  Pn:      Niuean       tapakau        ‘ wing of a bird, fin of a fish’
  Pn:      E Futunan    kapakau        ‘wing’
  Pn:      E Uvean      kapakau        ‘wing’
  Pn:      Rennellese   kapakau        ‘wing’
  Pn:      Tikopia      kapakau        ‘shoulder, upper arm, wing, fin’
  Pn:      Luangiua     apaʔau         ‘wing’
  Pn:      Samoan       ?apaʔau        ‘wing’
  Pn:      Tuvalu       kapakau        ‘wing, arm, lateral fin’
>

    Blust (ACD) also reconstructs PWMP *kepek ‘flap wings’ (expected POc form f *kopo(k)')
and PWMP *kepay-kepay ‘flap (wings, fins of fish, etc.)’ (expected POc form f *kope) with
supporting data, and crossreferences the doublets * kapay and *kipay (without supporting
data) (expected POc forms f * kape and f *kipe). PMP * kapay is perhaps reflected by Tawala
apape ‘wing’. I find no straightforward reflexes of Blust’s other reconstructions, but Iduna
(PT) ofa-na ‘(its) wing’ and Gela (SES) gapo-gapo ‘spread wings, flap, flutter’ suggest that
there were perhaps several phonologically similar forms in POc cognate with the forms found
in Western Malayo-Polynesian languages.

                                                                                              Birds    277


    A bird’s beak was most probably referred to as POc *ijuju      denoting the external or protruding
aspect of the mouth. There is also some evidence for POc * mujn, in the form of
non-Oceanic terms from which Blust (ACD) reconstructs PWMP *mu(ri)cio] ‘mouth (of an
animal), snout’,23together with the Iduna, Gapapaiwa and Balawaia terms listed below, reflecting
PPT *mu(d.j)u. However, it may be that this is a chance similarity and that PPT
*muju was an irregular reflex of POc *ijuju?

<
POc *ijuju ‘mouth, lips, snout, beak’
  PT: Motu                 udu             ‘mouth, nose, beak’
  MM: Nehan                ŋohŋoho-        ‘beak’
  MM: Roviana              ŋuzu            ‘beak’
  MM: Roviana              ŋuzu-ŋuzu       ‘carved prow of war canoe’
  SES:     Kwaio           ŋidu-na         ‘beak’
  Fiji     Wayan           ŋusu            ‘mouth of an animal; external mouth or lips of a person, fish, etc.; beak (of bird or turtle); snout or muzzle of a dog, pig, etc.’
  Pn:      Tongan          ŋutu            ‘mouth, beak, orifice’
  Pn:      Rennellese      ŋutu            ‘mouth, beak, breath’
  Pn:      Maori           ŋutu            ‘lip, beak, rim, mouth, entrance’
cf. also:
   PT:    Iduna            mudu            ‘carved prow’
   PT:    Gapapaiwa        mutu            ‘lips, beak’
   PT:    Balawaia         muru            ‘beak’
>

    Many, perhaps most Oceanic languages make some lexical distinctions among the tails
of birds, fish, reptiles and mammals. The following very common term for tail appears applicable to birds in many languages:

<
PAn *ikuR ‘tail’ (Blust 1995)
POc *iku(R) ‘tail, of quadruped, some birds and possibly fish’ (cf ch. 5, §7.1.3)
  Adm:     Nyindrou        kiwi-n           (metathesis)
  NNG:     Manam           eku
  NNG:     Gitua           igu
  NNG:     Gedaged         wi-n             (metathesis)
  NNG:     Takia           uyu-n
  PT:      Kilivila        yeyu-na
  PT:      Tawala          giu-na           (metathesis)
  PT:      Balawaia        Yiyu
  MM:      Nakanai         kiu              (metathesis)
  SES:     Bugotu          iu-iyu           ‘tail (of dog, bird, fish)’
  SES:     Kwaio           ?i?i-na
  SES:     Sa’a         ?u-?u?i-na    ‘tail of an animal’ (metathesis)
  SES:     Gela         zgw
  NCal:    Xaracuu      kwi
  Mic:     Chuukese     wik
  Mic:     Ponapean     iki
  Pn:      Tongan       iku
>

[2] Isneg motoŋ 'mouth’. Iban muneoŋ 'protruding, sticking out. esp. of jaw or lips', Toba Batak munsuŋ ‘beak,
 snouf, Malay moneoŋ ‘snout’, Wolio muncu ‘(outside of the) mouth, beak, snout’.

[3] Both ^ŋuju and *muju were also apparently used for the carved prow of a canoe, i.e. its 'beak’: see vol.l,
 p.189.

278     Ross Clark



   Finally, the feet of most bird species are likened to animal claws and fingernails:

<
PMP *kuSkuS ‘claw, finger, toenail’
POc *kuku ‘nail (of hand or foot), claw’
  NNG:     Mangap      kukunu         ‘claw’
  PT:      Tawala      gigi-na        ‘claw’
  SES:     Bugotu                     ‘hoof, claw’
  SES:     Gela        kuku           ‘swoop on prey, as a bird’
  SES:     Tolo        huhu-na
  Mic:     Kiribati    uki
  Mic:     Chuukese    kki-r, wik
  Mic:     Kiribati    uki
  Mic:     Kiribati    gugu           ‘digit of person or animal: big toe, thumb, hoof, talon, claw’
  Pn:      Tongan       kuku          ‘grasp, grip, clutch, hold on to’
  Pn:      E Futunan    (moti)kuku    ‘claws’
  Pn:      Maori        (mai)kuku     ‘nail, claw, hoof’
>

    Other anatomical features such as the cock’s comb and spurs are lexicalised diversely and
there is no clear POc reconstruction.

    The laying of relatively large (and often edible) eggs is distinctive of birds (along with
turtles and other reptiles). A well established reconstruction is:

<
PMP *qateluR ‘egg, testicle’ (Blust 1995)
POc *qatoluR ‘egg’
  Adm:     Aua         aPulul
  Adm:     Seimat      atoli
  Adm:     Loniu       elutu          (metathesis)
  Adm:     Mussau      otdlu
  NNG      Kairiru     katol
  NNG      Tumleo      tali-n
  NNG      Yabem       qa-ke?sulu
  NNG      Mangap      (man) kutulunu
  NNG      Arawe       gasuslu
  PT:      Motu        gatoi
  PT:      Mekeo       aoi
  MM:      Nakanai     hatotolu
  MM:      Tangga      katalu
  MM:      Patpatar    tulur
  MM:       Simbo         toruru
  SES:      Bugotu        kidoru
  SES:      Gela          tθlll
  SES:      Tolo          kolu-na
  SES:      Sa’a          saolu
  SES:      Bauro         aoru
  NOV:      Mota          t()liu
  NOV:      Paamese       oreli(te)
  NCV:      Namakir       ?atol
  SV:       Ura           n-ahli-
  SV:       Lenakel       (noua-)n-ahlə-
  NCal:     Iaai          wdkufi
  Mic:      Ponapean      kutor
  Mic:      Kiribati      (pun)atoi
cf. also:
   Fiji     Rotuman       kalofi            (expected '``iktfolu )
>

                                                                                         Birds   279


    A word of more general reference, POc *puaq, originally ‘fruit’, but generalised as a
classifier for a wide range of more or less spherical objects, is sometimes used for eggs, but
this may well be the result of repeated local extensions.

__pre__
  NNG:      Gitua       pua                ‘egg’
  NNG:      Lukep(Pono) pua-na             ‘egg’
  PT:       Bwaidoga    fou                ‘egg’
  SES:      Arosi        hua i kua         ‘fowl’s egg’
  Pn:       Rennellese   hua               ‘fruit, berry, egg’
  Pn:       E Futunan   fua ?i moa         ‘hen’s egg’
  Pn:       Maori        hua               ‘fruit, egg’

    Despite the great variety in the form and construction of birds’ nests (note PMic *fata
‘platform, nest’ from POc * patar ‘platform’, vol.l, p.57 and p. 190), a common term can be
reconstructed (sometimes stated as also applying to nests or dens of animals).

<
PEMP *niku(i) ‘nest’ [4]
POc *(n,n)iku~*nuki ‘nest’
  NNG:      Amara       o-nuk
  NNG:      Aria        o-nuk
  NNG:      Mapos Buang mvi-s              ‘nest, den’
  PT:       Are         nigu-na            ‘nest, den, hole’
  PT:       Tawala      nunu
  PT:       Balawaia    nuyi
  PT:       Mekeo       fii-fia
  MM:       Kara (East) tiiu
  MM.       Nehan       fiiu
  MM:       Maringe        hokn
  SES:      Bugotu         hikn
  SES:      Gela           nikn
  SES:      Kwaio          nn?i
  SES:      Tolo           nikn-na
  NCV:      Mota           niyin
  NCV:      Paamese        a-nn, mmu
>

[4] Cognates in SHWNG languages include Mor/7zZ>z. nrwi, Waropen m. Biak niw (Anceau.x 1961).

280      Ross Clark



      A PCP form is also reconstructable:

<
PCP *ova ‘nest’
  Fij:      Wayan        ova           ‘nest of a bird’
  Pn:       E Futunan    ofa(ŋa)       ‘nest’
  Pn:       Samoan       ofa(ŋa)       ‘nest’
  Pn:       Emae         ofa(ŋa)       ‘nest of bird or animal’
  Pn:       Maori        ofa(ŋa)       ‘nest’
>

    The actions surrounding eggs and nests are less distinctively lexicalised. The verb
corresponding to ‘lay’ is etymologically various (e.g. Lau kwala ‘give birth, beget, lay an egg’,
Bauan vaka-lutu ‘drop, lay (egg)’, Paamese mumoni ‘make’mumon orelite ‘lay an egg’), but
note the following:

<
POc *tau(p) ‘lay egg’
POc *taup-i- ‘sit on eggs’
  NNG: Bing              taw           ‘lay egg’
  MM: Nakanai            tan           ‘put, place, lay egg’
  SES: Gela              taov-i        ‘sit on eggs’
  SES: Gela              taov-agi      ‘brood over’
  SES: Longgu            taov-i (a)    ‘sit on and hatch’
  NCal: Iaai             han           ‘lay egg’
>

    The action of incubating eggs by sitting on them is compared with that of covering and
protecting the young in the following verb attributable to PEOc:

<
PEOc *ovi(s), *ovis-i- (i) ‘brood, sit on eggs’; (2) ‘cover chicks with wings’
  SES:      Bugotu       oft           ‘to sit on eggs, hatch’
  SES:      Tolo         ovi(a)        ‘to sit on and hatch’
  Mic:      Kosraean     apis          ‘cover, hug, hold, protect under wings, brood’
  Fij:      Wayan        oviði         ‘brood, sit on eggs; cover chicks with wings’
  Fij:      Bauan        ovið(a)       ‘to brood, of hens; to cover up the chickens under her wings’
>

   When the egg hatches, the words used are generally those for the breaking open of rigid
containers (the coconut probably being the most familiar comparison), but no consistent etymon emerges.

   The action of flying is as emblematic of birds as their possession of feathers and wings,
and several verbs are associated with it (see also POc *kaba ‘(n) wing, (v) flap wings’ above):

                                                                                   Birds       281

<
PMP *Rebek ‘to fly’
POc *Ropok ‘fly,jump’
  Adm:    Loniu          woh
  NNG:    Kairiru        -ruo
  NNG:    Manam          ro
  NNG:    Yabem          -lob
  NNG:    Takia          -rou
  NNG:    Mengen (Poeng) lo                ‘fly, go’
  PT:     Gapapaiwa      rovo
  PT:     Motu           roho              ‘leap, skip, fly’
  MM:     Bali           rovoko
  MM:     Nakanai        lovo
  MM:     Tolai          rowo
  MM:     Siar           rofoi
  SES:    Bugotu         ðovo
  SES:    Sa’a           loho
  NOV:    Mota           rowo              ‘spring, leap, fly’
  NOV:    Uripiv         o-row             ‘fly,jump’
  SV:     Lenakel        ivək
  Fij:    Wayan          rd                ‘fly up, rise up through the air’ (expected frovo; cf. no ‘sit, stay’ < *nopo)
>

    POc *tap (w)a may perhaps have referred to gliding or soaring; the apparently contradictory
meaning of ‘flap wings’ in some languages may represent contamination from POc *kaba
‘flap wings’ (above).

<
POc *tap (w)a ‘glide, soar’
  PT:     Gapapaiwa    tapi            ‘flap’
  MM:     Nakanai      tapa-pa         ‘flap’
  MM:     Madak        rava            ‘fly’
  MM:     Tolai        ta-tap          ‘flap’
  MM:     Halia (Haku) tapa            ‘fly’
  MM:     Simbo        ta-tava         ‘fly’
  MM:     Maringe      tava            ‘glide, soar with wings spread, hover’
  SES:    Tolo         ava             ‘to hover or glide’
  NCal:   Nengone      capa-capa       ‘flutter’
  Fij:    Bauan        taba-na         ‘wing’
  Pn:     Hawaiian     kaha            ‘to swoop, as a kite; to be poised, soar (as a bird)’
  Pn:     Rarotongan taʔa              ‘glide, plane, skim, sail through the air’
>

<
POc *toki ‘peck’ (also perhaps of fish nibbling at bait) (cf. *toki ‘chop’, vol.l, p.250)
 MM: Patpatar         tok            ‘peck (food)’
  SES: Tolo           tokia
PMic *toki ‘bite, peck’ (Bender et al. 2003)
 Mic: Sonsorolese tsysa              ‘to peck, as birds’
  Fij:   Way an       toki-a
Polynesian reflexes show ŋ for expected k:
  Pn:    Samoan        lory
  Pn:    Nukuoro       toŋi         ‘peck at’
  Pn:    Maori         toŋi         ‘peck, nibble’
>

282   Ross Clark



6.3 Bird names

There is a strong consensus among recent researchers locating the Proto Oceanic homeland
in Northwest Melanesia, with the island of New Britain a focus of probabilities. I will follow
this view insofar as it helps give a perspective on the dimensions of the problem of reconstructing
this particular lexical field. In what follows
 I will use the term ‘homeland’ to refer
to New Britain and its neighbouring islands. The birds among which referents for POc
reconstructions will be sought in this study are those which are residents of or regular visitors to
the Bismarck Archipelago, as described in recent handbooks (Coates 1985, 1990; Coates &
Peckover 2001). This gives a total of slightly more than 200 species belonging to 126 genera,
 77 of them monotypic.

    The reconstructions presented below do not comprise all or even most of a plausible avian
terminology of Proto Oceanic. Entire families of birds which were almost certainly known to
the POc speakers are unrepresented here, because the small number of terms so far recorded
for living Oceanic languages do not yield up any useful cognate sets. Examples are the grebes
(Podicipedidae), pelicans (Pelecanidae), cormorants (Phalacrocoracidae), ibises (Threskior-
nithidae), nightjars (Caprimulgidae), flowerpeckers (Dicaeidae), waxbills (Estrildidae) and
drongos (Dicruridae). This lack, in turn, is primarily a result of the insufficiency of the data,
particularly for languages of Northwest Melanesia, where the avifauna is the richest. The
situation has improved, but only slightly, since my previous study (Clark 1994). There is still
an almost complete lack of really comprehensive studies.

    It may be useful, nevertheless, to have some idea of what such a taxonomy would have
looked like. In my earlier paper I reasoned by analogy from two detailed studies from societies
close to the Oceanic region, though both non-Austronesian in language: Maj nep &
Bulmer (1977) on Kalam of the New Guinea highlands, and Taylor (1990) on Tobelo of north
Halmahera. Both studies found a total of about 200 lexemes for avian taxa. The typical taxon
corresponds to a Linnaean genus, though as a substantial proportion of genera were monotypic
(represented by a single species) within the area studied, there is a certain ambiguity
between genus and species. Genus-level taxon labels in Kalam, for instance, would include
ccp covering the Australian Goshawk (Accipiterfasciatus) and Black-mantled Goshawk (A.
melanochlamys), kwwt for both the Amboina Cuckoo dove (Macropygia amboinensis) and
the Black-billed Cuckoo dove (M. nigrirostris), mmafip labelling both the Glossy Swiftlet
(Collocalia esculenta) and the Mountain Swiftlet (C. hirundinacea), plolom both the Mountain
Yellow-billed Kingfisher (Halcyon megarhyncha) and the Sacred Kingfisher (H. sanclay
and walkobneŋ both the Black-fronted White-eye (Zosterops minor) and the Mountain Whiteeye
(Z. novaeguineae). In some cases, conventional distinguishing expressions exist to discriminate
between the two species, for example, ccp mseŋ-ket ‘Australian Goshawk’ (mseŋ-
ket ‘open country’) versus ccp kamay-ket ‘Black-mantled Goshawk’ (kamay-ket ‘beech tree
sp.’).

                                                                                     Birds   283


    On the other hand, some Kalam taxa correspond to Linnaean groups larger than the genus,
and some cut across the terminology altogether, recognizing convergent similarities: spsep
refers both to the Mountain Pygmy Parrot (Micropsitta bruijtif) and the Pink-faced Nuthatch
(Daphoenositta mirandct). sskl refers to both Whitehead’s Swiftlet (Collocalia whiteheadi)
and the Pacific Swallow (Hirundo tahitica). (Cf. POc *kabakabal in §5.12.)

    Most birds produce some sound audible to humans, whether territorial song, flocking
calls or alarm cries, and often this is distinctive enough to be recognised as emblematic of
the bird itself. The transcoding of bird vocalizations into human speech sounds is a universal
phenomenon, and birds are probably onomatopoetically named more than any other class of
living things. In theory this can pose an obstacle to the comparative method, if the independent
application of an onomatopoetic name to the same bird in different languages produces
pseudo-cognates. However, the more remotely related the two languages, the less likely such
pairs of names are to follow regular sound correspondences. The approach taken here will
be to accept exact cognate sets as genuine, but cases where there are repeated irregularities
despite similarity of phonetic form will be taken as, at least, suspect for reconstruction purposes.

    In theory we would like to be able to say how POc speakers would have named each
species of bird they were familiar with. Some reasons why this is not possible at the present
state of knowledge have already been reviewed. There is also the fact that, even if we take the
location and date of the POc-speaking community as fairly precisely known, the composition
of the avifauna at that place and time is by no means so certain. The distribution of bird species
is a changing set of circumstances, affected both by expansion of successful species and by
extinction of others. In practice all we have to go on (except for some scattered archaeological
evidence) is the present situation. But even in a situation where several reasonably good
cognate sets are available, which could in theory be assigned to several species present in the
Oceanic homeland, the assignment may be difficult since our data is weakest precisely in the
area where the fauna is richest.

    Below I present nearly 200 cognate sets, of which about 80 are attributed to Proto Oceanic
and the remainder to various interstages. Following a discussion of the domestic fowl, the
families are arranged into three large groups: the non-passerine land and fresh-water birds;
the passerines; and the sea and shore birds. A typical local inventory contains roughly equal
numbers of species in these three groups. (Bregulla 1992 on Vanuatu, for example, has 36
passerine species, 45 sea birds and 40 others.) All scientific and ‘common’ English names
have been normalised to follow the checklist of Howard & Moore (1991).


6.4 The domestic bird: Gallus gallus

The Red Jungle Fowl, Gallus gallus) spread as a domesticate along with Oceanic speakers
throughout almost all the Pacific islands. There does not seem to be any clear lexical distinction
between domestic and feral birds, though descriptors may be added, as in Samoan moa
?aivao ‘wild fowl’ (cf veto ‘bush, jungle’). The glosses ‘chicken’ and ‘fowl’ have been taken
as equivalent.

    A number of Oceanic languages use a word for fowl which is most commonly the generic
term for ‘bird’.

284   Ross Clark

                           Figure 6.1   Gallus gallus, Red Jungle Fowl

<
PMP *manuk ‘bird, fowl’
POc *manuk ‘Red Jungle-fowl, Gallus gallus'
  Yap:    Yapese        ni-men
  NNG:    Manam         maŋ             bird, chicken
  NNG:    Mangap        man
  SV:     Kwamera       menu             ‘bird, prototypically fowl’
  SV:     Lenakel       menuk
  Mic:    Carolinian    malix           (loan from Palauan)
  Mic:    Namoluk       malok           (loan from Palauan)
  Mic:    Ponapean      malek(enwel)    (loan from Palauan)
>

Note that Bender et al. (2003:327) consider the Micronesian forms to be loans from Chamorro
mannok ‘chicken’.

     A more widely distributed set of terms for the fowl is clearly an imitative term for the
distinctive call of the male bird. A pattern of consonants occurs which could represent POc
*k-k-r-k, though the vowels are not consistent and one or other of the consonants may not
appear. Such distant semblances as Japanese kokekokko and French cocorico ‘cock-a-doodle-
doo’ suggest that this sequence may have, contrary to appearances, something natural about
it. And yet, the shift of these words from sound-imitative to referential (including the female)
cannot have taken place many times independently. I therefore hesitantly offer a reconstruction.
However, it is noteworthy that *k in this term is never lenited (to y, 2 etc) in the many
languages where this is a regular change. This presumably reflects its onomatopaeic origin.

<
POc *kokorako ‘fowl, Gallus gallus, esp. male’
  Adm:    Loniu              koha
  Adm:    Nyindrou           kakaro (mwan)              ‘rooster’
  NNG:    Labu               kakaru
  NNG:    North Watut        kokora
  NNG:    Bariai             kokako
  NNG:    Kove               kok(o)ako, kahako
  NNG    Lu si          kok(o)ako
  NNG    Takia          kirek
  NNG    Kilenge        koako
  NNG    Mouk           kuako
  NNG    Lamogai        kuako
  NNG    Mengen (Poeng) kukulega                   ‘bird similar to chicken
  PT     Bwaidoga       kakaleko, kakeliko         ‘the domestic fowl’
  PT     Are            kokorereko
  PT     Wedau          kokorereko                 ‘rooster’
  PT     Kilivila       rekorekwa
  PT     Muyuw          kalkdlek, lekdlek
  PT     Bartie Bay     kokorereko
  PT     Hula           kokoroku
  PT     Mekeo          ?o?olo
  PT     Motu           kokoroku
  MM:    Nakanai        kureko
  MM:    Tolai          kəkaruk, karegi, kareki
  MM:    Petats         kekeleau
  MM:    Mono-Alu       kokolei
  MM:    Babatana       kokorako                   ‘rooster’
  MM:    Nduke          kokorako
  MM:    Roviana        kokorako
  MM:    Simbo          kokorako
  MM:    Maringe        khokorako
  SES:   Bugotu         kokiroko                   ‘cock; to crow’
  SES:   Longgu         kokoroko                   ‘rooster’
  SES:   To’aba’ita     kukua
  SES:   Lau            karaikoa, kakara i koa
  SES:   Langalanga     kakaraikua
  SES:   ’Are’are       kua, kukua, kuakua
  SES:   Kwara’ae       karai
  SES:   Kwaio          kokorako
  SES:   Kwai           kakarai
  SES:   Sa’a           kue
  Mic:   Sonsorolese    gogo, koko
>

                                                                              Birds   285



    The possible Polynesian reflex of the third term has undergone a significant semantic
shift.

<
POc *toqa ‘fowl’
  NNG:   Kairiru              (myan) tok   (m-an ‘bird’)
  MM:    Teop                 toa          ‘small water fowl’
  NCV:   Mota                 toa
  NCV:   Lakon                to
  NCV:   Raga                toa
  NCV:   Matantas            na-toa
  NCV      Kiai                toa
  NCV      Atchin              na-td
  NCV      Neve’ei             no-to
  NCV      Avava               oto
  NCV      Big Nambas          fi-tu, ni-tu
  NCV      Nese                fia-to
  NCV      Labo                ue-te
  NCV      SW Bay              ne-teu
  NCV      Naha’ai (Malfaxal) no-to
  NCV      SE Ambrym           tiito
  NCV      Paamese             (a) to
  NCV      Lewo                towa
  NCV      Nguna               toa
  SV:      Ura                urwa
  SV:      Sye                 ne-two
  NCal     Nelemwa             ko
  NCal     Caaac               ho, jo
  NCal     Jawe                ho
  NCal     Cemuhi             J®
  NCal     Paici              ja
  NCal     Xaracuu             do
  NCal     Drubea              td
  NCal     Iaai               xoto
  NCal     Dehu               gutu
  NCal     Nengone             titewe
  Fij:     Bauan               toa
  Pn:      Tongan              to?a            ‘courageous, hero, strong man’
  Pn:      E Futunan           (moa)to?a       ‘cock’
  Pn:      Tikopia             toa             ‘strong man, warrior, fighting spirit’
  Pn:      Marquesan           toa             ‘brave, strong, warrior; male’
>

286     Ross Clark



    The common Polynesian word for the fowl has no certain external cognates, though it has
apparently been borrowed rather far afield. However, it is possible that Wayan and Bauan mo
are cognate with PPn *moa, as PCP *oa often becomes d, at least in Western Fijian. If they
are, then PCP *moa is reconstructable, but with uncertain denotation.

<
PPn *moa ‘fowl’
  Pn:      Tongan       moa
  Pn:      Niuean       moa
  Pn:      E Futunan    moa
  Pn:      Samoan       moa
  Pn:      Tuvalu       moa
  Pn:      Nukuoro      moa            ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:      Tahitian     moa
  Pn:      Rarotongan   moa
  Pn:      Maori        moa            ‘Moa (Dinornis) and other extinct spp.’
cf. also: Possible borrowings from Polynesian include:
  Yap: Yapese          moe?
  NCal: Ajie           meye
  NCal: Tinrin         meo
  Mic: Kiribati        moa
  Fij:    Wayan        mo          ‘rail sp,, probably Porzana tabuensis’
  Fij:    Bauan        mo          ‘ Sooty Crake, Porzana tabuensis’
  Fij:    Rotuman      moa
>

                                                                                   Birds    287


    A common observation about animal taxonomy is that terminology for domesticated
species will be more detailed than for most wild species—specific names for sexes, ages
and varieties are to be expected. This does not seem to be the case for the fowl in Proto
Oceanic.

    One term, reconstructed as PMP *qupa ‘hen, egg-laying chicken’, appears to have Oceanic
reflexes only in Polynesian and Rotuman (the latter a borrowing):

<
PMP *qupa ‘hen, egg-laying chicken’ (ACD)
POc *qupa ‘hen’
  Pn:       E Futunan   ?ufa          ‘young hen, pullet’
  Pn:       Rapanui     uha           ‘hen; female of animals’
cf. also:
  Fij:      Rotuman     ?ufa          (borrowed from Polynesian source)
>

   The male of the species is most commonly simply denoted by ‘male fowl’ (Manam may
moane, Motu kokoruku maruanena,’Axe’are kua mane), and chicks as ‘child of fowl’ (Motu
kokoroku natuna, Cemuhi nahi-ja, Bauan luve ni tod).


6.5 Non-passerine land and fresh water birds

Though in species numbers they are roughly a third of the total, this group of families accounts
for well over half the cognate sets and reconstructions presented here. Land birds are likely to
be seen by everyone in the community, and not just those who go to sea. The non-passerines
are on the whole larger and more conspicuous than the passerines. They are therefore likely
to have names known by everyone. They are also objectively more diverse as a group, and
hence more likely to be recognised and lexicalised (Boster, Berlin & O’Neill 1986: 577-578).


6.5.1 Cassowaries (Casuariidae)

A single species of this family of huge flightless birds, the Dwarf Cassowary (Casuarius
bennetti), lives in the Oceanic homeland. Although cassowaries do not extend even into the
Solomons, enough reflexes exist in languages of the NNG, PT and MM groups to support
the reconstruction below. Attribution of such a form to POc is further supported by numerous
cognates in languages to the west, e.g. Biak (SHWNG) (man)swar, Kaiwai (CMP) asawar
(Anceaux 1961).

288   Ross Clark

                        Figure 6.2    Casuarius bemetti, Dwarf Cassowary

<
PCEMP *kasawari ‘cassowary’
POc *kasuari ‘Dwarf Cassowary, Casuarius bennettk (Milke 1965)
  NNG    Kairiru         qaiwar
  NNG    Manam           kaluari
  NNG    Tumleo          sauwil
  NNG    Kela            kusua
  NNG    Yabem           kePsewa
  NNG    Musom           sirwe
  NNG    Aribwatsa       subeP
  NNG    Amara           akaiuor
  NNG    Mangap          kaiwor
  NNG    Tami            kisiwa
  PT:    Suau            Pasuari
  PT:    Are             kasuare
  PT:    Nimoa           hasuari
  MM:    Nakanai         textitkehu
  MM:    Lihir           kosol
>


6.5.2 Herons (Ardeidae)

The herons of the homeland include three species of large herons or egrets of the genus
Egretta as well as the Green-backed Heron (Butorides striatus), the Nankeen Night Heron
(Nycticorax caledonicus) and two bitterns (Ixobrychus spp,). Most cognate sets refer to the
large and conspicuous Egretta herons, which may have been the basis for a generic term.

                                                                                   Birds    289


                             Figure 6.3     Egretta sacra. Reef Heron

<
POc *kao(i) ‘heron, probably Egretta sp.’
  Yap:   Yapese         ?kaw, ?kow            ‘heron’
  Adm:   Nyindrou       kaoi                  ‘heron’
  NNG:   Mengen (Poeng) gao                   ‘reef heron’
  PT:    Gapapaiwa      kou                   ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra‘
  MM:    Patpatar       kou                   ‘rufous night heron’
  MM:    Sursurunga     kau                   ‘taxon including Zebra Heron and Nankeen Night Heron’
  MM:    Halia               koei             ‘crane’
  MM:    Halia               ko-koyei         ‘ Egretta sacra‘
  MM:    Banoni              koko             "Egretta sacra (dark morph)’
  MM:    Nduke               kou              ‘Great Egret, Egretta alba‘
  MM:    Simbo               kau              ‘bird sp. similar to crane’
  SES:   Longgu              ?ao              ‘reef heron’
  SES:   ’Are’are            ao               ‘black heron’
  SES:   ’Are’are            ao eke           ‘white heron’
  SES:   Uki ni Masi         yao              ‘ Egretta sacra‘
  Mic:   Sonsorolese         ya-yao(t)        ‘heron’
  Mic:   Chuukese            kawakaw          ‘heron (general name)
  Mic:   Ponapean            kowe(lik)        ‘heron-like bird sp.’
  Fij:   Bauan               (visa)ko         ‘Green-backed Heron, Butorides striatus‘
  Pn:    Nukuoro             kava             " Egretta sacra"
  Pn:    Takuu               kao              ‘small thin wading bird resembling a heron’
  Pn:    Tikopia             keo              ‘Egretta sacra"
  Pn:    Maori               kao(riki)        ‘Little Bittern, Ixobrychus minutus"
>

It appears that *kao may have been a generic term for herons in PCP. Both Fijian and Polynesian
introduce new terms (see below) for Egretta, and *kao mainly survives in reference
to less conspicuous species. Among Central Pacific reflexes only the Takuu and Maori reflexes
may be considered unproblematic. The Nukuoro word is probably borrowed from a
Micronesian language.

<
POc *kaopa ‘heron, probably Egretta sp.’
  Adm: Drehet          kop                ‘heron sp.’
  SES:  Gela       kaova               ‘egret’
  SES:  Tolo       haova               ‘a long-legged, long-necked coastal bird’
  SES:  Arosi      kaopwa              ‘egret’
  SES:  Bauro      yaoha               ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra‘
  NCV:  Mota       kaova               ‘an egret, herodias’
  NCV:  SE Ambrym koh                  ‘Egretta sacra‘
  NCal: Nelemwa    kook, koova               ‘Egretta sacra"
  NCal: Fwai       koova               ‘Egretta sacra"
  NCal: Pai ci     koo                 ‘Egretta sacra"
  NCal: Xaracuu    kaukwa              ‘white heron sp.’
  NCal: Xaracuu    gokoo               ‘Egretta sacra‘
  Pn:   Rennellese you                 ‘Black Bittern, Ixobrychus flavicollis"
  Pn:   Pileni     kova                ‘heron, egret’
>

290    Ross Clark


Both Polynesian Outlier names are presumably borrowed from SE Solomonic languages.

__pre__
  TM:   Burna          ove(ne)       ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra‘

<
PNCV * qova ‘heron, probably Egretta sp.’
  NCV: Raga            ova           ‘Egretta sacra (dark phase)’
  NCV: Kiai            ova           ‘heron’
  NCV:  Lewo           yeva          ‘heron’
  NCV: Namakir         ?ov           ‘reef heron’
  NCV: Nakanamanga ova               ‘reef heron (dark phase)’
>

The relation among the three cognate sets above is not entirely clear. The ordering is based on
their successively narrower distribution, from which one might conjecture that *kao was the
original POc term, *kaopa an extension of this, and *qopa a truncation of * kaopa restricted to
North-Central Vanuatu and its immediate neighbour Temotu area. The above cognate complex is
almost unrepresented in the Papuan Tip group, which seems to replace it with the
following:

<
PPT *boqe ‘heron, Egretta sp.’
  PT      Tubetube  boi               ‘reef heron’
  PT      Wagawaga boi                ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra‘
  PT      Iduna    foi                ‘Intermediate Egret, Egretta intermedia"
  PT      Kilivila  boi               ‘heron’
  PT      Muyuw     bouy              ‘white crane’
  PT      Balawaia  boge              ‘white heron’
  PT      Hula     poge               ‘heron’
  PT      Lala     boe               ‘heron’
  PT      Mekeo    foe                ‘heron, egret’
>

   Two of the identifications below are problematic: the Pied Heron, Egretta picata, is a
mainland species not known to occur in the Bismarcks, and the Grey Heron, Ardea cinerea,
does not occur in the New Guinea area at all.

                                                                                Birds   291

<
POc *b'aro ‘heron, probably Egretta sp.’
   NNG:     Yabem     bwak>?            ‘heron’
   NNG:     Bing      buar-buar         ‘Pied Heron, Egrettapicata’
   NNG:     Dami      bar               ‘heron’
   NNG:     Gedaged   (ma)bol           ‘Grey Heron, Ardea cinerea’
   PT:      Motu      baira             ‘pure white heron’
   MM:      Patpatar  bol               ‘great egret’
   MM:      Ramoaaina bar               ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra’’
   SES:     Longgu    (koivo) baro      ‘white heron sp.’
   NOV:     Neve’ei   no-bol (yevyev)   ‘reef heron’
cf. also:
  Fij:      Rotuman    pelb             ‘‘Egretta sacra’
  Fij:      Bauan      beld             ‘Egretta sacra’
>

    A more localised group of cognates in Vanuatu show some resemblance to the above:

<
PSV *bwan(ie) ‘heron’ (Lynch)
   SV:      Ura        (yay)pon      ‘egret’
   SV:      Sye        (yay)pon      ‘egret’
   SV:      Kwamera    pan           ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra
   SV:      Lenakel    pwan          ‘crane’
   SV:      Anejom     n-pwan        ‘Ardea spp.’ [sc. Egretta]
cf. also:
   NOV:     Letemboi   na-limbanua ‘heron’
   NOV:     Labo       na-mbunuoj ‘heron’
   NOV:     SW Bay     (li)mbanui  ‘heron’
>

    Additional clear but highly localised names in the Solomons, Micronesia and Polynesia
also centre around Egretta. POc * sou below is suspect as a POc reconstruction as it only
occurs in the Solomons. However, Numbami (NNG) saole ‘egret’ may be cognate. If it is,
then the POc form was perhaps *saol or *saul, but this in turn leaves Numbami final -e for
expected f-ɑ unaccounted for, as well as the lack of the final consonant and echo vowel from
expected Marovo '``eouhi. Nduke '`'houhi.

<
POc *sou (?) ‘heron’
  MM:       Torau      sou           ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra’
  MM:       Marovo     cou           ‘Egretta sacra’
  MM:       Nduke      hou           ‘Egretta sacra’
  SES:      Gela       sou           ‘heron’
  SES:      Tolo       cou           ‘bird sp.’
  SES:      Malango    cou           ‘Nankeen Night Heron, Nycticorax caledonicus’
  SES:      Longgu     sou           ‘heron’
  SES:      Lau        tou           ‘crane’
  SES:      Kwaio      tou           ‘egret’
  SES:      ’Are’are   tou           ‘night heron’
  SES:      Sa’a       tou           ‘night heron’
>

292     Ross Clark

<
Proto Central Micronesian *karau 'Egretta sacra‘ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic:     Kiribati    kdi           ‘Egretta sacra"
  Mic:     Marshallese keke          ‘reef heron (white phase)’
  Mic:     Mokilese    koro          ‘reef heron’
  Mic:     Sonsorolese yayai(cor)    ‘black heron’
  Mic:     Namoluk     oro           ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra
Proto Chuukic *karat ‘heron’
  Mic: Puluwatese ycere(n)           ‘heron’
  Mic: Woleaian       geræ           ‘bird sp. with long neck’
  Mic: Chuukese       ATA            ‘heron’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Rennellese    kagau        ‘Egretta sacra‘
>

The Rennellese term seems to agree with the Central Micronesian reconstruction, but borrowing from this direction would be unexpected. No heron terms like this appear to exist in
the Southeast Solomons.

<
PPn *matuku ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra"
  Pn:      Tongan       motuku
  Pn:      Niuean       motuku
  Pn:      E Futunan    amatuku
  Pn:      Samoan       matu?u
  Pn:      Tuvalu       matuku
  Pn:      K’marangi    matuku
  Pn:      Takuu        matuku
  Pn:      Sikaiana     motuku
  Pn:      Ifira-Mele   matuku(tea) ‘white heron’, tea ‘white’)
  Pn:      Pukapukan    matiku
  Pn:      Marquesan    matuku
  Pn:      Rarotongan   matuku      ‘a small dark-grey heron which frequents the seashore’ (Savage)
  Pn:      Maori        matuku      ‘Egretta sacra and other heron spp.’
Compare, with unexpected referents:
  Pn:  Niuean       motuku         ‘Bristle-thighed Curlew, Numenius tahitiensis‘
  Pn:  Rennellese matuku           ‘a kind of gitpe pigeon, perhaps the female’
>

<
Proto Central Eastern Polynesian *kautukii~*kootuku ‘heron sp.’
  Pn:      Hawaiian     ?auku?u      ‘Black-crowned Night Heron, Nycticorax nycticorax‘
  Pn:      Mangarevan kotuku         ‘Reef Heron, Egretta sacra"
  Pn:      Tahitian   ?otu?u         'Egretta sacra"
  Pn:      Rarotongan kotuku         'Egretta sacra"
  Pn:      Maori      kotuku         ‘Great Egret, Egretta alba"
  Pn:      Maori      kautuku        ‘Australian Bittern, Botauruspoiciloptilus"
>

                                                                                  Birds   293


The East Polynesian forms prefixed with *ko- fall into a large class of nouns so reshaped in
this subgroup. However, the Hawaiian and Maori terms with *kau- suggest the possibility of
influence of the *kao term reconstructed above.

    Compared with extensive cognate sets for the Egretta herons, only two small sets appear
to denote the Night Herons:

<
POc */jako ‘Night Heron, Nycticorax sp.’
  Adm:     Loniu        fiako        ‘bird sp., sings at night, heralds death, possibly night heron or curlew’
  NNG: Musom      ijoku(mbuij)       ‘gray or black heron’
  NNG: North Watut ŋako(tofi         ‘crane’
  PT:  Motu       noko               ‘heron’
>

<
PNCal *tila ‘night heron, Nycticorax sp.’
  NCal:   Nelemwa       rheld        ‘Nankeen Night Heron, Nycticorax caledonicus’
  NCal:   Ajie          sira         ‘mangrove heron’
  NCal:   Tinrin        flrd         ‘grey night heron’
  NCal:   Xaracuu       sira         ‘Nycticorax caledonicus’
>


6.5.3 Ducks (Anatidae)

The Pacific Black Duck (Anas superciliosa) is the most common duck of the Oceanic region,
but the Grey Teal (Anas gibberifrons) is also present in the homeland, as are two species of
Whistling Ducks (Dendrocygna spp,), and various other species of this family are known
as migrants. There is no evidence of domestication of any duck species in pre-European
Oceania. Many languages use a separate lexical item for the introduced domesticates, as
Samoanpato ‘domestic duck’ (from Spanish), toloa ‘wild duck’. Very few descriptions offer
glosses more precise than ‘duck’ or ‘wild duck’. However, Idunageluluva is explicitly stated
to cover both species of Anas mentioned above, and Nelemwa kerorop includes both these
as well as the Mallard, A. platyrhynchos). There may be a terminological agreement between
Caaac and Fijian (Lomaivitilevu) in which the Whistling Duck is described as ‘red duck’
(Caaac rilaŋ mia, Fijian ga-damu).

<
PMP *NjaRaq ‘wild duck’ (Blust 2002)
POc *NjaRa ‘duck’
  Adm: Loniu            W            ‘bird sp., floats on surface of water, possibly duck or booby’
  Adm:    Nyindrou      na           ‘duck; shag’
  PT:     Wedau         ŋara         ‘duck; shag’
  MM:     Banoni        ndra(ka)     ‘Pacific Black Duck, Anas superciliosa’
  MM:     Torau         nara         ‘Anas superciliosa’
  MM:     Roviana       ŋara         ‘wild duck’
  SES:    Uki ni Masi   (?a)ijara
  SES:    Arosi         (ka)ŋara
  SES:    Arosi         ŋara (i su?u) (su?u Take, swamp’)
  SV:      Anejom         n-ŋa,           ‘possibly Porphyrio sp.’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  SV:      Anejom       ŋar(ohos)       ‘possibly Porphyrio sp.’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
PMic ”`ŋaŋa ‘sea bird, duck’
 Mic: Carolinian ŋdŋa5
 Mic: Satawal          ŋdŋa
 Mic: Woleai           ŋaŋa
 Fij:    Bauan         ŋd
>

294     Ross Clark

                         Figure 6.4   Anas superciliosci, Pacific Black Duck


    The following possible Maori reflex refers to a different waterfowl, but the formal
development would be regular. (The grebe is presently found only in the South Island, where
Maori */7 > ŋ

__pre__
  Pn:      Maori (South Island) kd(mana)            Great Crested Grebe, Podiceps cristatus

    The following reconstruction is a metathetic variant of the above, apparently a local
development in SE Solomonic and Micronesian.

<
PEOc *Rapa ‘duck’
  SES:   Gela        (vava)raŋa ‘a duck’
  SES:   Tolo        (ha)raŋa      ‘wild duck’
  SES:   To’aba’ita  (?d?a)rarja
  SES:   Kwaio       (?aʔa)latja ‘Pacific Black Duck, Anas supereiliosa'
  SES:   ’Are’are    (arala)rana ‘wild duck’
  SES:   Sa’a        araŋa         ‘wild duck’
  Mic:   Namoluk     raŋ           ‘Spotbill Duck, Anas poecilorhyncha’
  Mic:   Marshallese rluaij        ‘wild duck’
  Mic:   Marshallese rluoija(npat) ‘Anas spp.’ (pat ‘swamp’)
cf. also: Probably borrowed from a SE Solomonic language:
  MM Marovo          araŋa         ‘Anas superciliosa’
>


[5] Note that Jackson & Marek (1991) consider Carolinian ŋaŋa a loan from Chamorro ŋaŋaf ‘duck’.

                                                                                          Birds    295


    A final local development of this same group, again with metathesis:

<
Proto South Melanesian '^`l(i)eiŋ ‘duck’ (Lynch)6
  SV:      Kwamera        ia-reŋ          ‘duck (indigenous)’
  NCal:    Caaac          maŋ             ‘duck’
  NCal:    Tinrin         riid            ‘duck’
  NCal:    Xaracuu        riid            ‘Anas spp.’
  NCal:    Iaai           eŋ              ‘duck’
>

    PPn *toloa replaces */jaRa as the generic term for ‘duck’.

<
PPn *toloa ‘duck’
  Pn:      Tongan         toloa           ‘Pacific Black Duck, Anas superciliosa’
  Pn:      E Futunan      toloa           ‘Spotbill Duck, Anaspoecilorhyncha’
  Pn:      Samoan         toloa           ‘Anas superciliosa'’
  Pn:      Tokelauan      toloa           ‘Anas superciliosa’
  Pn:      Tuvalu         toloa           ‘Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos, and Northern Shoveller, A. clypeata’
  Pn:      Pukapukan      toloa           ‘Anas superciliosa’
  Pn:      K’marangi      told            ‘duck sp.’
  Pn:      Tikopia        toroa           ‘Anas superciliosa’
  Pn:      Anutan         toroa           ‘duck’
  Pn:      W Uvean        toloa           ‘Anas superciliosa’
  Pn:      Hawaiian       koloa           ‘Anas spp.’
cf. also: A probable Polynesian borrowing:
  TM: Burna           teloloa             ‘Anas superciliosa'
>

    A number of other Polynesian and Fijian languages have bird names formally cognate
with the above, but referring to shore and sea birds. (A number of these innovations are in
the languages of atolls, where ducks are rare or non-occurrent owing to the absence of surface
fresh water.):

__pre__
    Fij:    Kadavu         toro, taro      ‘Sula spp.’
    Fij:    Wayan          toro            ‘probably Frigatebird, Fregata spp.’
    Pn:     Nukuria        koroa           ‘Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus’
    Pn:     Takuu          taroa           ‘Numenius phaeopus’
    Pn:     Luangiua       kaloa(kule)     ‘Bar-tailed Godwit, Limosa lapponica’
    Pn:     Sikaiana       toloa           ‘Numenius phaeopus, Limosa lapponica
    Pn:     Rennellese     togoa           ‘Great Egret, Egretta alba’
    Pn:     Tuamotuan      toroa           ‘booby, Sula sp.’
    Pn:     Rarotongan     toroa           ‘booby, Sula spp.’
    Pn:     Maori          toroa           ‘albatross, Diomedea spp.’

[6] Southern Melanesian is a subgroup proposed by John Lynch comprising the Southern Vanuatu and New Cale donian languages. See for example Lynch (2004:317).

296     Ross Clark

<
Proto Tahitic *mokola ‘duck’
  Pn:    Tahitian     mo?ora        ‘Pacific Black Duck, Anas supereihosa`'
  Pn:   Manihiki      rdrnoko       ‘wild duck sp.’
  Pn:   Rarotongan mokora           ‘duck’
>

Maori applies formally cognate terms to two quite different species:

__pre__
 Pn:    Maori         mokora        ‘New Zealand Robin, Petroica australis (female)’
 Pn:    Maori         rnakord       ‘ Silver Gull, Larus novaehollandiae‘


   A strikingly resemblant form occurs in Motu. The only known source of Polynesian loanwords
here would be 19th century missionaries from the Cook Islands, but it seems odd to
have a wild species named in this way.

__pre__
    PT:     Motu             mokoraha         ‘Wandering Whistling Duck, Dendrocygna areuata'



6.5.4 Diurnal raptors (Pandionidae, Accipitridae, Falconidae)

These three families are treated together because of obvious similarities in appearance and
habits, as well as overlap in naming practices. They are well represented in the homeland,
with at least ten species. Roughly from largest to smallest, they include the White-bellied Sea
Eagle (Haliaeetus leucogaster), the Osprey (Pandion haliaetus), several goshawks of genus
Accipiter', the Brahminy Kite (Haliastur indus), the Black Honey Buzzard (Henicopernis
infuscata), the Crested Baza (Aviceda subcristata), and probably both the Peregrine Falcon
(Falcoperegrinus) and the Oriental Hobby (Falco severus).

    A very large number of terms for birds of prey are recorded, from which a number of
cognate sets emerge; however, associating particular names with particular species is much
more difficult, owing in large part to vague descriptions which use ‘hawk’ or ‘eagle’ to refer
to any bird of prey.

6.5.4.1 Fish-eating raptors (Pandion, Haliaeetus, Haliastur)

Perhaps because of their size alone, these species provide some of the best POc reconstructions.
The following set may represent a generic term:

<
POc *taragau ‘fish-eating eagle or hawk’
  NNG: Kairiru              tarakyau,        ‘hawk/eagle’
  NNG: Kairiru              tiraPau
  NNG:      Manam           taragau         ‘fish-eagle’
  MM:       Patpatar        taragau         ‘Whistling Kite, Haliastur sphenurus‘
  MM:       Tolai           taragau         ‘Osprey, Pandion haliaetus"
  SES:      Malango         taragau         ‘Pandion haliaetus"
  SES:      Kwara’ae        alafau          ‘hawk not very big, steals chickens and other birds food’
  SES:      Kwaio           alagau          ‘White Goshawk, Accipiter novaehollandiae‘
  SES:      Sa’a            arakau          ‘Brahminy Kite, Haliastur indus‘
  SES:      Arosi           aragau          ‘Haliastur indus"
cf. also:
   MM:      Nehan           targau           ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula"
>

                                                                                   Birds    297


                  Figure 6.5   Haliaeetus leucogaster, White-bellied Sea Eagle


    The fish-eagle (Haliaeetus) was probably the largest flying creature known to the Proto
Oceanic speakers. (H. leucogaster of the homeland is replaced in the Solomons by the very
similar H. sanfordi.) So it is not surprising to find terms for this species literally meaning
‘big bird’ in a number of languages. In all but one of the following, the first element reflects
POc * manuk ‘bird’, and the second is the local word for ‘big’. These second elements are
etymologically diverse, but Patpatar, Nehan and Puluwatese probably retain the POc form
*lapuat ‘large’ (vol.2:190-191).

<
POc *manuk-lapuat [‘big bird’] ‘White-bellied Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus leucogaster
  PT: Bartie Bay        manu-bada     ‘sea hawk’
  PT: Are               manu-bada     ‘fish hawk’
  PT: Wedau             manu-bada     ‘fish hawk’
  MM: Patpatar          malaba        ‘eagle (black and white)’
  MM: Nehan             manu-lab      'Haliaeetus leucogaster or Osprey, Pandion haliaetus'
  SES:    Bugotu        manu hutu     ‘eagle’
  SES:    Gela          manu-kama     ‘a hawk, eagle’
  SES:    Gae           manu-loki     ‘eagle’
  SES:    To’aba’ita    no?o baPita   ‘eagle sp.’
  TM:     Vano          menuka p``ene ‘eagle’
  Fij:    Bauan         manu-levu     ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans’
>

The following is formally connected, but from an area with no eagles—perhaps still referring
to the largest bird in the area:

__pre__
   Mic:    Puluwatese mallap            ‘frigate bird’


    Two other sets are derived from the bird generic *manuk, though the second element is
less easy to identify.

<
POc *manuka ‘sea eagle’ (Blust 2002)
  Yap: Yapese      manuw                      ‘eagle’
  MM: Halia (Haku) manu                       ‘Sanford’s Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus sanfordf
  MM:    Petats          manu                ‘the very large fish-eagle’
  MM:    Banoni          manuka              'Hahaeetus sanfordi'
  MM:    Mono-Alu        mdnu?a              ‘eagle’
  MM:    Roviana         manuvu, manuyu      ‘a large grey fish-hawk’
  MM:    Ughele          manuyu              ‘eagle’
  Mic:   Puluwatese      mdnuwa              ‘legendary man-eating bird’
  Mic:   Carolinian (Tanapag)      m''uhiwa, manuwo    ‘eagle, hawk’
  Mic:   Chuukese        məriwo              ‘a kind of sea eagle; a mythical bird, the flapping of whose wings makes a wind that topples trees’
>


298   Ross Clark


<
PAdm *manu(w)ai ‘sea eagle’ (Blust2002)
  Adm:   Loniu          menuway       ‘eagle’
  Adm:   Nyindrou       mahuwe        ‘eagle’
  Adm:   Titan          manuai        ‘Osprey, Pandion haliaetus’’
  Adm:   Baluan         manuay        ‘sea eagle’
  Adm:   Lou            menua         ‘hawk, eagle’
  Adm:   Wuvulu         manua         ‘sea eagle’
>

   Though perhaps not so strongly identified with a particular species, the following also
appears to refer to the largest raptors:

<
POc *bogi ‘large bird of prey sp., possibly sea eagle’
  Adm:    Titan         poe (dilei)   ‘large eagle’
  NNG     Gitua          (man)bok     ‘large eagle’
  NNG     Bariai         bogi         ‘sea eagle’
  NNG     Lusi           voyi         ‘sea eagle’
  NNG     Malalamai      bogi         ‘small eagle’
  NNG     Gedaged        bog          ‘large predatory bird, fish eagle’
  NNG     Takia          bog          ‘eagle’
  NNG     Wab            buog         ‘large eagle’
  NNG     Roinji         bok          ‘small eagle’
  NNG     Aria           bogi         ‘sea eagle’
  PT:     Lala          bo?i(bata)   ‘beach eagle’
  PT:     Mekeo         fol           ‘large birds of prey more common near mountains’
  PT:     Motu           bogi(bada)   ‘Black Kite, Milvus migrans' (bada ‘big’)
>

   Further possible POc reconstructions for ‘eagles’ are:

<
POc *bway ‘sea eagle’
  Adm: Baluan           (ŋa)puaŋ      ‘brown bird, eats fish, similar to sea eagle but smaller’
  NNG: Yabem            (mo?)b‘aij    ‘sea eagle’ (mo? ‘bird’)
  NNG: Mangap           man-boŋ       ‘eagle’
>

                                                                                     Birds   299

<
POc *roqa ‘eagle’
  MM:       Bola          loya          ‘eagle’
  MM:       Nakanai       loha(uru)     ‘sea eagle’ (uru ‘big’)
  SES:      Malango       roha          ‘White Goshawk, Accipiter novae hoilandiae’
  SES:      Longgu        aroha         ‘eagle’
>

<
POc *maya ‘Osprey, Pandion haliaetus’
  Adm: Titan              mayci       ‘type θf raptor’
  PT:  Wedau              mai(dunari)
  MM: Nakanai             mde         ‘large hawk’
>

    There are several further local reconstructions in the Solomons for these fish-eaters:

<
Proto NW Solomonic *katata~*kakata ‘sea eagle, Haliaeetus’
  MM:       Nehan         katkata(kubul)    ‘White-bellied Sea Eagle, H. leucogaster
  MM:       Nehan         tatate(kubul)    (juvenile)’
  MM:       Marovo        kakaka            ‘eagle’
  MM:       Nduke         tala              ‘Sanford’s Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus sanfordi’
  MM:       Roviana       atdta             ‘eagle’
  MM:       Simbo         kakaka            ‘eagle’
  MM:       Vangunu       akaka             ‘eagle’
  MM:       Kokota        kakade            ‘eagle’
  MM:       Maringe       gayata            ‘Haliaeetus sanfordi’
>

<
Proto SE Solomonic *tava ‘hawk or eagle’ (cf POc *tap (w)a ‘glide, soar’ above)
   SES:     Gela          lava          ‘small hawk’
   SES:     Malango       tavo(kea)     ‘Brahminy Kite, Haliastur indus'
   SES:     To’aba’ita    afa           ‘eagle sp.’
   SES:     Kwara’ae      afa           ‘eagle (largest of all birds)’
   SES:     Kwaio         afa           ‘Sanford’s Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus sanfordi'
   SES:     ’Are’are      aha           ‘sparrow-hawk, eagle’
   SES:     Fatal eka     dfe           ‘eagle’
   SES:     Uki ni Masi   hata(roŋa)    ‘eagle’
   SES:     Bauro         aheta(roŋa)   ‘eagle’
cf. also:
   Pn:      Rennellese    tava          ‘Australian Goshawk, Accipiterfasciatus’ (borrowed from a SE Solomonic source)
>

<
Proto Malaita-Makira fada ‘sea eagle, Haliaeetus’
  SES:      Kwaio         fada          ‘eagle’
  SES:      Dori’o        fada          ‘eagle’
  SES:      ’Are’are       hata         ‘big brown eagle’
  SES:      Sa’a           hada         ‘White-bellied Sea Eagle, Haliaeetus leucogaster’
  SES:      Arosi          hada         ‘Haliaeetus leucogaster’
>

300      Ross Clark

<
Proto Malaita-Makira *wakio ‘Osprey, Pandion haliaetus'
   SES:     To’aba’ita   kakCo        ‘fish eating raptor, probably osprey’
   SES:     Lau          k`eikio
   SES:     Langalanga   k``agio      ‘eagle’
   SES:     ’Are’are     wakio        ‘fish hawk’
   SES:     Sa’a         wakio
   SES:     Arosi        wagio
   SES:     Bauro        wakio
>

      The following may be cognate with PSOc *mala (§5.4.2 on p.303):

<
PNCal *bwamara ‘fishing bird of prey’
  NCal:     Nelemwa      b'aivada     ‘Osprey, Pandion haliaetus’
  NCal:     Jawe         bwaemada     ‘Whistling Kite, Haliastur sphenurus’
  NCal:     Pije         bwaephada    ‘Haliastur sphenurns’
  NCal:     Paici        b'amkla      ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans’
  NCal:     Ajie         boamara      ‘oiseau de proie, genre epervier’
  NCal:     Tinrin       bwamera      ‘Pandion haliaetus’
  NCal:     Xaracuu      mwamara      ‘Pandion haliaetus’’
  NCal:     Xaracuu      bwamata      ‘harrier sp.’
>


6.5.4.2 Other raptors

The highly distinctive Crested Baza had an apparent POc name:

<
POc *ki(t,s)o ‘Crested Baza, Aviceda subcristata’
  PT:       Iduna        kito
  MM:       Patpatar     kistou
  MM:       Halia        kitou        ‘large bird (similar to the cockatoo and blue pigeon)’
  MM:       Banoni       kitou
  MM:       Nduke        pito         ‘crested hawk, Baza guineyi’
  MM:       Roviana      pito         ‘crested hawk, Bazaguineyi’
  MM:       Maringe      khitu(reo)   ‘Imitator Sparrow Hawk, Accipiter imitator’ (cf. re?o ‘having hoarse, raspy voice’)
   SES:     Gela         kito         ‘very large bird sp.’
   SES:     Malango      kico
   SES:     Longgu       kito         ‘crested hawk’
   SES:     To’aba’ita   ?ito         ‘bush bird sp.’
   SES:     Kwaio        kito         ‘bird sp.’
   SES:     ’Are’are     ki?ito       ‘a hawk’
   SES:     Sa’a         kito
cf. also:
  Fij:      Wayan        kitu         ‘swamphen, Porphyrioporphyrio’
>

                                                                                  Birds   301


                         Figure 6.6   Aviceda subcrislata. Crested Baza

<
PNGOc *kisakisa ‘hawk or eagle’
  NNG: Dami             kiso           ‘hawk’
  NNG: Gedaged          kiskis         ‘eagle sp., catches fish’
  PT:  Tubetube         kisakisa       ‘a hawk’
  PT:  Are              kisakisa       ‘hawk’
  PT:  Kilivila         kilakila       ‘hawk’
  PT:  Nimoa            kisakisa       ‘hawk’
cf. also:
   NNG: Adzera          ŋasŋas         ‘type of eagle’
   NNG: Takia           ŋesaŋes        ‘hawk’
   SES: Gela            kisokiso       ‘bird sp. in the forest’
>

   The following three sets of terms have fairly wide geographical spread but they are not numerous
or semantically consistent enough to justify a confident attribution to Proto Oceanic.

<
POc (?) *luar ‘eagle’
  MM:    Tolai          luər          ‘large hawk sp.’
  MM:    Petats         loa           ‘a hawk which is a little bigger and more tawny than the halalug'
  TM:    Nebao          niiæ          ‘eagle’
  TM:    Asuboa         lio           ‘eagle’
  TM:    Tanibili       (nono)luo     ‘eagle’
>

302     Ross Clark

<
POc (?) *p‘a(r,R)a ‘hawk’
  Adm:      Mussau      pale                          ‘hawk’
  NNG:      Pasismanua7 pola                          ‘Brahminy Kite, Haliastur indus’’
  PT:       Gapapaiwa bora                            ‘eagle (generic)’
  MM:       Patpatar    peres                         ‘Haliastur indus'
  MM:       Roviana     vari (ivu)                    ‘eagle sp.’
  TM:       Vano        na-vala                       ‘Pied Goshawk, Accipiter albogularis‘
  NCV:      Mota        var-vara(m''atika)            ‘a kite that preys on the mwatika [swamphen]’
  NCV:      Kiai        pa-para                       ‘Australian Goshawk, Accipiterfasciatus, or Peregrine Falcon, Falcoperegrinus'
  NCV: Atchin                 (mato)war               ‘a large species of hawk that sometimes kills fowls and rats’
  NCV:      SE Ambrym væ-væ(hum)                      ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans'
  NCV:      Paamese   vei-va(kume)                    'Circus approximans‘
  NCV:      Lewo      pe-pa(uma)                      ‘hawk; eagle’
  Pn:       Takuu     palld                           ‘large mythical bird of prey’
>

<
POc (?) *ta(ou)k ‘hawk, bird of prey’
  Adm: Mussau                tao-taoko        ‘sea eagle’
  NNG: Kaulong               (ekiŋ) tau       ‘hawk’ (ekiŋ ‘bird’)
  MM: Tolai                  tauk(il)         ‘Crested Baza, Aviceda suberistata'
>

    Regionalisms for the smaller predators include:

<
PWOc *kipa ‘hawk’
  PT:       Balawaia        kipa              ‘carnivorous bird’
  PT:       Motu            kipa              ‘hawk’
  MM:       Maringe         ki-khipa          ‘White Goshawk, Accipiter novaehollandiae‘
>

<
PWOc *kam'aga ‘eagle, hawk’ (cf. perhaps PMic *kemoa ‘booby’, §7.3)
  PT:       Balawaia        yamoga            ‘eagle’
  PT:       Hula            amoa              ‘eagle hawk’
  MM:       Babatana        kamaga            ‘hawk’
>

<
PPT *kilave ‘hawk’
  PT:      Wedau            kita              ‘kestrel’
  PT:      Wedau            kitave            ‘hawk’
  PT:      Bartie Bay       kitave            ‘hawk’
  PT:      Mekeo            aft               ‘hawk’
>

[7] ‘Pasismanua’ is the name provisionally used here for ‘native names’ given by Gilliard & Lecroy (1967) for
birds identified during the 1958-59 Gilliard New Britain Expedition. The spellings are impressionistic and the
 language or languages are not clearly identified, but the area of the expedition’s work lies within the territory
 of the Pasismanua group of languages, part of the Southwest New Britain Linkage.

                                                                                  Birds   303

                    Figure 6.7   Circus approximans, Pacific Marsh Harrier

   In Southern Oceania, the sea eagles are no longer present, and the familiar raptors are the
goshawks (Accipiter spp.) and the Pacific Marsh Harrier (Circus approximans)

<
PSOc *mala ‘hawk’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV Mota             mala        ‘hawk, kite, osprey’
  NCV Lakon            ma/         ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans‘
  NCV Raga             mala        ‘ Circus approximans"
  NCV Raga            mal-kal-b''iru ‘Australian Goshawk, Accipiterfasciatus" (b''iru ‘Purple Swamphen, Porphyrioporphyrio")
  NCV:Matantas       na-nala       ‘ Circus approximans"
  NCV:Sara           ne-anal       ‘ Circus approximans" (Flux 1993)
  NCV:Kiai           mala          ‘ Circus approximans"
  NCV:Atchin         ni-mal        ‘kite’
  NCV:Namakir        mdl           ‘red hawk’
  NCV:Nguna          mala          ‘hawk (brown back, white underneath)’
  SV:   N Tanna      maləkam       ‘eagle’
  SV:   Lenakel      melkəm        ‘eagle’
  SV:   Anejom       in-mecyap  w  ‘Accipiter fasciatus, Circus approximans‘
Borrowed from a North-Central Vanuatu language:
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele mala            '’Circus approximans‘
  Pn:   Ifira-Mele   mala-p''eriki ‘Peregrine Falcon, Falcoperegrinus"
>

    The following could be an irregular development of *mala, the languages shown are all
from Malakula, Vanuatu; however some of the Vanuatu reflexes of POc *p wa(r,R)a ‘hawk’
above may belong here, being from languages in which */ and *R would both give zero in
this environment.

Proto Central Vanuatu *bala ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans‘
  NCV: Atchin          ni-mbel          ‘hawk’
  NCV: Naman           ne-bel

304   Ross Clark


  NCV:    Neve’ei    ne-bal
  NCV:    Nese       na-dal
  NCV:    Big Nambas ni-bəl          ‘hawk’
  NCV:    Letemboi   na-mbala        ‘hawk’
  NCV:    Labo       ne-mbale        ‘hawk’
  NCV:    SW Bay     na-mbal         ‘hawk’
  NCV:    Aulua      ne-mbel         ‘hawk’


Proto South Melanesian *marup ‘falcon’
  SV:     Ura         umrom          ‘peregrine falcon’
  SV:     Sye         umrom          ‘peregrine falcon’
  SV:     Kwamera     murup          ‘Peregrine Falcon, Falco peregrinus'
  NCal:   Nengone     marup          ‘Australian Goshawk, Accipiter fasciatus, possibly
                                     also falcon’


PNCal *dei/ ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans‘
  NCal:   Nelemwa     daŋ
  NCal:   Caaac       den
  NCal:   Jawe        den
  NCal:   Pije        diŋ
  NCal:   Cemuhi      diŋ            ‘New Caledonia Sparrow Hawk, Accipiter
                                     haplochrous"
  NCal:   Paici       (mxru)dii      "Accipiter haplochrous"
  NCal:   Tinrin      dm             ‘hawk’
  NCal:   Xaracuu     de
  NCal:   Drubea      nru
  NCal:   Iaai        diŋ
  NCal:   Nengone     (wa)doŋ


PNCal *bwakole ‘hawk or kite’ (cf. *b‘amara above)
  NCal:   Nelemwa      b^ayole, b' aole   ‘Pacific Marsh Harrier, Circus approximans"
  NCal:   Caaac        bwaole             ‘Australian Goshawk, Accipiterfasciatus"
  NCal:   Pije         bwahole            ‘Whistling Kite, Haliastur sphenurus"
  NCal:   Cemuhi       bwaole             "Haliastur sphenurus"
  NCal:   Paici        b'dwkre            "Haliastur sphenurus"
  NCal:   Iaai         bdhole             "Accipiter fasciatus, Haliastur sphenurus"



6.5.5 Megapodes (Megapodiidae)

Megapodes or scrub fowl (Megapodius spp.) are found from the homeland south to Vanuatu
and as far east as the island of Niuafo’ou in Tonga. The representative in the homeland is
the Bismarck Scrub Fowl (M. eremitd). All three of the name-sets below may be of imitative
origin, given the bird’s two-syllable calls ending in [au]-like sounds. (Hadden (2004a:78)

                                                                                 Birds    305




                    Figure 6.8   Megapodius eremita, Bismarck Scrub Fowl




gives 'paa-atd, ‘keeawau keeawuh', ‘keereow keerow’ and ‘kiau kiaiV as representations of
its calls.)
     POc * m‘alau is reflected from Sulawesi (Sangirese maleo) to the easternmost bird of this
family in Tonga (Wallace 1869: 202-4, Christian 1926, but see also comments in Blust 2002).

POc *mwalau ‘Bismarck Scrub Fowl, Megapodius eremita'
  NNG : Kairiru         molau         ‘wild fowl inhabiting the bush, produces fairly large
                                      eggs’
  NNG :   Manam     molau             ‘bird sp.’
  NNG :   Gedaged   malau             ‘megapode’
  NNG :   Sengseng  muluŋ             ‘bush hen, megapode’
  NCV:    Mota      nr`alau           ‘Banks Island Scrub Fowl, Megapodius layardi
  NCV:    Lakon     mwala             Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Raga      nr`alau           Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Matantas  na-malau          Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Sara      na-mlau           Megapodius layardV (Flux 1993)
  NCV:    Kiai      malau             ‘megapode (?)’
  NCV:    Atchin    (to)mla           ‘bush turkey’ (to ‘fowl’)
  NCV:    Neve’ei   (noto)molo        Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Tape      (ti)molo          Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Nese      (to)mola          Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    SE Ambrym meu               Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Paamese   mean              Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Lewo      midu              ‘bird sp., green with white belly and tail’
  NCV:    Namakir   molo              Megapodius layardV
  NCV:    Nguna     malau             Megapodius layardV
  Pn:     Tongan    malau             ‘Polynesian Scrub Fowl, MegapodiuspritchardiV
  Pn:     Takuu     marau
  Pn:     Luangiua  malau

   An apparent doublet with *k w- appears in a number of New Guinea and Solomons languages:

306   Ross Clark


POc *kwal(i)au ‘Bismarck Scrub Fowl, Megapodius eremita‘
  NNG:   North Watut    keroŋ            ‘bush-hen sp.’
  NNG:   Mengen (Poeng) kerao            ‘wildfowl’
  PT:    Hula           k''alio          ‘scrubhen’
  PT:    Muyuw          korau(ta)        ‘megapod’
  PT:    Iduna          k''alau(ta)      ‘Dusky Scrub Fowl, Megapodiusfreycinef
  PT:    Bwaidoga       k''alau(ta)      ‘megapod or bush hen’
  MM:    Nakanai        kileo            ‘bush fowl (megapode)’
  MM:    Tolai          kuru(pap)        Megapodius freycinef
  MM:    Petats         koloŋ            ‘the mound-bird or megapodidae’
  MM:    Kia            kolo(peho)       ‘megapode’
  SES:   Gela           koleo            ‘a brush turkey, megapod’

    The following set shows many irregularities suggestive of independent onomatopoetic
origin, but there may be some basis for a reconstruction *k(d)iaw.

POc *k(a)iau ‘Bismarck Scrub Fowl, Megapodius eremita‘
  Adm:   Mussau        kikiau        ‘large mound building bird, Megapodius"
  NNG    Kove          kio           ‘bush hen, megapode’
  NNG    Lu si         kaiau
  NNG    Amara         o-koiou       ‘bush hen, wailpaul (i.e. megapode)’
  NNG    Bariai        kaiau
  NNG    Kilenge       kaiau         ‘bush hen’
  NNG    Mangap        kiau          ‘a wild bird, bush chicken’
  MM:    Patpatar      kiou          ‘fowl that has been domesticated’
  MM:    Tolai         kiau
  MM:    Halia         kihau         ‘ground bushfowl’
                       kio           ‘Dusky Scrub Fowl, Megapodiusfreycinef
  MM:    Nehan         kaio          ‘bush fowl’
  MM:    Torau         kiau          Megapodius freycinef
  MM:    Marovo        io
  MM:    Nduke         eo
  MM:    Roviana       eo            ‘brush hen’
  MM:    Maringe       kho?io
  SES:   Malango       kihau
  SES:   To’aba’ita    geo
  SES:   Kwara’ae      geo
  SES:   Kwaio         geo



6.5.6 Pheasants and quails (Phasianidae)

Apart from the domestic fowl, the only representative of this family in the homeland is the
Indian Blue Quail (Coturnix chinensis). In the following comparison, a POc reconstruction
is justified if the Mangap and Tolai forms are regarded as continuing the PAn etymon.

                                                                                 Birds   307




                       Figure 6.9   Porphyria porphyrio, Purple Swamphen


PAn *
    puRuq ‘quail, partridge’ (Blust 2002)
    puRu(q) ‘quail’
POc *
  NNG: Mangap           puru(pdla)     ‘quail’
  MM: Tolai             voro, worn     ‘Indian Blue Quail, Coturnix ehinensis'



6.5.7 Rails (Rallidae)

The numerous rails of Oceania include the very widespread Purple Swamphen (Porphyrio
porphyrio), easily recognised by its large size and red forehead. Among the smaller species
are the Buff-banded Rail (Rcillus philippensis) and White-browed Rail (Porzana cinered),
which occur throughout much of the Oceanic region, and in the homeland three others of the
genus Rallus, as well as the Bare-eyed Rail (Eulabeornisplumbeiventris), Red-necked Crake
(Rallinci tricolor), and Rufous-tailed Moorhen (Amaurornis olivaceus).

POc *b‘alciRe ‘Purple Swamphen, Porphyrioporphyrio'
  MM:    Tolai           buldrə             ‘purple swamp hen’
  SES:   Uki ni Masi     polale
  SES:   Arosi           p``arare           ‘large blue swamp bird sp.’
  SES:   Bauro           balare             ‘large blue swamp bird sp.’
  Fij:   Lau, Vanua Levu gala
  Fij:   Rotuman         kalæe
  Pn:    Tongan          kalae
  Pn:    Niuean          kale, kule
  Pn:    E Futunan       kalae
  Pn:    Sikaiana        kalae              ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:    Pileni          kalai              ‘bush bird sp.’
  Pn:    Rennellese      kagae
  Pn:    Tikopia         karae
  Pn:    Emae            karae
  Pn:    W Uvean         kalae
  Pn:    Hawaiian        Palae              ‘Moorhen, Gallinula chloropus'

308     Ross Clark




                        Figure 6.10   Rallus philippensis, Buff-banded Rail



      Another possible POc reconstruction for the same bird is the following:

POc *b‘iru ‘Purple Swamphen, Porphyrioporphyrio’
  MM:      Maringe       na-phiro
  NOV:     Mota          weru           'Eulabeornis, a rail’
  NOV:     Raga          b``iru
  NOV:     Nese          ne-vere
  SV:      Sye           (um)pulau
  SV:      Ura           bulau

    The only other rail forwhich widespread cognate sets exist is the Buff-banded Rail (Rallus
philippensis). The following possible POc reconstruction has only slender support:

POc *
    b(a,e,i)risu ‘Buff-banded Rail, Rallusphilippensis ’
  MM:      Tolai       piriu
  SES:     Uki ni Masi perisu
  SES:     Bauro       parisu

    In Vanuatu, a solid set of cognates referring to this bird shows a distinct resemblance to
the term for the Swamphen, POc *b‘alaRe.

PNCV *b (w)ilake ‘Buff-banded          Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:Mota            pilaye                  ‘rail’
  NCV:Lakon           pi lay                  ''Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:Matantas        na-pilagi               ‘White-browed Rail, Porzana cinerea’
                      na-pilagi ruhupoi       ''Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:     Kiai       pilae                   ''Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:     At chin    pila                    ‘rail’
  NCV:     Neve’ei    ni-bila?                'Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:     Big Nambas behy                    ‘rail’
  NCV:     Namakir    b''ilak                 'Rallus philippensis’
  NCV:     Nguna      na-p''ilake             'Rallus philippensis’
  SV:      Sye        ne-mpli                 'Rallus philippensis’
  SV:      Kwamera    pare                    'Rallus philippensis’

The similarity is enhanced by two SE Solomonic languages in which the word, while still
denoting the Purple Swamphen, show unexpected k for *R in the final syllable:

                                                                                   Birds   309


   SES:   Gela            bilake, bulake ‘swamp hen’
   SES:   Malango         bulaki          ‘Porphyrio porphyria’

   A group of New Caledonian names for the smaller rail echo the canonical form of *b walaRe
and *b (v)olake’.

PNCal *
      pit(a,i)ri ‘rail’
  NCal: Tinrin            pitiri       ‘rail’
  NCal: Xaracuu           picari       ‘New Caledonian Wood Rail, Rallus lafresnayanus’
  NCal: Drubea            picari       ‘Buff-banded Rail, Rallusphilippensis’


PNCal *bh] ‘Buff-banded Rail, Rallusphilippensis’’
  NCal:   Nelemwa         bin
  NCal:   Caaac           pik
  NCal:   Pije            pik
  NCal:   Cemuhi          ben
  NCal:   Iaai            bæŋ

   Proto Central Pacific had a distinct name for the Buff-banded Rail.

PCP *weka ‘Buff-banded Rail, Rallusphilippensis’
  Fiji    Rotuman         ve?a
  Pn:     Tongan          veka
  Pn:     Niuean          veka
  Pn:     E Uvean         veka
  Pn:     E Futunan       veka
  Pn:     Samoan          ve?a
  Pn:     Rennellese      veka         ‘Purple Swamphen, Porphyrioporphyrio)
                                       (juvenile)’
  Pn:     Emae            veka
  Pn:     W Futunan       veka         ‘woodhen’
  Pn:     W Uvean         veka
  Pn:     Tahitian        tevea        [i.e. teve?a\ ‘Ralluspacificus ’ (Forster, 1775)
  Pn:     Maori           weka         ‘Weka Rail, Gallirallus australis’

The hypothetical Tahiti Rail (Ralluspacificus) is known only from a painting made on Cook’s
second voyage (duPont 1976:41), but the name recorded agrees with the evidence of its appearance that it was a species of Rallus.
     The only reconstruction for the Sooty Crake (Porzana tabuensis) is restricted to Polynesian.

    mo(s)o ‘ Sooty Crake, Porzana tabuensis’
PPn *
  Pn:     Tongan          moho
  Pn:     Niuean          moho
  Pn:     E Futunan       moso
  Pn:     Rennellese      moso

310     Ross Clark


  Pn:   Mangarevan moho              ‘rail sp.’
  Pn:   Tahitian      meho
  Pn:   Rarotongan mo?o-mo?o
  Pn:   Maori         moho           ‘Buff-banded Rail, Rallus phihppensis'
Two Outlier languages apply a possible reflex of this word to a different small black bird:
  Pn:   Nukuoro       moso          ‘Micronesian Starling, Aplonis opaea'
  Pn:   K’marangi moeho             ‘Aplonis opaca’

The Nukuoro name looks like a regular development of PPn *moso, but the Kapingamarangi
suggests possible borrowing from Micronesian (ef. Mokilese mwiok).


6.5.8 Pigeons and doves (Columbidae)

This family is among the most richly elaborated in the Oceanic realm. Almost every island
has at least one or two representatives, and the Proto Oceanic speakers may have been acquainted with twenty or more species. The most widely distributed Columbidae belong to
two genera: the Imperial Pigeons (Ducula spp,), and the much smaller Fruit Doves (Ptilinopus spp,). Other genera represented include Gymnophaps, Columba, Macropygia, Reinward-
toena, Chalcophaps, Gallicolumba, Henicophaps, and the shaggy-plumaged Nicobar Pigeon,
Caloenas nicobarica.
    The most likely candidate for a generic is the following, which is identified as generic
in some languages (Gedaged, Tawala, Muyuw), and elsewhere refers to a wide range of
columbid genera. In some local areas, however, it appears to have become specialised.

PAn *punay ‘dove, Treron sp.’ (Blust 2002)
POc *bune ‘pigeon, dove’
  NNG:     Kairiru         (m>an) pun            ‘pigeon’ (myan ‘bird’)
  NNG:     Manam           bune                  ‘dove’
  NNG:     Gedaged         bun                   ‘general name for pigeons and doves’
  PT:      Iduna           bune-bune             ‘Australian Pied Imperial Pigeon, Ducula
                                                 spilorrhoa’
  PT:      Tawala         bune-bune              ‘pigeon (generic)’
  PT:      Kilivila       bu-buna                ‘dove’
  PT:      Muyuw          b``d-bun               ‘general term for pigeons’
                          bu-buna                ‘pigeon’
                          bunu(vad)              ‘white pigeon’
                          buna(kuku)             ‘blue pigeon’
  PT:      Hula           pune                   ‘dove’
  PT:      Motu           pune                   ‘Ducula spilorrhoa’’
  PT:      Bartie Bay     bune-bune              ‘a dove, blue pigeon’
  PT:      Wedau          bune-bune              ‘green dove’
  MM:      Patpatar       bun                    ‘dove, pigeon’
  MM:      Tolai          (ta)bunə               ‘Knob-billed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus insolitus’
  MM:      Nehan          bun                    ‘Yellow-bibbed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                                 solomonensis’
  MM:      Petats          bun                   ‘a small bird about the size of a dove’

                                                                             Birds   311


  TM:    Buma            bune (batanoe)       ‘ Santa Cruz Ground Dove, Gallicolumba
                                              sanclaecrucis'
  NCV:   Raga            bune                 ‘Ptilinopus greyii (imm)’
  NCV:   Matantas        na-pone
  NCV:   Kiai            (va)pune           ‘Silver-shouldered Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                            tannensis (imm)’
  NCV:   Atchin        (wo)pun              ‘bird sp.’
  NCV:   Neve’ei       (nav)bin             ‘Ptilinopus tannensis‘
  NCV:   Avava         (nep)bbun            ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:   Port Sandwich (na-vim)bun          ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:   Labo          (ne-v)piin           ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:   Aulua         (vi)mbun             ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  SV:    Ura           ubuda                ‘Ptilinopus greyii"
  SV:    Sye           no-mpon              ‘Ptilinopus greyii"
  SV:    Lenakel       pun(hua)             ‘bird sp., blue with red breast’
  SV:    Kwamera       pən(harov), pin(uas) ‘Ptilinopus greyii‘
  SV:    Anejorh       no-pha               ‘Ptilinopus spp.’
  NCal   Nelemwa       gun                  ‘Cloven-feathered Dove, Drepanoptila
                                            holosericea‘
  NCal   Caaac         gun                  ‘Ptilinopus greyii"
  NCal   Jawe          gun                  ‘pigeon vert’
  NCal   Cemuhi        bun-he?-wi           ‘Drepanoptila holosericea‘
  NCal   Iaai          bin                  ‘Ptilinopus greyii"
  NCal   Dehu          pin                  ‘a pigeon’
  Fij:   Bauan         bune(damu)           ‘Orange Dove, Ptilinopus victor‘
                       buna(ko)             ‘Golden Dove, Ptilinopus luteovirens"

   Another very widespread set is also wide-ranging in its reference, though with a clear
focus on genus Ducula, at least in Remote Oceanic languages.

POc *ku(i)ba ‘pigeon, probably Ducula sp.’
  PT:    Tawala         guba(lia)     ‘blue pigeon’
  PT:    Magori         gubai         ‘pigeon’
  PT:    Mekeo          kopi          ‘pigeon’
  MM:    Marovo         (ba)kupa      ‘Nicobar Pigeon, Caloenas nicobarica‘
  MM:    Nduke          (ba)kupa      ‘Caloenas nicobarica"
  MM:    Roviana        (ba)kupa      ‘a pigeon’
  SES:   Bauro          (wa)ubo       ‘Mackinlay’s Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia
                                      mackinlayi‘
  NCV:   Matantas       na-whete      ‘Pacific Pigeon, Duculapacifica"
  NCV:   Kiai           wepe          ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:   Neve’ei        no-yoim       ‘Ducula pacifica‘
  NCV:   Nam an         nu-yub        ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:   Tape           no-ywip       ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:   Avava          wim           ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:   Big Nambas     kut, wibi

312   Ross Clark




                            Figure 6.11   Duculapacificci, Pacific Pigeon




  NCV:    Nese          no-ydo              ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    Nasarian      na-xaimba           ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    SW Bay        no-Poimb            ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    Port Sandwich na-xumb             ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    SE Ambrym     nip                 ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    Paamese       uive                ‘Ducula pacifica"
  NCV:    Lewo          kupa                ‘pigeon’
  NCV:    Namakir       kun                 ‘Ducula pacifica‘
  NCV:    Nguna         wlpa                ‘Ducula pacifica"
  SV:     Ura           wim                 ‘Pacific pigeon’
  SV:     Sye           no-ywem             ‘Ducula pacifica‘
  Mic:    Sonsorolese   kyope               ‘Micronesian Pigeon, Ducula oceanica"
  Fij:    Rotuman       Pipa                ‘Ducula pacifica"
  Pn:     Rennellese    kuipa               ‘male Pacific Pigeon with black swelling at bill’
  Pn:     Pileni        umbe                ‘pigeon, dove’
  Pn:     Marquesan     kukupa              ‘Ptilinopus dupetithouarsi‘
  Pn:     Tahitian      PuPupa              ‘Grey-green Fruit Dove, Ptilinopuspurpuratus"
  Pn:     Manihiki      kukupa              ‘wood dove’
  Pn:     Rarotongan    kukupa              ‘Rarotongan Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus rarotongensis‘
  Pn:     Maori         kukupa              ‘New Zealand Pigeon, Hemiphaga
                                            novaeseelandiae"



6.5.8.1 Imperial Pigeons (Ducula)

The best supported cognate set for this type of pigeon has a PAn antecedent, though the
development of PAn *R to POc */ is not regular.

    baRuj ‘dove, Ducula sp.’ (Blust 2002)
PAn *
    baluc ‘pigeon, Ducula sp.’
POc *
  Adm: Mussau            balus            ‘dove sp.’(from Tok Pi sin?)
  Adm: Loniu             pan              ‘bird sp.’

                                                                                  Birds    313


  Adm: Nyindrou        ban            ‘dove’
  Adm: Titan           (pim)pal       ‘pigeon’
  Adm: Lou             pol            ‘pigeon, dove: Ducula spp.’
  NNG: Manam           bali(boro)     ‘grey pigeon’
  NNG: Yabem           balosi         ‘dove, big slate-coloured pigeon’
  NNG: Kove            vazuhi         ‘dove’
  NNG: Kilenge         a-vol          ‘dove’
  NNG: Mangap          mbalmbal       ‘dove’
  NNG: Tami            mbalut         ‘blue dove’
  NNG: Aria            belis          ‘dove’
  NNG: Kaulong         (ekiŋ) vulus   ‘dove’ (ekiŋ ‘bird’)
  NNG: Lamogai         belis          ‘dove’
  MM: Bali             balu           ‘dove’
  MM: Tigak            valus          ‘dove’
  MM: Patpatar         balus          ‘big black and white pigeon’
  MM: Tolai            bəlu           ‘generic for pigeons, esp. Island Imperial Pigeon,
                                      Ducula pistrinaria’
  MM:       Nehan       baluh         ‘Ducula pistrinaria’
  MM:       Tinputz     banus         ‘Ducula spp.’
cf. also:
   MM:      Roviana     baruku        ‘fruit pigeon’
   MM:      Simbo       ba(r)yu       ‘pigeon sp.’
   MM:      Maringe     balhi         ‘pigeon (generic)’
   MM:      Kia         babaluhu      ‘pigeon’

    Note that the New Georgia and Santa Isabel words listed under ‘cf. also’ reflect the wrong
final consonant.

POc *bona ‘pigeon, Ducula sp.’
  MM: Tolai     bonbon                  ‘pigeon sp.’
  MM: Ramoaaina (kiiru) bonbon          ‘Island Imperial Pigeon, Duculapistrinaria
  NCV: Mota     p''ona                  ‘a pigeon’
                mala-p''ona             ‘Ptilinopus spp.’
  NCV: Lakon    p''on                   ‘Pacific Pigeon, Duculapacifica’
  NCV: Raga     man-bona                ‘Ducula pacifica’’
  NCV: Apma     bihil-bon               ‘Ducula spp.’
Probable borrowing from a North Vanuatu language:
  Pn:    Pileni       nu- mbona     ‘pigeon’

   Probably a local development of the above are the following Solomons forms reflecting
*boRa.

    MM:     Nehan        bor           ‘Grey-breasted Quail Dove, Gallicolumba beccarii)
                                       and ground doves generally’
    MM:     Maringe      bora          ‘variety of balhu [pigeon] found in forest’
    MM:     Kia          bora          ‘Knob-billed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus insolitus’

314      Ross Clark


      SES:   Bugotu         bora            ‘pigeon’
      SES:   Gela           bola            ‘pigeon spp.’
      SES:   To’aba’ita     bola            ‘pigeon, probably Ducula sp.’
      SES:   Kwara’ae       bola            ‘pigeon like kurukuru but lives inland’
      SES:   Kwaio          bola            ‘pigeon’
      SES:   ’Are’are       pora            ‘a pigeon’

   Like PPn *tu below, an undoubtedly imitative name, but locally focused on a single
species:

                    tutu ‘Baker’s Pigeon, Ducula bakerf 8
Proto North Vanuatu *
  NCV:      Mota             (man)tut      ‘kind of Vanua Lava pigeon that cries tuf
  NCV:      Mwotlap         nu-tut
  NCV:      Lakon            tut
  NCV:      Raga            tutu
  NCV:      Wusi (Nokovula) (manu)tu
  NCV:      Matantas        (na-nohu)tu
  NCV:      Kiai            (mu)tu-(nu)tu (second name)

   Although the following is in near-complementary distribution with POc *bune, and could
almost be a metathetic development of it, Bauan at least contrasts the two terms.

PCP *ru(b,v)e ‘Pacific Pigeon, Duculapacifica‘
  Fij:      Bauan          ruve            ‘Pacific Pigeon, Duculapacifica, or White-throated
                                           Pigeon, Columba vitiensis"
  Pn:       Tongan        lupe
  Pn:       Niuean        lupe
  Pn:       Samoan        lupe
  Pn:       E Futunan     lupe
  Pn:       Tuvalu        lupe
  Pn:       Luangiua      lupe
  Pn:       Sikaiana      lupe
  Pn:       Rennellese    gupe
  Pn:       Tikopia       rupe
  Pn:       Marquesan     ?upe             ‘Marquesas Pigeon, Ducula galeata"
  Pn:       Tahitian      rupe             ‘Society Islands Pigeon, Ducula aurorae"
  Pn:       Rarotongan    rupe
  Pn:       Maori         rupe             ‘New Zealand Pigeon, Hemiphaga
                                           novaeseelandiae"
Probable Polynesian loans:
  TM: Burna           (te)lupe             ‘pigeon spp.’
  Mic: Kiribati       rupe                 ‘Micronesian Pigeon, Ducula oceanica
  Fij:   Rotuman      rupe(vao)            ‘bird sp.’ (vao ‘forest’)



[8] cf. PAn *tuRtuR 'resonant sound' (Blust 1995)

                                                                                      Birds    315



6.5.8.2 Fruit Doves (Ptilinopus)


POc *g(a)umii ‘Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus sp.’
  NNG:      Yabem           (mop''goni     ‘dove’ (mo? ‘bird’)
  NNG:      Bing            gumgum
  PT:       Ubir            kum(ag)        ‘blue pigeon’
  SES:      ’Are’are        (ku)kumu       ‘pigeon’
  SES:      Arosi           (kumu)kumu     ‘pigeon sp.’
  NCV:      Matantas        na-kauma
  NCV:      Rerep           ŋaum
  NCV:      Neve’ei         (nav)goum      ‘large Tanna fruit dove’
  SV:       Lenakel         (təma)kum      ‘k. bird, likepunhua but larger’
  SV:       Kwamera         (təmə)kum      'Vopinharov. red-bellied fruit dove’


Proto SE Solomonic *va(o,u) ‘Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus sp.’
   SES:    Malango          (bela)vau     ‘Yellow-bibbed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                          solomonensis) (female)’
   SES:    To’aba’ita      fao            ‘dove sp., green with yellow breast’
   SES:    Kwara’ae        fao            ‘bird sp., not very big, powdery-white like pigeon
                                          (bola)‘
                           fau            ‘Red-bibbed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus viridis'


PNCV *vweru ‘Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus sp.’
  NCV:     Mota             wir             ‘a bird’
  NCV:     Vures            wiria           ‘Grey’s Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus greyii‘
  NCV:     NE Ambae         were (memea)    ‘Ptilinopus greyii" (memea ‘red’)
  NCV:     Raga             vweru           ‘Ptilinopus greyii‘
  NCV:     Naman            nu-vire         ‘bird sp.’
  NCV:     Tape             vwiri           ‘Ptilinopus greyii‘
  NCV:     Larevat          na-ver          ‘ Silver-shouldered Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus tannensis"


     tobaka ‘Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus sp.’
PNCV *
  NCV: NE Ambae             tobaka         ‘Silver-shouldered Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus tannensis‘
  NCV:Kiai                  tipa           ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:Araki                 tipa           ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:Nese                  (novo)todak    ‘Ptilinopus tannensis"
  NCV:Nguna                 tokopea        ‘dove’
  NCV:S Efate               tokape         ‘ground dove, Chalcophaps‘


    (k,g)upuR ‘pigeon or dove’
POc *
  MM:       Patpatar        kuhur          ‘ground dove’
  MM:       Tolai           kuvur          ‘pigeon sp.’
  MM:       Nduke           kukuvu         ‘Island Imperial Pigeon, Ducula pistrinaria‘
316    Ross Clark


  MM:      Roviana         kukuva          ‘small green dove sp.’
  SES:     Gela            kuvu            ‘pigeon sp., very small, yellowish breast’
  SES:     ’Are’are        kuvu            ‘a wood pigeon’
  SES:     Bauro           kuhui           ‘Red-bibbed Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus viridis'

6.5.8.3 Ground-feeding pigeons

The following appears to be a local survival of a term reconstructible for PMP, but the glosses,
even within the SE Solomonic subgroup, are confusingly diverse.

PMP *-muken ‘omen dove’ (Blust 2002)
POc *((l,R)(a,u))mulCr>o ‘dove sp.’
  SES:     Gela            lumuko          ‘ground pigeon sp.’
  SES:     Malango         muko            ‘Mackinlay’s Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia
                                           mackinlay?
  SES:     Lau             lamoa           ‘dove’
  SES:     Kwaio           lamu?o          ‘small red bird in mountainous interior, a ground
                                           feeder’
  SES:     Bauro           rumoyo          ‘Brown-backed Emerald Dove, Chalcophaps
                                           stephanf


POc *butir ‘pigeon sp.’
  NNG:     Adzera      busir               ‘pigeon’
  NNG:     North Watut boser               ‘dove’
  PT:      Wedau       butura              ‘blue pigeon’
  MM:      Patpatar    buten               ‘imperial pigeon’
  MM:      Nduke       buti                ‘Brown-backed Emerald Dove, Chalcophaps
                                           stephan?
  MM:      Roviana             buti        ‘bird like a small pigeon, brown breast, green back,
                                           eats canarium nuts’
  NCV: N Ambrym                (min)buis   ‘large Tanna fruit dove’

    An isolated Micronesian form appears as a possible cognate of this set, Kiribati pitin
‘ground dove, Gallicolumba sp.’. The exact species reference of the Kiribati term is unclear.
However, Pratt et al. (1987:194-5) indicate that this bird was introduced to Kiribati (Abe-
mama) about 1940 from some other Pacific island. Since none of the possible source islands
have words resembling bitin, it would seem much more likely that this name (phonetically
[pisin]) is a borrowing from English pigeon.

     m waRaki ‘Emerald Dove, Chalcophaps indiea' (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
PSOc *
  NCV:     Mota            m‘ara           ‘a dove’
  NCV:     Lakon           mwcercey
  NCV:     Raga            mwarayi
  NCV:     Matantas        na-mahi
  NCV:     Kiai            (vo)mae
  NCV:     Atchin          (wo)mere        ‘bird sp.

                                                                                    Birds    317



  NCV:     Nam an    (vo)mar
  NCV:     Neve’ei   (na-v)mar
  NCV:     Tape      (na-v``i)mar
  NCV:     Avava     (ap)mar
  NCV:     Larevat   (ave)mar
  NCV:     Nese      (no-vo)may
  NCV:     Labo      (na-v)maxa
  NCV:     Axamb     (na-vi)m'`er
  NCV:     SE Ambrym mai
  NCV:     Paamese   ame
  NCV:     Namakir   mar          ‘ground dove’
  SV:      N Tanna   mwak         ‘dove’
  SV:      Kwamera   mak          ‘pigeon or dove (generic)’


PPn *tu ‘ground dove’
  Pn:      Tongan      til             ‘Friendly Quail Dove, Gallicolumba stair?
PNPn *tu, *tu-kele ‘ground dove’
  Pn:    E Futunan tu                 ‘Purple-capped Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                      porphyraceus‘
                        tii-kele      ‘'Gallicolumba stair?
  Pn:      Samoan       t?i-?aimeo    ‘Gallicolumba stairi (female and young)’
                        tu-laulifa    ‘Gallicolumba stairi (male)’
  Pn:      Emae         tu-kere       ‘Emerald Dove, Chalcophaps indica‘
  Pn:      Imere        tu-kere       ‘Chalcophaps mdiea`
  Pn:      Maori        tu-kere       ‘bird sp. remembered in proverbs’

The absence of glottal stop in the Tongan and E Futunan forms shows that this name is likely
imitative of the species’ voice, rather than derived from tu?u ‘stand’ (referring to the species’
ground-feeding habits). However, in languages where the glottal stop has been lost the two
would be homophonous, and tfi-kere may be understood by present day speakers as ‘stands
on the ground’.

6.5.8.4 Other species

POc *woku ‘Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia sp
  MM: Nakanai           (ka)voku    ‘bird sp.’
  MM: Tolai             (to)vok     ‘bird sp.’
  MM: Banoni            boku        ‘Mackinlay’s Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia
                                    mackinlay?
  MM:      Nduke        oku         ‘prob. Macropygia mackinlay?
  MM:      Simbo        voku        ‘bird sp.’
  SES:     Bugotu       (ka)vuku    ‘pigeon’
  SES:     Gela         (ka)vuku    ‘a dove’
  SES:     Malango      (ka)vuku    ‘Ptilinopus sp.’
  SV:      Ura          (uvor)wok   ‘White-throated Pigeon, Columba vitiensis'
  SV:      Sye          (no-yol)woy ‘Columba vitiensis‘

318   Ross Clark


                                                     qekmj ‘owl’, PWMP *
Imitative naming is a high probability here; cf. PAn *bekur ‘coo, turtle
dove’, PMP *bukaw ‘owl sp.’ (Blust 2002). The voice of AT. mackinlayi is represented as
‘kor-wu’ or ‘vo-ku’ (Hadden 2004a: 114). A metathetic variant is represented by Teop (MM)
uvo Macropygia mackinlayi‘cf. Koiari (Papuan) kuvo ‘Lesser Bar-tailed Cuckoo Dove,
Macropygia nigrirostris".

PSOc *taroap(\) ‘White-throated Pigeon, Columba vitiensis' (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
PNCV *taroa ‘White-throated Pigeon, Columba vitiensis"
  NCV:    Mota       taroa             ‘pigeon sp.’
  NCV:    Lakon      taro
  NCV:    Matantas   na-taroa
  NCV:    Kiai       taroa
  NCV:    Naman      doro
  NCV:    Neve’ei    no-toro
  NCV:    Big Nambas toro
  NCV:    SE Ambrym teau
  NCV:    Paamese    tala              ‘bird sp.’
  NCV:    Lewo       tewa              ‘bird (smaller than kupa)‘
  NCV:    Namakir    taro              ‘blackbird sp.’
  NCV:    Nguna      taroa             ‘pigeon sp.’
  NCV:    S Efate    tars              ‘bush bird sp.’
  NCal    Fwai       dap
  NCal    Cemuhi     (iuid)-jdap       (iuid ‘New Caledonian Pigeon, Ducula goliath‘)
  NCal    Paici      (dea)jee


Proto North Vanuatu *
                    toava ‘Mackinlay’s Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia mackinlayi‘
  NCV: Mwotlap         na-taap
  NCV: Vera’a         ?oava
  NCV: Vures          t&av
Proto Central Vanuatu *bwaueve ‘Mackinlay’s Cuckoo Dove, Macropygia mackinlayi‘
  NCV: Raga            b'aueve
  NCV: SE Ambrym vueh
  NCV: Paamese         vouehe
  NCV: Namakir         tov         ‘long-tailed pigeon sp

    The following set undoubtedly owes something to imitation of typical pigeon ‘coo’ vocalizations—low pitched but with strong formant structure. Compare the Wayan Fijian name for
a species introduced from Asia in modern times: kukuru ‘Spotted-necked Dove, Streptopelia
chinensis‘.

POc *(ku(r,l)u)ku(r,l)u ‘pigeon sp.’
  NNG:    Takia         kula-kulu               ‘pigeon sp.’
  PT:     Gapapaiwa     kuyu-kuyu               ‘fruit dove, Ptilinopus sp.?’
  PT:     Mekeo         kur                     ‘pigeon/dove’ (Schellong& Carolsfeld 1890)
  MM:     Nakanai       kuru                    ‘dove, pigeon’

                                                                                Birds   319


  MM:       Ramoaaina kuru                   ‘a pigeon’ [Ducula,Macropygia\
  MM:       Tolai     kur                    ‘Brown’s Long-tailed Pigeon, Reinwardtoena
                                             browni‘
  MM:       Nehan       ku(i)lu              ‘pigeon/dove’ (Schellong& Carolsfeld 1890)
  MM:       Petats      kulu                 ‘the blue wild pigeon’
  MM:       Halia       kulu                 ‘Island Imperial-Pigeon, Ducula pistrinaria,
                                             or Red-knobbed Pigeon, Ducula rubricera‘
  MM:       Torau       ku-kuru              ‘Ducula pistrinaria"
  MM:       Marovo      kuru-kuru            ‘Duculapistrinaria and similar spp.’
  MM:       Nduke       ku-kuru (peka)       ‘k. fruit dove, similar to Ducula rubricera,
                                             but lives in mountains’
                        kuru                 ‘Ducula spp.’
  SES:      Gela        kuru-kuru            ‘white pigeon sp.’
  SES:      Malango     kulu-kulu            ‘Chestnut-bellied Pigeon, Ducula brenchleyi‘
                        kuru-kuru            ‘Ducula rubricera"
  SES:      Kwara’ae    kuru-kuru            ‘dove like bola but lives on the sea’
  SES:      Kwaio       kulu-kulu            ‘bird sp.’
  SES:      Sa’a        kuru-kuru (ni Malau) ‘pigeon sp. without wattles on the beak’
                                             (malau ‘island’, also place name)
                        kolo-kolo            ‘Crested Long-tailed Pigeon, Reinwardtoena
                                             crassirostris‘
  SES:      Ulawa       kuru-kuru            ‘wood pigeon (generic)’
  SES:      Uki ni Masi kuru-kuru (ni wapu) ‘Ducula brenchleyi‘ (wapu ‘forest’)
  Fij:      Bauan       kulu(votu)           ‘Many-coloured Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                             perousii‘
                        gilu                 ‘Friendly Quail Dove, Gallicolumba stairii"
  Pn:       Tongan      kulu-kulu            ‘Purple-capped Fruit Dove, Ptilinopus
                                             porphyraceus"
  Pn:       Niuean      kulu-kulu            ‘Ptilinopus porphyraceus"
  Pn:       E Uvean     kulu-kulu            ‘Ptilinopus porphyraceus"
  Pn:       Emae        kulu-kulu            ‘Ptilinopus spp.’
cf. also:
   NNG: Gedaged         kududuk               ‘bird like small dove, bluish green’


POc *kurau ‘pigeon sp.’
  NNG: Poeng            kulao           ‘great cuckoo-dove’
  MM Nduke              kuratu          ‘Pale Mountain Pigeon, Gymnophaps solomonensis
                                        (-t- unexplained)
  MM:       Vangunu     kərao           ‘red-knobbed pigeon’
  SES:      Gela        kura-kurau      ‘green and white pigeon sp. with red crest’
  SES:      Tolo        kuau            ‘bird sp. which feeds on nuts’
  SES:      Malango     kurau           ‘Nicobar Pigeon, Caloenas nicobarica‘
  SES:      ’Are’are    urau            ‘pigeon’
  SES:      Sa’a        urou            ‘wood pigeon with large wattles’
cf. also:
   SES:     Bauro       kuvwau          ‘Red-knobbed Pigeon, Ducula rubricera‘

320      Ross Clark


                         kuvwau (mano) ‘White-throated Pigeon, Columba vitiensis’
  Pn:       Rennellese   kiou          ‘small Ducula sp.’ (borrowed from a SES language)


     belik(e,i)o ‘pigeon sp.’
PEOc *
  SES: Gela           belikokeo        ‘pigeon sp., black with red beak’
  NCV:  Naman         beligio
  NCV: Neve’ei        ni-bwiligio
  NCV: Larevat        balgio
  NCV: Nese           na-ble


PROc *soge ‘pigeon sp.’
  NCV: Nasarian      nti-so’g          ‘black pigeon of the mountains’
  Fij:  Bauan        soge              ‘Peak’s Pigeon, Ducula latrans‘
                     soge(loa)         ‘White-throated Pigeon, Columba vitiensis' (loa
                                       ‘black’)
  Fij:      Wayan        soge          ‘Peak’s Pigeon, Ducula lalrans'


POc *b‘aruruk ‘pigeon or dove sp.’
  NNG: Takia             pururuk       ‘pigeon sp.’
  SES: Malango           (manu) pururu ‘Brown-backed Emerald Dove, Chalcophaps
                                       stephanf
  SES:      Sa’a         (ta)pwaruru   ‘bronze-wing dove’
  SES:      Bauro        bworoau       ‘Crested Long-tailed Pigeon, Reinwardtia
                                       erassiroslris'
  NCV: Nguna             pworuru       ‘to coo’
cf. also:
   MM:      Tolai        bilul            ‘Nicobar Pigeon, Caloenas nicobarica’’

    Possibly cognate are forms in SHWNG languages (Ansus mambaru, Biak mambruk) referring to the Crowned Pigeons (Goura spp.) (Anceaux 1961).


6.5.9 Parrots (Loriidae, Cacatuidae, Psittacidae)

The three families united here are represented by nine diverse genera in the homeland. By
far the largest bird, not confusible with any other, is the Blue-eyed Cockatoo (Cacatua oph-
thalmica). The large Eclectus Parrot (Eclectus roralus) shows striking sexual dimorphism,
with males (green) and females (red) often lexically distinguished. The Rainbow Lory (Tri-
choglossus haematodus) is probably the most conspicuous and widespread parrot in western
Oceania. Among other middle-sized parrots are the Cardinal Lory (Chalcopsitta cardinalis).:
the Purple-bellied Lory (Lorins hypoinochrous) and the Singing Parrot (Geoffroyus hetero-
elitus'). Smaller parrots include two Lorikeets of the genus Charmosyna, which, along with
the closely related genus Vini, are found as far as eastern Polynesia. Smallest of all are the

                                                                                   Birds    321


Pygmy Parrots of genus Micropsitta and the Orange-fronted Hanging Parrot (Loriculus au-
rantiifrons). For the last (which is found no further east than New Guinea) not a single name
was found in any of the sources.

6.5.9.1 Cockatoos
Only Papuan Tip languages supply sufficient cognates to support reconstructions for these
birds. That the first term may be traceable to POc, however, is suggested by possible cognates in SHWNG languages such as Ansus kara, Serui-Laut karai., Ambai kara ‘cockatoo’
(Anceaux 1961).

PPT *karai ‘white cockatoo’
  PT       Wagawaga         kehoi
  PT       Dobu             keyoi
  PT       Wedau            keloi
  PT       Sinaugoro        karai
  PT       Hula             kalai
  PT:      Motu             karai        ‘cockatoo’


    kwakawe
PPT * akeke^                  ‘Sulphur-crested Cockatoo, Cacatua galerita‘
  PT:      Tubetube         wakeke       ‘cockatoo’
  PT:      Suau             wakeke       ‘cockatoo’
  PT:      Iduna            kakawe
  PT:      Bwaidoga         kakawe       ‘white cockatoo’
                            wakeke       (northern dialect)
  PT:   Roro                iaveiave     ‘white cockatoo’
  PT:   Mekeo               aveave       ‘bird sp.’
Compare perhaps:
  MM: Nduke                 vak’voa      ‘Ducorps Cockatoo, Cacatua ducorps‘
  MM: Maringe               veya         "Cacatua ducorps"



6.5.9.2 The Eclectus Parrot

This large parrot (Eclectus roratus) is most notable for its sexual dimorphism, with the predominantly red-plumaged female and green-plumaged male sometimes being separately lex-
icalised. The first two reconstructions are similar in form, and appear to refer to the male.
Unfortunately, sources for the few languages that reflect both the shorter and longer term are
unhelpful as to the distinction of meaning. Apparent reflexes of the first reconstruction extend
well beyond the range of the Eclectus, and are applied to various other species, eventually
reaching as far as New Zealand.

POc *kaRa ‘male Eclectus Parrot, Eclectus roratus’’
  NNG: Yabem                 kala?         ‘the green male parrot’
  NNG: Bariai                kala          ‘parrot’
  NNG: Kove                  kaha          ‘parrot’

322     Ross Clark


  NNG:     Lusi         kara           ‘parrot’
  NNG:     Kilenge      ( ai)kala      ‘parrot’
  MM:      Halia (Haku) kala-kala      ‘Eclectus Parrot’
  MM:      Marovo       kara           ‘Eclectus roratus`
  MM:      Nduke        (ma)kara       ‘Eclectus roratus'
  MM:      Roviana      kara           ‘general name for parrots’
  MM:      Simbo        (ma)kara       ‘Eclectus roratus'
  MM:      Kia          (ma)kara       ‘green parrot’
  MM:      Maringe      (ma)k(h)ara    ‘Eclectus roratus' (Webb 1992), ‘green parrot’
                                       (Tryon 1995)
  SES:     Gela          kalao         ‘green parrot sp.’
  SES:     To’aba’ita    a-?ala        ‘Eclectus roratus'
  SES:     Kwaio         a-Pala        ‘Eclectus roratus'
  SES:     ’Are’are      ara           ‘large green parrot, red under wings’
  SES:     Sa’a          ?a-?a         ‘Eclectus roratus'
  SES:     Uki ni Masi   ?ala          ‘Eclectus roratus'
  SES:     Bauro         yara          ‘Eclectus roratus'
  Fij:     Bauan         ka-ka         ‘Shining Parrot, Prosopeia spp.’
  Fij:     Wayan         ka-ka         ‘possibly Collared Lory, Phigys solHarins'
  Pn:      Tongan        ka-ka         ‘Red Shining Parrot, Prosopoeia labuensis'
  Pn:      Tahitian      (e)?a-?a      ‘green parrot sp. with red forehead’ (Forster 1775)
                                       [probably Cyanoramphus sp.]
  Pn:      Maori         ka-ka         ‘parrot spp.’


PWOc *ka(l,R)aija(r,R) ‘male Eclectus Parrot, Eclectus roratus'
  NNG      Bariai         kalaŋa-n        ‘parrot’
  NNG      Kove           kahaŋa-ni       ‘parrot’
  NNG      Lusi           karaŋa-ni       ‘parrot’
  NNG      Gedaged        ilaŋ            ‘k. parrot, male green and red, blue and red’
  NNG      Amara          a-kalaŋar       ‘parrot’
  NNG      Kilenge        ai-kalaŋa       ‘parrot’
  NNG      Mouk           kalaŋa          ‘parrot’
  NNG      Kaulong        (ekiŋ) kalaŋ    ‘parrot’
  NNG      Lamogai        kalaŋa          ‘parrot’
  NNG      Sengseng       kahalaŋ         ‘parrot’
  NNG      Mengen (Poeng) keratia         ‘Eclectus Parrot; parakeet (?) likes corn, banana,
                                          papaya’
  PT:      Bwaidoga         anegala       ‘parrot sp.’
  PT:      Tawala           kanagala      ‘parrot’
  PT:      Wedau            kanagara      ‘parrot’
  PT:      Kilivila         karaga        ‘green parrot’
  PT:      Nimoa            heleŋe        ‘parrot sp.’
  PT:      Balawaia         yalaga        ‘parrot’
  PT:      Hula             alaka         ‘green lorikeet’
  PT:      Mekeo            alaŋa         ‘common green parrot, female red’

                                                                                  Birds   323


  MM:     Vitu              yakuja          ‘Eclectus roratus’
  MM:     Nakanai           kalaŋan         ‘Eclectus roratus’
  MM:     Tab ar            garagar         ‘Eclectus roratus’
  MM:     Patpatar          kalaŋar         ‘parrot sp.’
  MM:     Tolai             kələŋərə        ‘Eclectus Parrot (red)’
  MM:     Nehan             kalaŋara        ‘Eclectus Parrot’
  MM:     Petats            kanakana        ‘large green fruit-eating parrot’
  MM:     Banoni            karaka          ‘male Eclectus Parrot’


POc *k'‘'ilo(ki) ‘female Eclectus Parrot’
  PT:    Balawaia      kiloki         ‘dark green bird sp.’
  PT:    Hula          kiloki         ‘lovebird’
  PT:    Motu          kiole          ‘parrot sp.’ (metathesis of fh7o(y)z)
  MM:    Simbo         kilo           ‘parrot sp.’
  MM:    Maringe       na-klio        ‘red and green parrot, possibly female of makara’
  SES:   Gela          kilo           ‘red parrot sp.’
  SES:   Longgu        kilo           ‘red parrot (female)’
  SES:   To’aba’ita    kiro           ‘female Eclectus’
  SES:   Kwaio         (liko-liko     ‘Yellow-bibbed Lory, Lorius chlorocercus’
                                      (metathesis)
  SES:   ’Are’are      riko-riko      ‘a parrot, tamed as a pet’ (metathesis)
  SES:   Sa’a          ilo-ilo?a      ‘large red parrot, female of ?aʔa’
  SES:   Arosi         riko-riko      ‘a parrot, tamed as a pet’ (metathesis)

    The following term may also be associated with Eclectus. Cf. POc *keRaij ‘hawksbill
turtle’ (ch. 5, 250), a name which is eventually re-applied to a parrot in New Zealand (Maori
kea ‘Nestor nolabilis`).

POc *kiRak ‘parrot sp.’
  PT:    Gapapaiwa     kira-kiraka
  PT:    Wedau         kira-kirako    ‘parrot’
  MM:    Tinputz       ki-kire        ‘Eclectus parrot’
  MM:    Banoni        kire           ‘(red) Eclectus parrot’
  MM:    Babatana      kira           ‘lorikeet’
  MM:    Marovo        kira           ‘medium sized parrots, between chiri and kara’
  MM:    Kia           ki-kila        ‘Blue-streaked Lory, Eos reticulata’
  MM:    Maringe       khie-kile      ‘small green bird’
  SES:   Malango       kira           ‘Eclectus Parrot, Eclectus roratus’
  SES:   Lau           kil-kila       ‘green parrot’
  SES:   Kwara’ae      kila           ‘palm lorikeet (green, yellow, red)’
  SES:   Sa’a          kile-kile      ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus’
  SES:   Arosi         kira-kira      ‘small green parrot’

324    Ross Clark


6.5.9.3 Middle-sized parrots

The following four reconstructions appear to be cut from the same basic form: the first with a
three-consonant sequence, and each of the others missing one of the three. It would be natural
to treat the others as simply variously reduced forms of the longest form, but there are apparent
contrasts in several languages. The references are to medium-sized parrots (Chalcopsitta,
Lorins, Trichoglossus), but it is difficult to see any consistent association between a particular
species and any of these forms. Beyond the Solomons, the first two species disappear, and
these terms are applied to Trichoglossus, or in New Caledonia to the parakeets of genus
Cyanoramphus.

POc *sipi(r,R)i ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus, or Cardinal Lory, Chalcopsitta
  eardinalis'
  Adm Lou                sipir          ‘parrot-like bird’
  NNG : Takia            siwir          ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  PT:    Balawaia        rivili         ‘small green parrot’
  PT:    Lala           sivili         ‘small parrot with green neck’
  PT:    Mekeo           cipili, kipili ‘a noisy parrot’
  MM: Teop               subiri         'Chalcopsitta cardinahs'
  SES: Bugotu            siviri         ‘red parrot’
  TM: Burna              vili           ‘Palm Lorikeet and Rainbow Lorikeet’
  NCV:Mota               sivure         ‘a parrot’
  NCV:Nume               (we)svur       ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Raga               siviru         1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Neve’ei            ni-n-sivir     1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Nese               ni-civir       1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Nasarian           na-sivara      1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Labo               ni-sivaxa      1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Port Sandwich sivir               1 Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:Lewo               leviri         ‘parrot sp., red with green neck’
  NCV:Nguna              siviri         ‘parrot sp., red chest, green and yellow wings’
  SV:    Kwamera         sivur          ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCal Pije              diwali         ‘Red-fronted Parakeet, Cyanoramphus
                                        novaezelandiae'
  NCal Nengone           sipih          ‘parrot (red)’
  Pn:    Rennellese      sivigi         ‘Lorius chlorocercus'
cf. also:
   MM:      Nduke              sivoro     ‘Yellow-bibbed Lory, Lorius chlorocercus and
                                          Duchess Lorikeet, Charmosyna margarethae'
  MM:       Roviana            sivoro     ‘parrot sp. like rosella’
  MM:       Maringe            sivoro     ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'


POc *sipi ‘parrot, perhaps Cardinal Lory, Chalcopsitta cardinalis'
  Adm: Loniu                 cihi       ‘small parrot’
  NNG: Sengseng              susu       ‘parrot’
  PT:  Mekeo                 ufi        ‘mountain parrot sp., blue, prized for its plumes’

                                                                               Birds     325


  MM:    Nehan         sipih          ‘ Chai'copsitta cardirialis'
  SES:   Bugotu        sivi           ‘parrot sp.’
  SES:   Gela          suisui         ‘a red parakeet in coconuts’
  SES:   Malango       cui            ‘Yellow-bibbed Lory, Lorius chlorocercus'
  SES:   Arosi         sivi, divi     ‘scarlet parrot sp.’
  SES:   Bauro         sivi           ‘scarlet parrot sp.’
  NCV:   Dorig         siv            ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:   Raga          sivi           ‘Lorius, Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:   Matantas      na-civi        ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus and Palm Lorikeet,
                                      Charmosyna palmarum'
  NCV: Atchin          na-si          ‘parrot sp.’
                       siel           ‘parrot sp.’
  NCV:    Nam an       ni-ncsv        ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCV:    Paamese      siho           ‘parrot’
  Pn:     Takuu        sivi           ‘ Chalcopsitta eardinalis'
  Pn:     Luangiua     sivo           ‘red parrot’
  Pn:     Tikopia      sivi           ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'


POc *siri ‘parrot, perhaps Cardinal Lory, Chalcopsitta cardinal!s'
  PT:    Wedau         tiri(rama),    ‘long-tailed parrot sp.’
                         siri(rama)
  MM:    Mono-Alu      (ulu)sili      ‘red parrot’
  MM:    Marovo        ciri           ‘Charmosyna sp. (?) and small parrots generally’
                                      (also modified = Trichoglossus)
  MM:    Nduke         siri nabo      ‘Chalcopsitta eardinalis'
  MM:    Roviana       siri           ‘red parakeet sp.’
  MM:    Simbo         siri           ‘red bird sp. that eats coconut’
  SES:   Gela          siri           ‘small red parrot sp.’
  SES:   Malango       ciciri         ‘ Chalcopsitta eardinalis'
                       (kolo)eiri     ‘Charmosyna spp.’
  SES:   Longgu        suri           ‘noisy parrot, lives in coconut trees’
  SES:   To’aba’ita    suri(aoa)      ‘parrot sp.’
                       su-suri        ‘parrot sp.’
  SES:   Lau           siri           ‘small bird sp.’
                       siru           Tong tailed bird sp.’
  SES:   Kwaio         suli(ke)       ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus'
  SES:   ’Are’are      siri           ‘red hen parrot’
  SES:   Sa’a          siri           ‘a parrot’
                       siri (alaha)   ‘Yellow-bibbed Lory, Lorius chlorocercus' (alaha
                                      ‘chief’)
                       siri (u?u)     ‘a lory that hangs head downward’ (u?u ‘hang
                                      down’)
  SES:   Uki ni Masi siri             ‘ Chalcopsitta eardinalis'
  SES:   Arosi       siri             ‘ Chalcopsitta eardinalis'
                     sire             ‘small parrot sp.’

326    Ross Clark


  NCV:     Sara         ne-ssere          (Flux 1993)
  NCal:    Tinrin       diria             ‘parrot’
  NCal:    Xaracuu     jiria              ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus'
  NCal:    Drubea      jirid              ‘Red-fronted Parakeet, Cyanoramphus
                                          novaezelandiae1
cf. also:
   Mic: Ponapean        seret             ‘Ponape Lory, Trichoglossus ruhiginosus'
   Mic: Mokilese        ceret             ‘ Trichoglossus rubiginosus’
   Pn:    Nukuoro       serete            ‘parakeet’


POc *p'iri(p) ‘parrot sp.’
  MM:      Nduke        vili(sulu)        ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus’
  MM:      Roviana      vili(suru)        ‘small noisy greenish bird often found at coconut
                                          and Barringtonia blossoms’
  TM:      Burna        vili              ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus and Palm Lorikeet,
                                          Charmosyna palmarlink
  NCV:     N Efate     vini
  SV:      Ura         ule                ‘coconut lory’
  SV:      Sye         ure                ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus’
  NCal:    Nelemwa     pwlrip             ‘Homed Parakeet, Cyanoramphus cornulus'
  NCal:    Caaac       pwlrip             ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus’
  NCal:    Fwai        pwlrip             ‘perruche ecossaise’ (Trichoglossus haematodus')
  Pn:      Samoan      vilu               ‘a large parroquet’
  Pn:      Pileni      vili               ‘parrot’
  Pn:      Tahitian    vini               ‘Tahitian Lory, Viniperuviana’


Proto Malaita-Makira *kirori ‘parrot sp.’
  SES:     Lau          kirori         ‘parrot sp.’
  SES:     ’Are’are     irori          ‘a parrot’
                        kirori         ‘a parrot, finding its food specially on the blossoms
                                       of coconut trees; tamed as pets’
  SES:     Sa’a         kirori, ?irori ‘Cardinal Lory, Chalcopsitta cardinalis’
  SES:     Arosi        kirori         ‘ Chalcopsitta cardinalis’



6.5.9.4 Small parrots

The small parrots of closely related genera Charmosyna and Vini are referred to by two possibly not independent etyma.

POc *(ka)reijas ‘small parrot sp.’
  Adm:     Loniu                 kdik:ŋ        ‘parrot sp.’
  Adm:     Nyindrou              karen         ‘parrot’
  Adm:     Titan                 kareŋ         ‘red parrot, Agapornis roseicollis’
  Adm:     Lou                   kareŋ         ‘red parrot’

                                                                                   Birds   327



  NNG:      Yabem         (mpndeij      ‘female red parrot’
  NNG:      Bing          (iri)reŋ      ‘Emerald Lorikeet, Neopsittacuspullicauda‘
  MM:       Petats        re/jis        ‘the small red honey-eating parrot’
  MM:       Tinputz       rcages        ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus‘
  NCV:      Mota          reŋa          ‘a parrot’
                          reŋas         ‘Palm Lorikeet, Charmosynapalmarum’
  NCV: Mwotlap            na-iŋes       'Charmosyna palmar urn1
  NCV: Raga               deŋasi        'Charmosyna palmar urn1
  NCV: Wusi (Nokovula) (de)deŋa         'Charmosyna palmarum1
  NCV: SE Ambrym          reŋ           ‘Charmosyna palmar urn"
Probable loanword from a North-Central Vanuatu language:
  Pn:     Tikopia         leŋa          ‘Duchess Lorikeet, Charmosyna margarethae,
                                        also Cardinal Honeyeater, Myzomela cardinal!s'

The Titan gloss is subject to question, as the lovebirds (Agapornis spp.) are native to Africa.

POc *seŋa ‘parrot sp.’
  NNG:      Manam        seŋ              ‘parrot’
  MM:       Nehan        seij             ‘Rainbow Lory, Trichoglossus haematodus
  MM:       Halia (Haku) seŋe             ‘ Trichoglossus haematodus"
  Fij:      Bauan        seŋa             ‘Blue-crowned Lory, Vini australis"
  Pn:       Tongan       heŋa             " Vini australis"
  Pn:       Niuean       hei/a            " Vini australis"
  Pn:       E Uvean      heŋa             " Vini australis"
  Pn:       E Futunan    seŋa             " Vini australis"
  Pn:       Samoan       seŋa(vao)        " Vini australis"
  Pn:       Nukuria      te-hena          " Trichoglossus haematodus"
  Pn:       Pileni       eŋa              ‘land bird sp.’



6.5.9.5 Other parrot species

POc          ,g)i(l,n)e ‘Singing Parrot, Geoffroyus heleroehlus'
  MM:       Tolai            ŋini-ŋd     ‘Geoffroyus heteroclitus"
                             gili-gil    ‘small green parrot sp.’
                             gini-gil    ‘sea bird allied to parrots’
  MM Tinputz                 ki-kire
  MM Nduke                   ki-kine
                                   ‘Red-breasted Pygmy Parrot, Micropsitta bruijnii‘
  MM Roviana                 kine-kine
                                   ‘a parakeet, sometimes tamed and trained to speak
  SES Bugotu                 kie-kihe
                                   ‘a green parrot’
  SES Gela                   kine-kine
                                   ‘green parrot’
  SES Malango                kina
  SES To’aba’ita             kila-kila
  SES Bauro                  yinai
A loan from a Southeast Solomonic language:
  Pn:    Rennellese y/'/rc/        ‘Finsch’s Pygmy Parrot, Micropsitta finsehii'

328      Ross Clark




                          Figure 6.12   Phigys solitarius, Collared Lory




POc *
    marewe ‘parrot’
  MM Nakanai           marea                 ‘parrot’
  MM Tolai             malip                 ‘Purple-bellied Lory, Lorins hypoinochrous'
  MM Ramoaaina         marewe                ‘'Lorins hypoinochrous'
  MM Petats            malei                 ‘bird (generic)’
  MM Tai of            marei                 ‘bird (generic)’
  MM Torau             marii                 ‘bird (generic)’
  NCV: Wusi (Nokovula) maramarei             ‘Palm Lorikeet, Charmosynapalmarum'
  NCV: Atchin          mwer                  ‘parrot sp.’


PCP *kula ‘Collared Lory, Phigys solitarius'
  Fij:      Bauan        kula
  Pn:       Tongan       kula           ‘bird sp.’ (Churchward) ‘possibly Cardinal
                                                     Myzomela eardinalis' (Carlson 1974)
  Pn:       Marquesan ku?a              ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:       Tuamotuan kura              ‘bird sp. highly prized for its plumage’
  Pn:       Rarotongan kura(mo?o)       ‘Tahitian Lory, Viniperuviana'
Polynesian borrowing (the species is a recent introduction from the Austral Islands):
  Mic: Kiribati       kura           ‘Kuhl’s Lory, Vini kuhlii'

The renown of this parrot’s feathers has produced a range of extended meanings, beyond bird
names, as in PPn *kula ‘(bright) red’ and the following:

   Pn:       Tikopia      kura          ‘honored; of ritual value’
   Pn:       W Uvean      kula          ‘flying fox fur’
   Pn:       Pukapukan    (wulu) kula   ‘red feathers from western islands’ (wulu ‘feathers’)
   Pn:       Rapanui      kura          ‘short, multi-coloured feathers of certain birds’
   Pn:       Marquesan    kuwa          ‘red, applied to feathers, cloth etc. imported to the
                                        islands, also to the scarlet berries or peas used in
                                        their ornaments’ (Crook et al. 1799)

                                                                                 Birds      329


   Pn:    Tahitian     ?ura            ‘red feathers, formerly sacred to the gods’
   Pn:    Maori        kura            ‘red feathers; ornamented with feathers; precious,
                                       treasure’



6.5.10 Cuckoos (Cuculidae)

Eight species of this family are recorded from the homeland, two as seasonal visitors. They
include parasitic cuckoos of the genera Cuculus, Cacomantis, Chalcites, Urodynamis, Urody-
namis and Scythrops, and two Coucals of the genus Centropus. Names recorded, however, are
far fewer than for the parrots with a comparable number of species. Only one small cognate
set of Proto Oceanic scope has been found.

POc *seke ‘cuckoo, possibly Centropus sp.’
  MM: Patpatar         sek            ‘cuckoo’
  MM: Nduke            heye-heye      ‘Centropus sp.’
  SES: Malango         sege           ‘Buff-headed Coucal, Centropus milo (imm)’


     lVvusi ‘cuckoo’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
PSOc *
  NCV: Raga           hvusi-yala      ‘Long-tailed Koel, Urodynamis taitensis’
  NCV: Matantas       ri-risive(re)   ‘Golden-Bronze Cuckoo, Chalcites hieidus'
                                      (metathesis)
  SV:    Kwamera      ia-rovəs        ‘ Urodynamis taitensis’ (metathesis)



PCP *kalewa ‘Long-tailed Koel, Urodynamis taitensis’
  Fiji   Rotuman       (si)a?leva      Urodynamis taitensis’
  Pn:    Tongan        kaleva
  Pn:    Niuean        kalue
  Pn:    E Futunan     kaleva
  Pn:    Samoan        ?aleva
  Pn:    Pukapukan     kaleva
  Pn:    Tuvalu        kaleva
  Pn:    Takuu         kdreva
  Pn:    Sikaiana      kaleva
  Pn:    Rennellese    kdgeva       ‘a large dove or pheasant’
  Pn:    Tikopia       kdreva
  Pn:    Marquesan     ka?eva-?eva
  Pn:    Tahitian      ?areva-reva
  Pn:    Maori         kdrea-rea,   ‘New Zealand Falcon, Falco novaeseelandiae1
                        karewa-rewa

The Maori reflex above refers to a bird which, though not closely related, has an overall
similarity in appearance to the Koel.

330      Ross Clark


PCP *kawekawesa ‘Long-tailed Koel, Urodynamis taitensis‘
  Fij:      Bauan        kawakasd     ‘long-tailed bird sp.’
  Fij:      Lau          kawakawasd   ‘ Urodynamis taitensis
  Pn:       Tahitian     ?d?ovea      ‘ Urodynamis taitensis
  Pn:       Tongarevan   koekoed      ‘ Urodynamis taitensis
  Pn:       Maori        koekoed      ‘ Urodynamis taitensis


PMic *(li)kapilei ‘cuckoo’
  Mic:      Kiribati     kapenei      ‘ Urodynamis taitensis‘
Proto Chuukic *
              likapi ‘a bird’
  Mic: Woleaian      rixapirai        ‘bird sp.’
  Mic: Namoluk        likapilei       ‘Long-tailed Koel, Urodynamis taitensis‘
  Mic: Chuukese      nikæp            ‘land bird sp. (brown, long tail, afraid of other
                                      birds)’

Although Micronesian borrowing would not be expected, the similarity of the following is
intriguing:

   Pn:       Mangarevan pakanei        ‘name of a bird mentioned by Laval, possibly the
                                       cuckoo’ (Hiroa 1938)



6.5.11 Owls (Tytonidae, Strigidae)

The Barn Owls (Tytonidae) and Typical Owls (Strigidae) are each represented in Oceania
by a single genus. The Barn Owl (Tyto alba) is probably the most widespread owl of the
Oceanic region. In the homeland it coexists with the endemic New Britain Barn Owl (Tyto
aurantia). There are also two Hawk Owls of the genus Ninox. While the voice of the Barn
Owl is described as a screech, Typical Owls (like pigeons) have calls whose acoustic profile suggests the low second formant of [u]-type vowels. The Solomon Islands Hawk Owl
(Ninox jacquinoti). for example, has a call described as ‘’Kuurrroo’ with rolled ‘r” (Hadden
2004a: 155). The prevalence of such vowels in the first three cognate sets places them under a
certain degree of uncertainty. Note, however, that reflexes of *
                                                               lulu are found mostly in areas
where the Bam Owl is the only owl present, and are therefore unlikely to be imitative.

POc *kuru(dr,d)u ‘owl’
  NNG:      Dami           kuru(min)         ‘owl’
  NNG:      Yabem          kululu?(poq)      ‘owl’
  NNG:      Mengen (Poeng) ku-kulo           ‘owl spp.’
  PT:       Gapapaiwa      gudu-gudu         ‘owl; Papuan Frogmouth, Podarguspapuensis‘
  PT:       Kilivila       kuru              ‘owl’
  MM:       Patpatar       kur-kuru          ‘owl’
  MM:       Tolai          kur(u)kur         ‘small owl sp.’
  MM:       Halia          kurou             ‘ Solomon Islands Hawk-Owl, Ninox jacquinoti‘
  MM:       Teop           kuroi             Ninox jacquinoti"
                           (toto)kururu      ‘Fearful Owl, Nesasio solomonensis"

                                                                                    Birds     331


  MM:       Tinputz           kuro               ‘Ninox jacquinoti"
  MM:       Banoni            kuru               ‘Ninox jacquinoli"
  MM:       Torau             kuru               ‘Ninox jacquinoli'
  MM:       Babatana          kururu             ‘owl’
  MM:       Marovo            orodo              ‘Ninox jacquinoti or Nesasio solomonensis‘
  MM:       Maringe           na-krudu           ‘Ninox jacquinoti"
  SES:      Tolo              kuru               ‘owl’
  SES:      Longgu            kuru               ‘owl’
  SES:      To’aba’ita        (no?o) kurudu      ‘owl (as pet)’
cf. also:
   NNG: Mangap                uloto              ‘owl’
   MM Kia                     kikituru           ‘owl’


POc *drudru(r,R) ‘owl’
   MM:      Madak        dudu            ‘owl’
   MM:      Sursurunga   durdur          ‘owl taxon, includes Sooty Owl, Grass Owl’
   MM:      Nduke        duduru          ‘owl (generic)’
   MM:      Roviana      duduru          ‘owl sp.’
   SES:     Bugotu       duru            ‘owl’
   SES:     Gela         duru            ‘an owl’
cf. also:
   MM:      Halia        tutul           ‘Fearful Owl, Nesasio solomonensis‘
   MM:      Tinputz      toruruen        ‘owl’


PROc *lulu ‘Barn Owl, Tyto alba‘
  NCV:Kiai           lulu
  NCV:Araki          lulu
  NCV:Atchin         lul                 ‘the night hawk’
  NCV:Maskelynes na-rilr                 ‘owl’
  NCV:Lewo           (kia)lulu           ‘owl’
  Fij:  Bauan        lulu
  Pn:   Tongan       lulu
  Pn:   E Futunan lulu
  Pn:    Samoan      lulu
  Pn:   Pileni       lulu                ‘owl’
  Pn:   Rennellese gugii
  Pn:   Tikopia      ruru
  Pn:   W   lʃvean   lulu
  Pn:   Maori        ruru                ‘Boobook Owl, Ninox novaeseelandiae‘
A Polynesian borrowing:
  Fij:  Rotuman      ruru                ‘owl spp
cf. also:
   TM: Buma              e-luro

332   Ross Clark




                              Figure 6.13     Tyto alba, Bam Owl




An unusually large number of Polynesian bird names reflect *
                                                           lulu but are applied to various
                  toloa, §5.3):
seabirds (compare *

  Pn:    Tuvalu   lulu                ‘Phoenix Petrel, Pterodroma alba''
  Pn:    Rapanui ruru                 ‘Giant Petrel, Macronectes giganteus'`
  Pn:    Tahitian ruro                ‘Tahiti Kingfisher, Halcyon venerata’’
  Pn:    Manihiki ruru                ‘large sea bird sp. with hooked bill’
  Pn:    Maori    ruru-tdiko          ‘Black Petrel, Procellariaparkinsoni`
And borrowed from Polynesian:
  Mie: Kiribati      ruru             ‘Pterodroma alba'

    There is at present an owl-free area in Eastern Polynesia, which may account for the maritime application of some of these words. However, owls and petrels have in common that
they are seldom seen, and mainly known by their calls at night. Spenneman (2004:149) notes
that licemluao, the present Marshallese term for the female of the Short-eared Owl (Asio flam-
meus) was given by an earlier source for a type of petrel. (The name is probably analysable
as /z- ‘feminine prefix’ + ? + mu‘a ‘cry’ + o ‘oh!’.)

POc *pora ‘owl’
  NNG: Kaulong        (ekiŋ) voh            ‘owl’
  MM: Nduke          po-poro                ‘nocturnal bird, said to call just before daylight’
  NCV: Mota           (man)w ara            ‘owl’
  NCV: Rerep         nu-mbur                ‘owl’
  NCV: Port Sandwich na-vandr               ‘owl’

                                                                                   Birds    333




  NCV: SWBay               (ni-vin) mbant ‘owl’
  NCV: SE Ambrym           vuei           ‘Bam Owl, Tyto alba’
  NCV: Paamese             voia(asue)     ' Tyto alba’


     wisi ‘owl’
PEOc *
  SES: Lau        kwisi                ‘bird sp.’
  SES: Kwaio      k`isi                ‘bird believed to announce events
  NCV: Mota       wis                  ‘an owl’
  NCV: Lakon      wis                  ‘Barn Owl, Tyto alba’
  NCV: NE Ambae wisi
  NCV: Raga       fb'al)v'isi          ‘ Tyto alba’ (expected f-wisi)
  NCV: Big Nambas nu-vis               ‘owl, Tyto alba’ (expected f-wzs)


PSV *sum' il ‘Barn Owl, Tyto alba’
  SV:     Ura           ne-mit
  SV:     Sye           no-mit
  SV:     N Tanna       (ka)samw       ‘owl’
  SV:     Kwamera       (ka)sumwi
  SV:     Lenakel       himwir


PNCal *mwen ‘Barn Owl, Tyto alba’
  NCal:   Nelemwa       m'en
  NCal:   Caaac         m‘en
  NCal:   Fwai          m``en
  NCal:   Cemuhi        mwin
  NCal:   Xaracuu       mwa(dooya)
  NCal:   Drubea        mwe
  NCal:   Iaai          mun
  NCal:   Dehu          men
  NCal:   Nengone       meni



6.5.12 Swifts and swallows (Apodidae, Hemiprocnidae, Hirundinidae)

These three groups are closely allied in general appearance and habits and rarely distinguished
terminologically. The swiftlets are familiar birds of garden areas throughout much of Oceania.
The most common species noted are the White-rumped Swiftlet (Aerodramus spodiopygius),
Uniform Swiftlet (A. vanikorensis) and White-bellied Swiftlet (Collocalia esculenta). These
are not in general lexically distinguished. The few terms recorded for the Pacific Swallow
(Hirundo lahitica) and the even fewer for the Whiskered Tree-swift (Hemiprocne mystacea)
are often lexically associated with those for the Swiftlets, and where they are not, they do not
support any independently reconstructible term. These birds are also terminologically linked
with small insectivorous bats: SE Ambrym (NCV) avæp ‘any small bat; swiftlet’; E Futunan
pekapeka ‘White-rumped Swiftlet’,pekapeka sa?i ‘small bat sp.’ (see ch.5, §2.9).

334      Ross Clark


POc *kabakabal ‘swiftlet, Aerodramus or Collocalia spp.’ (cf. *kaba etc. ‘wing, flap’ )
  NNG: North Watut        kombaqkomb           ‘birdsp.’
  MM: Tolai               kəbəkəbəl            ‘ Collocalia esculenta'
                          kubəkubal            ‘swallow or swift sp.’ (expected ]kabəkabak)
  MM:       Roviana       kapakapa(gema)       ‘a small greenish bird, frequents qema
                                               \Nephelium\ trees’
  MM:       Maringe       gayable              ‘Collocalia spp.’
  SES:      Malango       habahaba (viso)      ‘Whiskered Tree-swift, Hemiprocne mystacea
  SES:      Kwaio         kaba(ll)             ‘Hemiprocne mystacea’
  SES:      Arosi         ?apaʔapa             ‘swallow’
                          kapakapa             ‘swallow (swift)’
  SES:      Bauro         yapayapa             ‘Collocalia spp.’
                          yapayapa (usu)       ‘Hemiprocne mystacea’
  NCV: Mota               yapayapa             ‘Collocalia esculenta’
  NCV: Mwotlap            na-baybay(lo)        ‘White-rumped Swiftlet, Aerodramus
                                               spodiopygius’ (metathesis)
  NCV: Raga          yabayaba                  ‘Collocalia spp.’
  NCV: Port Sandwich (xu)mbaxamb               ‘Hirundo tahitica’ (metathesis)
  NCV: SE Ambrym     avæp                      ‘swiftlets and bats, esp. Aerodramus
                                               vanikorensis’
  NCV: Nisvai           (navi)xabxabel         ‘swiftlet’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: S Efate          kapkdp                 ‘swiftlet’
  Fij:   Bauan          kdkaba(ðe)             ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius’
A probable borrowing from a North Vanuatu language, with metathesis (cf. Mwotlap):
  Pn:    Tikopia        paka(lili)         ‘Uniform Swiftlet, Aerodramus vanikorensis’
cf. also:
   PT:      Iduna         (manu) yayabama ‘White-bellied Swiftlet, Collocalia esculenta
   SV:      Ura           n-ibem          ‘white-rumped swiftlet’
   SV:      Sye           ni-mpem         ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius’


PCP *bekabeka ‘swiftlet’ (cf. POc *bweka ‘fruit bat, flying fox’, ch. 5, §2.9)
  Fij:      Lau        bekabeka(niðaŋi)    ‘White-rumped Swiftlet, Aerodramus spodiopygius’
  Pn:       Tongan     pekepeka(tea)       ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius’
                       pekepeka            ‘Pacific Swallow, Hirundo tahitica’
  Pn:       Niuean     pekapeka            ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius’
  Pn:       E Futunan pekapeka             ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius’
  Pn:       Pileni     pekapeka            ‘swiftlet’
  Pn:       Rennellese pekapeka            ‘White-bellied Swiftlet, Collocalia esculenta’
  Pn:       Emae       pekapeka            ‘Collocalia spp.’
  Pn:       Marquesan (ko)pekapeka         ‘Marquesan Swiftlet, Aerodramus ocista’
  Pn:       Tahitian   (?o)pe?a            ‘Hirundo tahitica or Tahitian Swiftlet, Aerodramus
                                           leucophaeus’
  Pn:       Rarotongan (ko)peka            ‘Cook Islands Swiftlet, Aerodramus sawtelli’

                                                                                 Birds   335




                   Figure 6.14   Hemiprocne mystacea, Whiskered Tree-swift




Proto Malaita-Makira *sisiri ‘swiftlet’
  SES:   To’aba’ita    sisiri          ‘Collocalia sp.’
  SES:   Lau           sisiru          ‘swallow’
  SES:   Kwaio         slsili          ‘Collocalia sp.’
  SES:   ’Are’are      sisiri(hapa)    ‘a small swallow’
  SES:   Sa’a          sisiri (hapa)   ‘swallow’
  SES:   Uki ni Masi   sisiri(hapa)    ‘Collocalia sp.’
  SES:   Arosi         sisiri(hioha)   ‘swallow, blue with red head, comes in houses’
  SES:   Bauro         sisiri (oha)    ‘Pacific Swallow, Hirundo lahitiea'


PNCal *bivilo(k) ‘swiftlet’
  NCal: Nyelayu   pivilo               ‘White-rumped Swiftlet, Aerodramus spodiopygius‘
  NCal: Nelemwa   pivilo               ‘White-bellied Swiftlet, Collocalia esculenta"
  NCal: Caaac     biviloc              ‘swallow, white-rumped swiftlet’
  NCal: Jawe      biviloc              ‘Aerodramus spodiopygius'
  NCal: Cemuhi  hiild                  "Aerodramus spodiopygius"


PROc *ka(rd)aka(rd)a ‘swiftlet’
  NCV: Mwotlap       ne-keykey(beye)    ‘Uniform Swiftlet, Aerodramus
                                        vanikorensis'
  NCV: Matantas na-textitkarakara       ‘White-bellied Swiftlet, Collocalia
                                        eseulenta'
                na-karakara(poi)        ‘Aerodramus vanikorensis'
                  na-karakara(ruhumele) ‘Pacific Swallow, Hirundo tahitiea'
  NCV: Sara     harahara                "Aerodramus vanikorensis' (Flux 1993)
  NCV: Kiai     karakara

336      Ross Clark


  NCV: Atchin            kirkiri(el)                ‘small bird resembling swallow, inabiting
                                                    the mainland’
  Fij:      Lomaiviti    kalakala(madrau)           ‘White-rumped Swiftlet, Aerodramus
                                                    spodiopygius‘
  Pn:       Takuu        karakara(tavori)           ‘Collocalia eseidenta'
  Pn:       Rennellese   kaga(mu?a)                 ‘Aerodramus spp.’



6.5.13 Kingfishers (Alcedinidae)

Ten species of Kingfisher are recorded for the homeland, half of them in the genus Halcyon,
which extends widely through Oceania. Particularly widespread are the White-collared Kingfisher (H. chloris), the Sacred Kingfisher (H. sanetd) and the White-headed Kingfisher (H.
saiirophaga). Other kingfishers of the homeland include the very large White-tailed Kingfisher (Tanysiptera sylvia), and the small birds of genera Ceyx arx&Alcedo. A number of good
cognate sets exist, but assignment to species is very problematic. The relatively few terms for
non-Halcyon species do not form any useful cognate sets. Blust (2002:113) compares POc
*(sj)iko with PMP *cikep ‘catch with hands’.

POc *(s,j)iko ‘kingfisher’
  NNG: Manam                 siko           ‘bird sp. (short body, red beak and head, black
                                            wings, long white tail)’
  NNG:      Lukep (Pono)     siki           ‘kingfisher’
  PT:       Tawala           diko           ‘kingfisher’
  MM:       Banoni           (si)sikd       ‘Dwarf Kingfisher, Ceyx lepidus‘
  MM:       Marovo           cige           ‘River Kingfisher, Alcedo atthis"
  MM:       Nduke            hige           ‘River Kingfisher.Cd/cWp atthis) and possibly other
                                            SPP-’
  MM:       Roviana       sige              ‘kingfisher sp. (small, swift-flying)’
  MM:       Kia           suke(neo)         ‘White-collared Kingfisher, Halcyon chloris‘
  SES:      Bauro          (a)sigo          ‘Halcyon spp.’
  NCV:      Mota          siyo              ‘kingfisher’
  NCV:      Dorig         siy               ‘Halcyon spp.’
  NCV:      Lakon          /A               ‘Halcyon spp.’
  NCV:      Raga           (ly'aljhiyo      ‘Halcyon chloris‘
  NCV:      Matantas      na-siho           ‘Halcyon chloris"
  NCV:      Kiai          siko              ‘kingfisher"
  NCV:      Avava         a-sik             ‘Halcyon chloris"
  NCV:      Port Sandwich na-six            ‘Halcyon chloris"
  NCV:      SE Ambrym     si                ‘Halcyon chloris"
  NCV:      Paamese       a-sio             ‘Halcyon chloris"
  NCV:      S Efate       slk               ‘kingfisher’
  SV:       Ura           uye               ‘kingfisher’
  SV:       Sye           uki               ‘Halcyon chloris‘
  SV:       Anejom        ne-Oey            ‘Halcyon sp.’
  NCal :    Nelemwa       Jixe(men)         ‘Sacred Kingfisher, Halcyon sancta‘

                                                                                   Birds    337




                    Figure 6.15     Halcyon chloris, White-collared Kingfisher




  NCal:   Paici           joo(ed)          'Halcyon sancta"
  Mic:    Sonsorolese      (taga)dik       ‘kingfisher’
  Pn:     Tongan           siko(td)        'Halcyon chloris‘
  Pn:     E Futunan        tiko(tala)      'Halcyon chloris"
  Pn:     Nukuria          te-hiko         ‘White-headed Kingfisher, Halcyon saurophaga"
  Pn:     Takuu            tiko(tala)      ‘mythical bird sp.’
  Pn:     Tikopia          siko(tara)      'Halcyon chloris‘
  Pn:     Imere            siko(tara)      'Halcyon chloris"
  Pn:     Tahitian         ld(tatare)      ‘Borabora Kingfisher, Halcyon tufa) and Tahitian
                                           Kingfisher, H. venerataf also Long-billed Reed
                                           Warbler, Acrocephalus coffer"
  Pn:     Rarotongan       ko(tare)        'Halcyon tuta"
  Pn:     Maori            ko(tare)        'Halcyon sancta"
A probable borrowing from a Southeast Solomonic language:
  Pn:    Rennellese     liyo         'Halcyon chloris"

This word appears to have been reshaped in Polynesian to PPn *tiko-tara, a compound
analysable as ‘defecate’ + ‘end of house’. Some outliers have returned to a historically earlier
form through non-Pn influence. The Bauan Fijian word for kingfisher has a general resemblance to the Polynesian *tikotara forms, but cannot be formally reconciled with them; more
exact agreement is found in the first part of the word sikorere, though with slightly deviant
reference:
   Fij:    Bauan         seðala           'Halcyon spp.’
                         sikorere         ‘White-breasted Wood Swallow, Artamus
                                          leucorhynchus‘

   The following two sets are likely to be at least influenced by imitation of the voice of
Halcyon kingfishers, represented as ki-ki-ki-ki-ki-i-i-ee (Watling 2004:137).

338   Ross Clark


POc *ki(o)kio ‘kingfisher’ cf. PAn *kiaw ‘puling sound of a bird’ (Blust 1995)
  Adm :   Nauna          kikiw          ‘kingfisher’
  Adm :   Seimat         kioki          ‘kingfisher’
  Adm :   Wuvulu         ioio           ‘kingfisher’
  NNG:    Mangap         kiakia(gada)   ‘kingfisher’ (cf. gadgdda ‘foolish, crazy’)
  PT:     Mi sima        kiokio         ‘kingfisher’
  PT:     Nimoa          kiokio         ‘kingfisher’
  PT:     Roro           heoheo         ‘kingfisher’
  MM:     Tolai          kiəkiə(tabu)   ‘White-collared Kingfisher, Halcyon ch loris'
  MM:     Ramoaaina      giagia(ntam)   ‘Halcyon chloris or White-tailed Kingfisher,
                                        Tanysiplera sylvia’
  MM:     Nehan          kekio          ‘White-headed Kingfisher, Halcyon saurophaga'
  MM:     Halia          kikio          "Halcyon saurophaga'
                         kiiikiu        ‘kingfisher’
  MM:     Petats         keukeuo        ‘kingfisher’
  MM:     Banoni         kiokio         ‘Halcyon saurophaga'
  MM:     Marovo         kikio          "Halcyon saurophaga'
  MM:     Nduke          kikio          ‘Halcyon saurophaga. Beach Kingfisher’
  MM:     Roviana        kikio          ‘the largest of the three kingfishers’ [i.e. Halcyon
                                        sp,]
  MM:     Simbo          kikio          ‘bird sp. found on reef’
  MM:     Kia            kiokio         ‘Ultramarine Kingfisher, Halcyon leucopygid
  MM:     Maringe        khiokhio       ‘Halcyon saurophaga'
                         ciocio         ‘kingfisher sp. with white belly, blue wings and
                                        back’
                         khiakhia       ‘Halcyon chloris’
  SES:    Gela           giogio         ‘a kingfisher’
  SES:    Longgu         kiokio         ‘kingfisher’
  SES:    Kwaio          kiokio         ‘Halcyon saurophaga'
  SES:    Bauro          kiokio         "Halcyon saurophaga'
  Pn:     Sikaiana       kiokio         "Halcyon chloris., also Island Grey-headed
                                        Monarch, Monarcha cinerascens’


POc *kiki ‘kingfisher’
  Adm:    Mussau          sokiki
  MM:     Vitu            kiki
  MM:     Tolai           kik           ‘Halcyon spp.’
  MM:     Nakanai         kiki
  SES:    Kwaio           ?i?i          ‘White-collared Kingfisher, Halcyon chloris
  NCal:   Xaracuu         cicode        ‘ Sacred Kingfisher, Halcyon sancta)
  NCal:   Drubea          ceca          "Halcyon sanela'
  NCal:   Iaai           jiji           "Halcyon sanela'
  NCal:   Dehu            ciciat
  NCal:   Nengone         wa-zeze

                                                                                  Birds   339


6.5.14 Rollers (Coraciidae)

The single species in this family in the Oceanic homeland, the Dollar Bird (Eurystomus orientalist can be associated with two small cognate sets, though there are problems of identification.

PWOc *ule(o) ‘Dollar Bird, Eurystomus orientalis"
  PT: Iduna            ule(kakamota)
  MM: Nduke            uleo
  MM: Roviana          uleo          ‘bird sp,, Graucalus sublineatus) with a rather shrill
                                     note’

    The obsolete generic in Roviana most probably refers to the Lineated Cuckoo Shrike
(Coracina hneata). Since the terms below are distributed only around the Western Oceanic/SE
Solomonic boundary, it is possible that terms have been borrowed across the boundary. If so,
there is no support for a POc reconstruction.

        kikiora
POc (?) *ikiroa^            ‘Dollar Bird, Eurystomus orientalis‘
  MM: Roviana          kik(i)ora      "Eurystomus orientalis"
  MM: Maringe          khikiloa       ‘dark coloured bird with yellow markings around
                                      eyes and beak, possibly the dollar bird’ (White
                                      1988); Yellow-faced Mynah, Mino dumontii‘
                                      (Webb 1992)
  SES:   Malango       kikirau        "Eurystomus orientalis"
  SES:   To’aba’ita    kekeora        ‘Eurystomus orientalis"

    There are very similar names for this bird in some Papuan languages of Bougainville, such
as Buin kikitou, Koromira mekikiro. which may be borrowings from Oceanic languages.


6.5.15 Hornbills (Bucerotidae)

Two good cognate sets are available for the single species, Blyth’s Hombill (Acerosplicatus),
which occurs throughout New Guinea and the Solomons.

POc *binam ‘hombill’ (ACD)
  PT     Tubetube      binam
  PT     Dobu          binama
  PT     Iduna         binama
  PT     Wedau         binama
  PT     Balawaia      bina           ‘a large-beaked bird’
  PT     Motu          bina
  SES:   Bugotu        bina           ‘toucan’
  SES:   Gela          bina           ‘toucan’
  SES:   Malango       bina
  SES:   To’aba’ita    bina
  SES:   Kwaio         bina
  SES:   Arosi         bina (awa)

340   Ross Clark




                          Figure 6.16   Aceros plicatus, Blyth's Hornbill


The following indicate a considerable broadening of the reference of this term in some SE
Solomonic languages:

   SES:   ’Are’are    pina (ni duo)      ‘big grey pigeon’ (ano ‘garden’)
   SES:   Sa’a        pine (ni on)       ‘Nicobar Pigeon, Caloenas nicobarica’
   SES:   Arosi       bina               ‘hawk’
                      bina( ni asi)      ‘booby’ (asi ‘sea’)
                      bina (ahuri)       ‘ Caloenas nicobarica’
                      bina (ni mon)      ‘Caloenas nicobarica’ (mou ‘garden)
                      bina (su?u)        ‘Caloenas nicobarica’ (su?u ‘lake, swamp’)

    The hombill’s voice is described as ‘various deep grunts and honking notes’ (Coates &
Peckover 2001:113). Given the lack of exact agreement among the following names, it is
likely that at least some represent repeated imitative coinages.

POc *koijo(k) ‘hornbilT
  NNG:    Amara          a-kijok
  NNG:    Kilenge        a-kijok
  NNG:    Sengseng       kaŋ-kaŋ
  NNG:    Mengen (Poeng) gogo
  MM:     Nehan          ŋoŋo
  MM:     Halia          ŋuŋu
  MM:     Petats         ŋoŋo
  MM:     Kia            koŋo
  MM:     Maringe        na-k''oŋo
  SES:    Bugotu         koŋo                ‘toucan’


     komo ‘hornbilT
PWOc *
  NNG:    Kairiru     worn
  MM:     Nakanai     ko-komo           ‘head of hornbill (as decoration)’
  MM:     Tolai       ko-komo
  MM:     Banoni      komo
  MM:     Nduke       ko-gomo

                                                                                   Birds    341


The very large bill of the hornbill would account for the mis-identification as ‘toucan’ in
the Bugotu and Gela sources. The toucan is a tropical American bird also celebrated for its
extremely large bill.


6.6 Passerine birds

Although the Passerines belong to a single order (Passeriformes) among more than 20 within
the class Aves, they account for more than half of all bird species. Yet in the present study
there are far fewer cognate sets for passerines than for the rest. On the basis of the Kalam and
Tobelo studies, there seems no reason to think that the Proto Oceanic speakers did not name
the passerines in as much detail as other types of bird. Two factors may have contributed to
the relative paucity of passerine cognate sets. First, many species are highly localised, which
may have produced a high rate of turnover (abandonment and recreation of terms) as the
Oceanic speakers migrated away from their homeland. Second, since these birds are, on average, smaller and less conspicuous (and of less economic importance) than the non-passerines,
an accurate identification would require both a researcher with the means and inclination to
go where the birds are, and a speaker as thoroughly informed about the avifauna as were the
Oceanic ancestors. It is just this type of information that is lacking for most Oceanic languages; passerines are undoubtedly over-represented among the ‘unidentified bird species’
entries in the dictionaries.


6.6.1 Trillers and cuckoo-shrikes (Campephagidae)

The cuckoo-shrikes (Coracina spp.) and trillers (Lalage spp.) extend from the homeland into
southern Melanesia. Some local cognate sets exist.

      tia(k,ij) ‘Melanesian Graybird, Coracina caledonica'
PNCal *
  NCal:   Nyelayu      jidŋ
  NCal:   Nelemwa      jiac
  NCal:   Caaac        jidk
  NCal:   Jawe         jidk
  NCal:   Fwai         jiwdk
  NCal:   Pije         jiyw
  NCal:   Cemuhi       jla
  NCal:   Paid          cio
  NCal:   Tinrin        tio
  NCal:   Xaracuu       CIO
  NCal:   Drubea        cikd


PCP *(jea)jea ‘Spotted Triller, Lalage maculosa’
  Fij:    Rotuman      jeɑ
  Fij:    Lomaiviti     sea-sea
  Fij:    Lau           sea-sea
  Fij:    Wayan         se-se
  Pn:     Niuean        hea-hea

342   Ross Clark




                      Figure 6.17   Rhipidura leucophrys, Willie Wagtail




    At least some of the following are likely to be independent imitations of vocalizations
variously represented as whee-see, twill you twill you, keweeo, and squeeii, produced by birds
of this genus (Hadden 2004a: 185-7).

POc *pwisu ‘Cuckoo-shrike, Coracina sp.’
  MM:     Maringe    fisa             ‘Common Cicadabird, Coracina tenuirostris’
  SES:    Bauro          hisu         ‘Coracina tenuirostris (f)’
  NCV:    Dorig      (wa)vsu-vsar     ‘Spotted Triller, Lalage maculosa'’
  NCV:    Raga       v'''eu           ‘Melanesian Greybird, Coracina ealedoniea''
  Pn:     Tongan     (siki)viu        ‘Lalage maculosa’
cf. also:
   MM: Teop     kuisau                ‘Papuan Cuckoo Shrike, Coracinapapuensis’
   MM: Banoni     kuisa               ‘Coracina papuensis'
   SES: Malango koiso                 ‘Coracina spp.’



6.6.2 Thrushes (Turdidae)

The only species for which any significant base of terms exists is the Island Thrush (Turdus
poliocephalus).

PSOc *was(i,e) ‘Island Thrush, Turduspoliocephalus’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Mota     wasia                 ‘a bird, merula’
  NCV: Lakon      srwsrw              ‘Cuckoo-shrike, Coracina sp.’ (metathesis)
  NCV: Raga     esi-esi
  NCV: Atchin     ni-was              ‘sp. of bird that feeds in the creeks’
  SV:   Sye     wasep
  NCal: Nengone   wasase

                                                                                    Birds   343


6.6.3 Fantails (Rhipiduridae) and flycatchers (Monarchidae)

The flycatchers (Myiagra.:Monarcha) and fantails (Rhipidura) extend widely into the Oceanic
region, but evince only a few local cognate sets.

6.6.3.1 Fantails

The highly distinctive appearance and behaviour of fantails, and their tolerance of human
proximity, make them familiar birds, much better represented by widespread cognate sets
than the other flycatchers.

POc *tcikere ‘Fantail, Rhipidura sp.’
  NNG: Bing            teykil-kil(ahang) ‘willie wag tail’
  PT:    Wedau         tagiri-girim      ‘wagtail’
  PT:    Balawaia      sikere(koio)      ‘a small grass bird with long tail’
  PT:    Hula          tikere            ‘willie wagtail’
  MM: Tolai            taŋene            ‘Sunbird, Nectarinia sp.’
  NCV: Mota            tayere            ‘a bird, flycatcher’
  NCV: Lakon           takeke            ‘Collared Grey Fantail, Rhipidurafuliginosa
  NCV: Raga            tayere            ‘ Rhipidurafuliginosa‘
  NCV:   SE Ambrym     tailel            ‘Spotted Fantail, Rhipidura spilodera"
  NCV: Paamese         tdlele            ‘'Rhipidura spilodera"
  NCV: Nguna           takere-kere
  NCal: Nyelayu        dagm
  NCal: Nelemwa        dagin             ''Rhipidura spilodera"
  NCal: Caaac          dagin
  NCal: Jawe           dagin             ''Rhipidura spilodera"
  NCal: Grand Couli dari
  Fij:   Rotuman      fce?ere            ‘Fiji Shrikebill, Clytorhynchus vitiensis`
A probable borrowing from some North--Central Vanuatu language:
  Pn:    Emae          takerokero


    laki ‘fantail’
POc *
  MM:      Nduke        (hi)reyi        ‘fantail, possibly Cockerell’s Fantail, Rhipidura
                                        cockerelli‘
  SES:      Lau        lai              ‘fantail’
  SES:      Kwara’ae   la?e             ‘willy wagtail’
  SES:      Kwaio      la?e             ‘Willie Wagtail, Rhipidura leucophrys'
  NCV:      Matantas   liyiliyi         ‘Spotted Fantail, Rhipidura spdodera'
  NCal:     Paid       h.di, heti       ‘Rhipidura spp.’
  NCal:     Xaracuu    hddi             ‘Rhipidura spp.’
  NCal:     Drubea     hdti             ‘Rhipidura spilodera‘


Proto NW Solomonic *pitikole ‘fantail’
  MM: Marovo            pitikole        ‘Willie Wagtail, Rhipidura leucophrys‘
  MM: Nduke             pitikole        ‘Rhipidura leucophrys"

344   Ross Clark


  MM:     Roviana         pitikole        ‘Rhipidura sp.’
  MM:     Simbo           pitikole        ‘bird sp. like a wagtail’
  MM:     Maringe         phipituale      ‘Rhipidura leucophrys’
cf. also:
   MM: Halia (Haku) pipikula              ‘Willy Wagtail’


     vete-vete ‘fantail’
PNCV *
  NCV: Raga              v''et-vete(rerea) ‘ Spotted Fantail, Rhipidura spiloderd’
  NCV: Naman             (no-vi)vete-vet ‘fantail’
  NCV: Neve’ei           (na-vi)vete-vet ‘fantail’


PSOc *sora ‘fantail’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV: Sara            nu-sora        ‘Spotted Fantail, Rhipidura spilodera' (Flux 1993)
  NCV: Kiai            sar(kele)      ‘Collared Grey Fantail, Rhipidurafuliginosa’
  NCV:   Nguna         soro(pito)     ‘fantail sp.’
  SV:    Kwamera       (ka)ssra-sər ‘Rhipidura fuliginosa’
The following potential cognate may be a local formation, cf. tatara ‘sweep’:
  SES: Arosi           tatara(p`'era) ‘wagtail’


                   riuriu[kabe] ‘Willie Wagtail, Rhipidura leucophrys'
Proto SE Solomonic *
  SES:    Bugotu         riuriuyabi
  SES:    Gela           riuriupege    ‘fantail’
  SES:    Malango        riuriuhabe
  SES:    Longgu         (ririPu) kabi ‘fantail’
  SES:    ’Are’are       riuriu Papi
  SES:    Sa’a           hiPuhiPu pote
  SES:    Ulawa          hiPuhiPu kape
  SES:    Uki ni Masi    kiukiu rape
  SES:    Arosi          rurukape
  SES:    Bauro          riuriugape
Apparently at least in part a borrowing from some SE Solomonic language:
  Pn:    Rennellese mayiyape           ‘Rennell Fantail, Rhipidura rennelliana’
                         marjiyape
                         mayuyape

The first part of this compound clearly relates to/'/// ‘turn’, referring to the bird’s characteristic
turns with spread tail feathers, both in flight and perching. In two languages the following
element is a body part: Sa’a pote ‘buttocks’, Gela pege ‘forepart of thigh’. But the more
widespread second element seems more likely to be related to POc *kapak, compare Arosi
kape ‘flutter’.

                                                                                 Birds   345


6.6.3.2 Flycatchers

PEOc *
     paRapaRa ‘flycatcher’
   SES:                         ‘Chestnut-bellied Monarch (Monarcha
           Uki ni Masi harahara(ŋata)
                                castaneiventris’
  SES: Arosi     harahara(ŋada) ‘bird sp.’
  SES: Bauro     yayara(sia)    ‘Monarcha castaneiventris ’
  NCV: SE Ambrym holhol(vetei)  ‘Myiagra caledonica’
  NCV: Paamese   holiholi(vetd) Myiagra caledonica’’
  NCal: Paici    (ntywara(abi)  ‘Myiagra caledonica’


PEOc *k(o,u)vi ‘Flycatcher, Myiagra sp.’
  SES:     Malango      (du)hui       ‘ Steel-blue Flycatcher, Myiagraferrocyanea’
  NCV:     Raga         (buru)kuvi    ‘Myiagra ferrocyanea’
  NCal:    Nengone      (wanere)kowt` ‘Myiagra caledonica’
  Mic:     Chuukese     koyi-koyi     ‘a bird (pipes at dawn and dusk)’
  Mic:     Mokilese     koi-koi       ‘bird sp.’
  Mic:     Ponapean     koi-koi       ‘Micronesian Myiagra Flycatcher, Myiagra
                                      oceanica’
  Pn:      Rennellese   yo-yovi(u)    ‘Rennell Shrikebill, Clytorhynchns hamlini’

6.6.4 Whistlers (Pachycephalidae)

The Golden Whistler, Pachycephala pectoralis, is the only widespread species in this family.

POc *san ‘Golden Whistler, Pachycephalapectoralis’
  MM:      Maringe      (k(h)na)eo
  SES:     Malango      (koe)eau     ‘Pachycephala spp.’
  SES:     Bauro        ton-ton
  NCV:     Raga         so-so(belak)
  Fij:     Lomaiviti    (didibe)sau



6.6.5 Whiteyes (Zosteropidae)

A single species of this family, the White-throated White-eye, Zosterops meeki, occurs in the
Oceanic homeland, but others of the same genus are very widely found throughout Oceania,
with at least one local cognate set.

PNCV *!aka ‘White-eye, Zosterops sp.’
  NCV:     Vera’a       leyley(e)
  NCV:     Raga         layalaya
  NCV:     Kiai         lala
  NCV:     Atchin       (we)lela           ‘small bird sp.’
  NCV:     Naman        (no-vi)layalay     ‘Yellow-fronted White-eye, Zosteropsflavifrons’
  NCV:     SE Ambrym    (tohu)laia         ‘Zosterops flavifrons’

346     Ross Clark




                     Figure 6.18     Philemon buceroides, Helmeted Friarbird




  NCV: Lewo              (nin)laia           ‘green bird’
  NCV: Namakir           likalak             ‘small yellow bird (feeds on pawpaw)’
  NCV: Nguna          Idka
cf. also:
   NCV: Mota          (mwa)ley
   NCV: Mwotlap          (na-mw)ligleg
   Pn:    Emae        lako                   (probable borrowing from a North-Central Vanuatu
                                             language)
These SV words are possible cognates:
  SV:   Ura           (u)leap           ‘Zosterops flavifrons'
  SV:   Sye           (u)leap, ne-lcap, ‘Zosterops flavifrons'
                       (we) leap

    The following two items are the only possible Southeast Solomonic cognate found, and
a possible Rennellese borrowing from a SE Solomonic language:

      SES:   Gela       (laulau)laka ‘very small bird sp.’
      Pn:    Rennellese yaya         ‘Woodford’s White-eye, Woodfordia supereiliosa''



6.6.6 Honeyeaters (Meliphagidae)

The honeyeaters of the homeland region include several belonging to the genus Myzomela, as
well as the New Britain Friarbird (Philemon cockerelli) and Gilliard’s Honeyeater (Melidectes
whitemanensis). Other birds of this family can be found as far as Fiji and western Polynesia.

    midi ‘honeyeater’ (see also PPn
POc *§6.7, p.349)
  MM: Nehan          (re)mit      ‘Olive-backed Sunbird, Nectarinia jugularis’’
  MM: Banoni         mede-mede    ‘Solomons Flowerpecker, Dicaeum aeneum’
  MM: Nduke            (sik)midi  ‘small honeyeater-like bird’
  SES: Gela            mudu-mudu ‘blackbird sp.’
  SES: Lau             (sisi)midi ‘honey eater’
  SES: Arosi         mudi-mudi    ‘yellow honeysucker’
  NCal: Tinrin         (ma)muru   ‘bird sp. which sucks flowers’

                                                                                      Birds    347


  NCal: Xaracuu           (md)muru        ‘Barred Honeyeater, Phylidonyris undulata’
  NCal: Drubea            (md)muru        ‘Phylidonyris undulata'’
  Fij:  Lau               miti-miti,      ‘Orange-breasted Honeyeater (Myzomelajugularis’
                           miti(kula)
  Pn:     E Futunan       miti (tokiko)   ‘Carunculated Honeyeater, Foulehaio carunculata’
cf. also:
   Pn:    Pileni          mihi              ‘red-fronted bird used for feather money’ (expected
                                          *zf zzz7z)

    The friarbirds (Philemon spp.) are a large and distinctive type of honeyeater represented
by three species in the homeland region. The following terms present various formal problems, but could be derived from some form such as POc *(sa)quka, with metathesis to *(sa)-
kuqa9

   Adm: Loniu              coPuka          ‘White-naped Friarbird, Philemon albitorques’
   Adm: Titan              cauka           ‘friarbird, probably New Britain Friarbird,
                                           Philemon cockerelli’
   NNG:     Musom          kuaŋ            Teatherhead’ (Philemon)
   NNG:     Aribwatsa      uwaŋ            Teatherhead’
   PT:      Iduna          takowa          ‘Little Friarbird, Philemon citreogularis’
   PT:      Gapapaiwa      sakoa           ‘Helmeted Friarbird, Philemon buceroides’
   MM:      Nakanai        kau             ‘Philemon cockerelli’
   MM:      Tolai          kəo, kau        ‘Philemon cockerelli’


PROc *
     (b,v)asilo ‘honeyeater’
  NCV: Raga          (busu)bihil          ‘Cardinal Honeyeater, Myzomela cardinahP
  NCV: SE Ambrym vasil                    Myzomela cardinalis’
  NCV: Paamese       vasiro               ‘Myzomela cardinalis’
  NCal: Iaai         bahelo               ‘New Caledonian Friarbird, Philemon diemensis’
  Fij:  W Viti Levu visilou               ‘Carunculated Honeyeater, Foulehaio carunculata’
  Pn:   Tongan10    fuleheu               ‘Foulehaio carunculata, also Fiji Shrikebill,
                                          Clytorhynchus vitiensis'

This set may be related to an innovative generic for ‘bird’ in a number of Central Vanuatu
languages: Apma b''ihil, N Ambrym p' ehel, Burmbar mbasir, etc.

    ioli ‘honeyeater’
POc *
  TM: Burna             wau iele          ‘Cardinal Honeyeater, Myzomela cardinalis’
  NCV: Kiai             ioli              ‘White-bellied Honeyeater, Phylidonyris notabilis’




[9] Cf. Nage (CMP) koka ‘Philemon bueeroides'.

[10] Niuatoputapu and Tafahi.

348      Ross Clark


PNCV *bwatu-(i)-manu ‘Cardinal Honeyeater, Myzomela cardinalis" (lit. ‘head of bird’)
  NCV: Mota               pwatman     ‘a red-headed honey eater, male; cock bird of lasis'
  NCV: Mwotlap            ne-pwetmen
  NCV: Raga               bwat-i-manu




6.6.7 Starlings (Stumidae)

Starlings of the genus Aplonis, and the Yellow-faced Mynah, Mino dumontii, extend throughout much of Oceania. The first two cognate sets may be related.

POc *pusiRa ‘Starling, Aplonis sp.’
  MM:       Tolai           vuirə            ‘Aplonis spp.’
  NCV:      Wusi (Nokovula) wohia            ‘New Hebrides Starling, Aplonis zelandica‘
  Mic:      Ponapean        sie
  Fij:      Rotuman         husila           ‘Striped Starling, Aplonis labuensis' (*
                                                                                    -R-   > -,
                                             rare in Rotuman)
  Fij:      Bauan               voðia        ‘Fiji Shrikebill, Clytorhynchus vitiensis"
  Fij:      W Viti Levu         voðea        "Aplonis labuensis'
  Fij:      Lomaiviti           voðea        "Aplonis labuensis'
  Pn:       Tongan             fuiva         "Clytorhynchus vitiensis"
  Pn:       Samoan             fuia          ‘Samoan Starling, Aplonis atrifusca"
  Pn:       Takuu              fuia          ‘Fead Island Starling, Aplonis feadensis"
  Pn:       Luangiua            huia         "Aplonis feadensis"
  Pn:       Maori               huia         ‘Huia, Heteralocha acutirostris"

The Shrikebill has in common with the starlings only a similar size and rather drab colouring.
The Huia of New Zealand, a much larger bird, presents even less obvious similarity, and may
have been named in imitation of its whistling call.

POc *bwisu ‘Shining Starling, Aplonis metallica"
  Adm: Lou           pwisi        ‘black bird sp.’
  Adm: Drehet        pwisi        ‘small black bird sp, with red eyes
  SES Lau            bi-bisu
  SES Kwara’ae       bi-bisu
  SES Kwaio          bi-bisu      ‘small black bird sp.’
  SES:   Uki ni Masi pi-pisu
  SES Arosi          pi-pisu      ‘bird sp.’
  SES Bauro          (a)pisu
Probably borrowed from a SES language is
  Pn:    Rennellese (va)pilu      ‘Aplonis sp.’
cf. also:
   MM: Teop               buiŋbuiŋ      ‘Aplonis metallica"
   MM: Tinputz            bosiŋ         ‘starling (general term)’
   NCV: Mota              wotepispis    ‘Island Thrush, Turduspoliocephalus

                                                                                      Birds   349


The definition of Drehet pwisi is a good description of Aplonis metallica. Yapese gce'Ppluw
‘small black bird sp.’ bears a striking resemblance to the Rennellese word, but given the lack
of precise identification and the absence of known borrowing in this direction, this is probably
coincidental.
    The following appears to be a continuation of POc *midi, reconstructed above (§6.6) as
originally applying to honeyeaters, but extended in Polynesia to the starlings and toilers, on
the basis of similarities which remain unclear.

PPn *mili ‘Striped Starling, Aplonis tabuensis’
  Pn:       Tongan    misi
  Pn:       Niuean    miti
  Pn:       E Uvean   misi
  Pn:       E Futunan miti (Puli)     (Puli ‘black’)
  Pn:       Samoan    miti            ‘Spotted Triller, Lalage maculosa’’
                      miti tai        ‘Samoan Triller, Lalage sharpei’ (tai ‘sea, shore’)
                      miti vao        ‘Aplonis tabuensis’ (vao ‘forest’)
  Pn:    Tikopia      miti
Probable Polynesian borrowing:
  Fij:   Lau          miti


Proto SE Solomonic *cii]i(l)o ‘Yellow-faced Mynah, Mino dumonlir
   SES:     Malango       ciijiro
   SES:     To’aba’ita    si’gio
   SES:     Lau           siŋeo         ‘starling’
   SES:     Kwara’ae      si’gilo       ‘bird sp., black except for red around eye’
cf. also:
   MM:      Halia (Haku) cigilio        Mino dumontii or Fead Island Starling, Aplonis
                                       feadensis’
  MM: Banoni              ciyino
  MM: Torau               sigineu



6.6.8 Wood swallows (Artamidae)

The Bismarck Wood Swallow (Artamus insignis) has congenerics elsewhere in Melanesia,
but only two very local cognate sets have been found.

Proto Central Vanuatu *bai ‘White-breasted Wood Swallow, Artamus leucorhynchus’
  NCV: SE Ambrym væi-væi
  NCV: Nguna     pde
  NCV: S Efate   pdi


PNCal *k hin ‘White-breasted Wood Swallow, Artamus leucorhynchus’
  NCal: Nelemwa          xih
  NCal: Caaac            khin

350      Ross Clark


     NCal: Fwai              khefi
     NCal: Cemuhi            ke’n



6.6.9 Crows (Corvidae)

Again a single species, the Australian Crow (Corvus orru') is present in the homeland, with
congenerics elsewhere in Melanesia. Both * (kao)kao and *kaka are likely to show some influence of widespread representations of crow vocalizations such as English caw.

    (kao)kao ‘crow, Corvus sp.’ 11
POc *
     NNGr: Yabem          ao?o                  ‘crow, raven’
     NNGr: North Watut    ŋaukŋauk              ‘raven’
     NNGr: Mengen (Poeng) kaokato
     PT:   Dobu           kaokao
     PT:   Are            ogaoga
     PT:   Muyuw          auwau
     PT:   Hula           kao
     PT:   Mekeo          oaŋou                 ‘native crow’
     MM Nakanai           kaokao
     MM Patpatar          kok
     MM Halia             koko(u)
     MM Tinputz           au
     MM Banoni            YeYau                 ‘White-billed Crow, Corvus woodfordf
     MM Torau             aoao                  ‘Corvus woodfordi'
     MM Alu               kd
     MM Maringe           na-?ao                "Corvus woodfordi' (Webb 1992); ‘Yellow-faced Mynah, Mino dumonlii' (White 1988)
     SES:    Bugotu                  aoao
     SES:    Malango                 kao        "Corvus woodfordf


PNGOc *ka(r,R)o(kV) ‘crow’
     NNG     Manam           kalo           ‘black bird sp. (Blewett); raven (Krahe)’
     NNG     Kairiru         qal            ‘crow’
     NNG     Bariai          karo           ‘crow’
     NNG     Kove            karo           ‘crow’
     NNG     Lusi            karo           ‘crow’
     NNG     Dami            kalog          ‘crow’
     NNG     Takia           alal           ‘crow’
     NNG     Amara           a-krok         ‘crow’
     NNG     Kilenge         a-kor          ‘crow’
     NNG     Mangap          aŋkor          ‘raven, crow’
     NNG     Kaulong         (ekiŋ) khor]   ‘crow’
  NNG:    Mouk        ko-krak       ‘crow
  NNG:    Lamogai     ka-kroŋ       ‘crow
  NNG:    Sengseng    kohoŋ         ‘crow
  PT:     Lala       alo           ‘crow
  PT:     Motu        galo          ‘crow


[11] Cf. (WMP) Muna kaoki.

                                                                              Birds   351


PNCal *kaka ‘New Caledonian Crow, Corvus moneduloides’
  NCal:   Paid        keke
  NCal:   Ajie        kexe
  NCal:   Tinrin      kaya
  NCal:   Xaracuu     gaka
  NCal:   Drubea      k‘dkwa


PNCal *h week ‘New Caledonian Crow, Corvus moneduloides’
  NCal:   Nyelayu     week
  NCal:   Nelemwa     hweek
  NCal:   Caaac       hwaak
  NCal:   Fwai        hwaw(w)dk


PPT *b'ayob'ayo ‘crow’
  PT      Tubetube    boioboio      ‘crow’
  PT      Wagawaga    waiwai        ‘Australian Crow, Corvus orru
  PT      Iduna       bwayob‘ayo    ‘Corvus orru’
  PT      Tawala      waewae        ‘crow’
  PT      Muyuw       buaiobuaio    ‘crow’

   The following reconstruction seems very likely to have denoted some (probably black)
passerine species, but the diversity of actual referents makes it hard to be more precise.

PNPn *mako ‘small bird sp.’
  Pn:     Samoan       ma?o-ma?o       ‘Black-breasted Honeyeater, Gymnomyza samoensis’
  Pn:     Hawaiian   (?d)ma?o          ‘Hawaiian Thrush, Myadestes obscuras’
  Pn:     Marquesan (kd)mako           ‘Long-billed Reed Warbler, Acrocephalus caffef
  Pn:     Marquesan   (?o)ma?o ke?eke?e ‘Large Flycatcher, Pomarea whitneyf (ke?eke?e ‘black’)
  Pn:     Mangarevan (ko)mako          ‘Tuamotu Warbler, Acrocephalus atyphus'
  Pn:     Tahitian   (?o)ma-ma?o       ‘ Society Islands Flycatcher, Pomarea nigra’’
  Pn:     Maori      mako(mako), (kd)mako, (kori)mako       ‘New Zealand Bellbird, Anthornis melanura’’

352     Ross Clark


6.7 Sea and shore birds

The sea and shore birds have in common that the species tend to be wide ranging rather
than localised, many of them migrants or wanderers. The larger families contain numerous
species whose field discrimination can be difficult. Observation of these birds becomes more
common as sea orientation becomes more dominant, so that the most precise and detailed
taxonomies are found in Micronesian and Polynesian languages.


6.7.1 Petrels (Procellariidae, Hydrobatidae)

Petrels come to land only to breed, and may be known primarily from the strange noises
they make at their burrows at night. Of several species recorded for the homeland, only the
Wedge-tailed Shearwater (Puffinuspacificus) breeds in the vicinity and is present year round.

    There is a certain degree of crossover apparent between the families of petrels, albatrosses
and boobies.

PROc *tinebu ‘petrel’
  NCal: Nyelayu          cinek        ‘nightbird’
  NCal: Nelemwa          ilep         ‘Tahiti Petrel, Pseudobulweria roslrala) and Wedge-tailed Shearwater, Puffinuspacificus‘
  NCal:      Caaac       nhinek       ‘Puffinus spp.’
  NCal:      Fwai        ninep        ‘petrel’
  NCal:      Voh-Kone    finep        ‘White-winged Petrel, Pterodroma leucoptera‘
  NCal:      Cemuhi      inip         ' Plerodroma leucoptera"
  Mic:       Kiribati    tinepu       ‘Christmas Island Shearwater, Puffinus nativitatis"


POc *saba(l) ‘petrel or albatross’
  TM:        Burna      saba          ‘Wandering Albatross, Diomedea exulans‘
  Mic:       Puluwatese hapal         ‘petrel’
  Mic:       Namoluk    sapal         ‘sea bird, dark coloured, blunt winged, size of noddy, never comes on land’



PROc *koro + modifier ‘petrel’
  NCV:       Namakir     koro(lik)    ‘black sea bird sp.’
  NCV:       N Efate12   koro(liko)   ‘Wedge-tailed Shearwater, Puffinuspacificus‘
  Mic:       Kiribati    koro(paro)   ‘Puffinus pacificus"
  Pn:        Tahitian    oro(matto)   ‘Pelecanusfiber, Little Grey Booby’ (Forster 1775)


PROc *ta(i)ko(k) ‘petrel’
PSV *n-tako-tako(k) ‘petrel’
  SV:        Kwamera     təkurakdk     ‘mutton bird (petrel spp.)’
  SV:        Lenakel     təkərka       ‘mutton bird’

[12] Tongoa.

                                                                                   Birds    353


PPn *taiko ‘petrel’
  Pn:    Tongan         teiko(o)       ‘Audubon’s Shearwater, Puffmus lherminieri) and Wedge-tailed Shearwater, P. pacificus’
  Pn:     Samoan        ta?i?o         ‘Puffmus sp.’
  Pn:     Pukapukan     taiko          ‘Puffmus lherminieri’
  Pn:     Rapanui       taiko          ‘seabird sp.’ (Fuentes)
  Pn:     Rapanui       taiho          ‘Trinidade Petrel, Pterodroma arminjoniana’ (Metraux 1940)
  Pn:     Marquesan teiko              ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:     Mangarevan kotai             ‘petrel, perhaps Puffmus lherminieri’ (metathesis)
  Pn:     Rarotongan taiko             ‘black petrel’
  Pn:     Maori      taiko             ‘Black Petrel, Procellariaparkinsoni’
cf. also: The Rotuman form is a loan from Polynesian:
  Fij:  Rotuman       toviko       ‘shearwater’ (expected


PPn *lofa ‘petrel or other large sea bird’ (cf. PPn *lofa ‘extended, spread out (as a bird’s wings)’)
  Pn:    Tongan         lofa           ‘Frigate Bird, Fregata spp.’
  Pn:    E Uvean        lofa           ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:    Pukapukan noa                 ‘Brown Booby, Sula leucogaster’
  Pn:    Nukuoro        loha           ‘bird sp. (never seen live)’
  Pn:    Tikopia        rofa           ‘Great Frigate Bird, Fregata minor’
  Pn:    Anutan         ropa           ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:    Marquesan roha, noha ‘petrel or shearwater’
  Pn:    Tahitian       noha           ‘Tahiti Petrel, Pseudobulweria rostrata’
  Pn:    Tuamotuan noha                ‘bird sp.’



6.7.2 Tropic-birds (Phaethontidae)

The two species of tropic-bird (Phaethon) are rare in Papua New Guinea waters but more
frequently encountered in Remote Oceania. The Red-tailed Tropic Bird (P. rubricauda) and
the White-tailed Tropic Bird (P. lepturus) differ, as their names suggest, in the colour of the
two extremely elongated tail feathers by which this type of bird is readily recognised. They
are generally covered by a single lexical item, though there may be a conventional specifier
for one or the other, as in Tongan tavake toto ‘P. rubricauda’ (to to ‘blood’).

PMic *tiku, tuki ‘tropic-bird’ (Bender et al. 2003)
  Mic:    Sonsorolese sək             ‘the phaeton’
  Mic:    Woleaian    sux             ‘white tropic bird’
  Mic:    Puluwatese wlk
  Mic:    Carolinian six              ‘white shore bird with a long tail’
  Mic:    Namoluk     uk              ‘White-tailed Tropic-bird, Phaethon lepturus’
  Mic:    Chuukese    wlk             ‘Phaethon lepturus’
  Mic:    Ponapean    sik             ‘white sea bird sp.’
  Mic: Mokilese       cik
  Mic:   Kosraean     sik         ‘bird sp.’
  Mic: Marshallese (l,uokwa)cek ‘Red-tailed Tropic-bird, Phaethon rubricauda’
cf. also: Probable borrowing from a Micronesian language:
  Yap: Yapese         yug         ‘type of white dove-like bird with a long tail’


354     Ross Clark




                     Figure 6.19   Phaethon lepturus, White-tailed Tropic Bird


PPn * tawake ‘White-tailed Tropic-bird, Phaethon lepturus’
  Pn:      Tongan        tavake
  Pn:      E Futunan     tavake
  Pn:      Samoan        tavaPe
  Pn:      Tuvalu        tavake
  Pn:      Nukuoro       tavake
  Pn:      Sikaiana      tavake         ‘tropic bird’
  Pn:      Rennellese    tavake         ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fulva’
  Pn:      Tikopia       tavake
  Pn:      Emae          manu tavake    ‘tropic bird’
  Pn:      Pukapukan     tavake         ‘tropic bird’
  Pn:      Hawaiian      koaPe          ‘tropic bird’
  Pn:      Marquesan     toake
  Pn:      Tahitian      tavaPe         ‘tropic bird’
  Pn:      Rarotongan    tavake         ‘Red-tailed Tropic-bird, Phaethon rubricauda
  Pn:      Maori         tawake         ‘bird sp. mentioned in songs’
Probable Polynesian borrowings:
  TM: Burna            tavake       ‘tropic bird’
  SV:    Anejom       n-tauoy       ‘Phaethon spp.’
  Mic: Kiribati        take         ‘Phaethon rubricauda’
  Fij:   Rotuman       tævæke       ‘Phaethon lepturus’ (expected \foevcePe)
Probable Fijian cognate or borrowing:
  Fij:   Bauan         tawake       ‘banner’

                                                                               Birds   355




                        Figure 6.20   Sulci dactylatra, Blue-faccd Booby




6.7.3 Boobies (Sulidae)

Of the three Boobies (genus Sula) found in Oceania, the Brown Booby (5. leucogaster) is
present year round in New Guinea waters. The Red-footed Booby (S. sula), however, is also
widely reported, while the Blue-faced Booby (S. dactylatra) appears to be the least common.
Only in Polynesia and Micronesia are the three species lexically distinguished.

PROc *pue ‘Booby, Sula sp.’
  NCal: Nelemwa       (hware)wue      ‘Brown Booby, Sula leucogaster
  NCal: Caaac         ua
  NCal: Fwai          (thef‘ana)we
  NCal: Iaai          (sibo)iir       ‘Sula leucogaster"
  Mic: Kiribati       (ki)pui         ‘Sula leucogaster"
PPn *fua(ko) ‘Booby, Sula sp.’
  Pn:    Samoan      fua(lo)
  Pn:    Tokelauan fua(kd)            ‘Sula leucogaster‘
  Pn:    Tahitian     ua(?ao)         ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula suld
  Pn:    Tahitian     a?o             ‘Sula leucogaster"

The following terms for petrels appear to be cognate:

    Pn:    Tongan [13]     fuako          ‘Wedge-tailed Shearwater, Puffinuspacificus"
    Pn:    Hawaiian     ua?u           ‘Hawaiian Petrel, Pterodroma phaeopygia"
    Pn:    Hawaiian     ?a?o         ‘Manx Shearwater, Puffinuspuffinus"


[13] Niuatoputapu.

356     Ross Clark


PNPn *(maua)kena ‘booby, Sula sp
  Pn:      Tuvalu     kena            ‘Blue-faced Booby, Sula dactylatra’
  Pn:      Pukapukan kena             ‘booby (?)’
  Pn:      K’marangi moua(kai)        ‘Brown Booby, Sula leucogaster’
  Pn:      Takuu      mauakena        ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula’
  Pn:      Sikaiana   mouakena        ‘Sula leucogastef
  Pn:      Rennellese mauakena        ‘Sula sula’
  Pn:      Tikopia    mauakena        ‘Sula dactylatra’’
  Pn:      Rapanui    kena            ‘Sula dactylatra’
  Pn:      Marquesan kena             ‘Sula leucogaster’
  Pn:      Mangarevan kena            ‘Sula sula’
  Pn:      Manihiki   kena            ‘Sula leucogaster’
  Pn:      Tongarevan kena            ‘Sula sula’
cf. also: A probable Polynesian borrowing:
  Mie: Kiribati       mouakena        ‘Sula dactylatra’

    The following also appears to be basically a term for a booby sp,, though there is some
spread to other sea birds. (The Maori word refers to a gannet, the temperate-zone counterpart
of the booby, very similar in appearance and habits.)

PNPn *takupu ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula’
  Pn:      Tuvalu     tapuku
  Pn:      Tuvalu      takupu            ‘Dusky Shearwater, Puffinus lherminieri’
  Pn:      Tokelauan takupu             ‘Sula sula (adult)’
  Pn.      Pukapukan takupu             ‘Sula sula (dark morph)’
  Pn:      Hawaiian   kalupu            ‘bird sp., perhaps albatross’
  Pn:      Marquesan (ko)putu           ‘Trindade Petrel, Pterodroma arminjoniana’
  Pn:      Tuamotuan takupu             ‘gannet’
  Pn:      Tongarevan tapuku
  Pn:      Maori      tdkapu, takupu    ‘Australian Gannet, Morns senator’


PNPn *kanapu ‘Brown Booby, Sula leucogaster’
  Pn:      Tuvalu    kanapu
  Pn:      Nukuria   kanapu             ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula’
  Pn:      Takuu     kanapu             ‘Sula sula’
  Pn:      Luangiua  laŋapu, 'iktŋapafi ‘black and white seagull with red legs’
  Pn:      Luangiua    aŋapu              ‘Sula sula’
  Pn:   Sikaiana     kanapu             ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:   Rennellese kanapu
  Pn:   Tongarevan kdpu
A Polynesian borrowing:
  Fij:  Rotuman      kanopu             (expected ^ano?u)

    The following three forms suggest POc *kalau ‘booby’, but may be scattered cognates of
the previous set. The Nukuoro word is probably borrowed from Micronesia.

                                                                                  Birds   357


   NNG: Mangap      kalau              ‘bird sp.’
   Mic: Marshallese kalMo              ‘Sula leucogaster‘
   Pn:  Nukuoro     kalau              ‘brown booby’

   This term is restricted to the central and northern Polynesian Outliers:

PNPn *katoko ‘booby’
  Pn:     Takuu         kdtoko        ‘Blue-faced Booby, Sula dactylatra’
  Pn:     Nukumanu      (ha)katoko    ‘Brown Booby, Sula leueogasler'
  Pn:     Luangiua      ako?o         ‘black bird sp. like frigate bird’
  Pn:     Luangiua      ako?a         ‘Sula leueogasler'
  Pn:     Sikaiana      katoko        ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula’
  Pn:     Sikaiana      atoko         ‘Sula sula'
  Pn:     Rennellese    katoko        ‘young stage of kanapu, Sula leueogasler'
  Pn:     Tikopia       katoko        ‘ Sula leucogastef


PROc *kemoa ‘booby’ (cf. perhaps PWOc *kamwaga ‘eagle, hawk’; §5.4.2)
  Mic:    Woleaian      xemoa         ‘booby bird’
  Mic:    Puluwatese    yomo          ‘booby bird’
  Mic:    Chuukese      omə           ‘booby bird’
  Pn:     Pukapukan     dkarna        ‘Red-footed Booby, Sula sula (white morph)’



6.7.4 Frigate birds (Fregatidae)

Two species of frigate bird are common in New Guinea waters, the Great Frigate Bird (Fre-
gata minor') and the Lesser Frigate Bird (F. arieP). (The identifications of other species for
Puluwat and Roviana below are likely to be erroneous.) Two clear POc reconstructions can
be justified, though there seems to be no consistent lexical differentiation between the two
species in the sources for contemporary languages.

POc *(dr,d)aula ‘frigate bird’
  Adm:    Mussau        raura
  NNG:    Bariai        raila
  NNG:    Gitua         daula         ‘seabird sp.’
  NNG:    Gedaged       daur
  NNG:    Aria          daila         ‘bird sp.’
  PT:     Muyuw         dauta
  PT:     Budibud       dauka
  MM:     Tigak         raula
  MM:     Label         daulai
  MM:     Tolai         daulə         ‘Lesser Frigate Bird, Fregata arieP
  MM:     Nehan         daul          'Pregala arieP
  SES:    Gela          daula
  SES:    Tolo          daula
  SES:    To’aba’ita    kaule
  SES: Lau           gaula
  SES: Kwaio         gaula
  SES: ’Are’are      kaura
  SES: Arosi         gaura
cf. also: A borrowing from a SE Solomonic language:
  Pn:   Pileni       kaula, koula


358   Ross Clark


                       Figure 6.21   Fregata artel, Lesser Frigate Bird


POc *katapa ‘frigate bird’
  Adm: Loniu           katah         ‘large black seabird sp,, white markings, dives to feed’
  Adm:    Lou         karap
  NCal:   Nelemwa     cave           ‘Lesser Frigate Bird, Fregata ariek
  NCal:   Iaai        atari          cFregata ariek
  NCal:   Dehu        wete
  NCal:   Nengone     waxej
  Mic:    Sonsorolese xaddfe
  Mic:    Puluwatese yahaf           ‘Magnificent Frigate Bird, Fregata magnifieens'
  Mic:    Carolinian (Tanapag) ahaf
  Mic:    Namoluk     asaf           ‘Great Frigate Bird, Fregata minor'
  Mic:    Ponapean    kasap
  Mic:    Mokilese    kacap
  Mic:    Kiribati    eitei
  Mic:    Nauruan     itti
  Fij:    Rotuman     ?afaha
  Fij:    Bauan       kasaga         (expected kkatava)
  Pn:     E Futunan katafa           ‘Fregata ariek
  Pn:     Tongan      kdtafa         ‘albatross’
  Pn:     Niuean       kola
  Pn:     Samoan       ?atafa
  Pn:     Tokelauan    katafa        L Fregata minor
  Pn:     Pukapukan    kotawa
  Pn:     Nukuoro      kataha        d-regala minor
  Pn:     Takuu        katafa
  Pn:     Sikaiana     kataha
  Pn:     Rennellese   kataha        d-regala arid'
  Pn:     W Uvean      katafa        d-regala sp.’
  Pn:     Tahitian     ?otaha
  Pn:     Tongarevan   kotaha
  Pn:     Rarotongan   kotaʔa


                                                                                Birds    359


Proto NW Solomonic *belama ‘frigate bird’
  MM:     Marovo       belama
  MM:     Nduke        belama
  MM:     Roviana      belama        ‘Ascension Frigate Bird, Fregata aquila'
  MM:     Simbo        belsms        ‘Lesser Frigate Bird, Fregata arid'
  MM:     Kia          belama
  SES:    Bugotu       belama
  SES:    Gela         belama

(The glosses for Puluwat yahaf and Roviana belama are probably errors at the species level,
as these frigate birds are not known in the Oceanic region.)

PNCal *kaidaa(n) ‘frigate bird’
  NCal:   Caaac        yhdi dan      d-regala spp.’
  NCal:   Fwai         yaidan        d-regala ariei'
  NCal:   Cemuhi       aidd          ‘Fregata spp.’
  NCal:   Pai ci       aidd          ‘Fregata spp.’
  NCal:   Ajie         seidd

   The Ajie name is explained as ‘the one who tells about the day’.


6.7.5 Waders (Charadriidae, Scolopacidae, Burhinidae)

More than twenty species of these shore birds frequent the coasts of the Oceanic homeland, but most are migrants seen only seasonally. Among the most commonly identified
are the Bristle-thighed Curlew (Numenius lahiliensis). Whimbrel (Numeniusphaeopus), Bartailed Godwit (Limosa lapponica), Wandering Tattler (Heteroscelus incanus). Pacific Golden
Plover (Pluvialis fulvd), and Ruddy Turnstone (Arenaria interpres). Field identification of
these birds can be difficult, and even in Polynesia and Micronesia there are few cognate sets
with completely consistent reference.

POc *jipiu ‘wader’
  MM:     Banoni       civiu             ‘small migratory waders’
  MM:      Marovo       suviu              ‘ Tringa spp. ’
  MM:      Nduke        soviu              ‘general name for sandpipers, Tringa spp.’
  MM:      Nduke        toviu              ‘shore bird like a curlew, similar to soviu but smaller
  SES:     Gela         di-diviu           ‘snipe’
  SES:     To’aba’ita   si-sifiu           ‘wader (perhaps Numenius sp.)’
  SES:     Lau          si-sifiu           ‘sandpiper’
  SES:     Kwaio        si-sifiu           ‘Common Sandpiper, Actitis hypoleucos‘
  NCV:     Mwotlap      (ne-men) si-sivi   ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialisfulva"
  NCV:     Kiai         zi-zivi(ro)        ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscelus incanus"
  NCV:     Paamese      si-sihi            ‘bird sp. found on coastal rocks’
  NCV:     Lewo         vio                ‘sea bird sp.’
  NCV:     Nguna        siviu              ‘shore bird sp.’
  NCV:     S Efate      sfiu, sfiw         ‘whimbreT
  NCal:    Pije         difin
  NCal:    Paid         dipiu              ‘Grey-tailed Tattler, Tringa brevipes and Ruddy Turnstone, Arenaria interpret

360     Ross Clark


These Polynesian Outlier names are probably borrowings from Southeast Solomonic and
Central Vanuatu languages, respectively:

   Pn:     Rennellese siviu            ‘Great Sand Plover, Charadrius lesehinaultii'
   Pn:     Emae       siviu            ‘large shore bird sp.’


PWOc *kiwiwi ‘sandpiper sp.’
  PT:      Gumawana kiwiwi            ‘sandpiper sp.’
  PT:      Iduna    kiwiwi            ‘sandpiper: white bird with black on its back, inhabits creeks’
  PT:      Bwaidoga     kiwiwi        ‘sandpiper sp.’
  PT:      Gapapaiwa    kivivi        ‘sea bird’
  PT:      Wedau        kivivi        ‘plover; any kind of sand bird’
  PT:      Motu         kiwiwi        ‘Common Sandpiper, Actitis hypoleucos‘
  MM:      Tab ar       kuvivi
  MM:      Teop         kivivi(o)     ‘sea bird sp.’


POc *pdpipi ‘small wader taxon’
   PT:    Iduna                       ‘Rufous-necked Stint, Calidris ruficollis‘
   MM: Marovo       pivivi            ‘Limosa spp.’
   MM: Nduke        pivivi            ‘Tringa spp., sandpiper’
   MM: Roviana      pivivi            ‘a small non-edible variety of sand snipe’
   SES: Lau         k''ik''i          ‘snipe’
cf. also:
   TM: Burna        vivi              ‘Charadrius sp.’
   NCV:   SE Ambrym hehe              ‘sandpiper sp.’
   Pn:    Tuvalu    vivi (tai)        ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscelus incanus'
   Pn:    Sikaiana  (vivi) tai        ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fulva‘

                                                                                Birds    361




                      Figure 6.22   Pluvialis fiulva, Pacific Golden Plover


PROc *kVlili ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscehis incanus'
  NCal: Nelemwa         hilili        "Heteroscehis incanus and Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialisfulva'
PMic *k(i;u)lili ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscehis incanus'
 Mic: Woleaian        ilil(i)        ‘plover’
 Mic: Chuukese        inc            ‘small plover’
 Mic: Namoluk         ilil
 Mic: Kosraean        kulul          ‘sandpiper’
 Mic: Marshallese kirir
 Mic: Kiribati        kiriri
PPn *kolili ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscehis incanus'
  Pn:    Tongan       kolili         ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:    E Uvean      polili
  Pn:    Tokelauan kolili
  Pn:    Tuvalu       kolili         ‘Ruddy Turnstone, Arenaria interpres'
  Pn:    Pukapukan kolili
  Pn:    Nukuria      koriri         ‘Arenaria interpres'
  Pn:    Sikaiana     kolili         ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:    Tikopia      kolili         ‘Common Sandpiper, Actitis hypoleucos
  Pn:    Hawaiian     Pulili
  Pn:    Tahitian     Piiriri
  Pn:    Tongarevan kuriri
  Pn:    Rarotongan kuriri


PCP *tuli(i) ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fulva'
  Fij:   Rotuman       ciili               ‘Pluvialisfulva and Wandering Tattler, Heteroscehis incanus'
  Fij:   Bauan         doli                "Pluvialisfulva'
  Fij:   Bauan          doli-doli, dilio    "Heteroscelus incanus"
  Fij:      Wayan        doll                " Pluvialis fulva"
  Fij:      Wayan        doli-doli           "Heteroscelus incanus"
  Pn:       E Futunan    tuli                ‘various small shore-bird spp,, Pluvialis, Limosa,  Heteroscelus"
  Pn:       Samoan        tuli               ‘various shore bird spp,, Pluvialis, Arenaria, Numenius, Limosa, Heteroscelus, Calidris"
  Pn:       Pukapukan     tuli
  Pn:       Tuvalu        tuli
  Pn:       Nukuoro       tuli
  Pn:       K’marangi     tuli            ‘Heteroscelus incanus"
  Pn:       Nukuria       (te) tulia      ‘Grey-rumped Sandpiper, Heteroscelus brevipes"
  Pn:       Takuu         turi            ‘small black shore bird with white breast and large protruding eyes’
  Pn:       Luangiua      kili(kavoi)     ‘Common Sandpiper, Actitis hypoleucos‘
  Pn:       Tikopia       turi            " Pluvialis fulva"
  Pn:       Tikopia       turi vare       "Heteroscelus incanus"
  Pn:       Tikopia       turifakataumako ‘Ruddy Turnstone, Arenaria interpres"
  Pn:       Pileni        tuli            ‘a small wading bird’
  Pn:       Marquesan     turi            ‘Arenaria interpres"
  Pn:       Maori         tu-turi(fatu)   ‘dotterel, Charadrins spp.’
cf. also: A probable Polynesian borrowing is Nehan tulia in the following three forms:
  MM: Nehan           tulia            ‘Actitis hypoleucos"
  MM: Nehan           tui-tui-tulia    " Pluvialis fulva"
  MM: Nehan           tuliaŋ           "Arenaria interpres"


362      Ross Clark




                         Figure 6.23   Limosa lapponica, Bar-tailed Godwit





PPn *kiu~iwi            ‘shore bird taxon including Pluvialis and Numenius"
  Pn:      Tongan        kiu            ‘any migratory wader’
  Pn:      Niuean        kiu
  Pn:     E Uvean       kiu            ‘Pluvialis fulva and Bar-tailed Godwit, Limosa
                                       lapponica’
  Pn:     Pukapukan     kiu            ‘plover sp.’
  Pn:     Nukuoro       kivi-kivi      ‘Ruddy Turnstone, Arenaria interpres’
  Pn:     Takuu         kivi           ‘general name for shore and wading birds’
  Pn:     Luangiua      ivi
  Pn:     Sikaiana      kivi           ‘bird sp.’
                        kivi(aitu)     ‘Grey-rumped Sandpiper, Heteroscelus brevipes’
                        kivi(talei)    ‘Arenaria interpres’
  Pn:     Tikopia       kiu            ‘Bristle-thighed Curlew, Numenius tahitiensis’
  Pn:     Anutan        kiui           ‘a small bird which comes only during monsoon
                                       season’
  Pn:     Emae       kiu               ‘small shore bird sp.’
  Pn:     Marquesan kivi               ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscelus incanus’
  Pn:     Mangarevan kivi              ‘Bristle-thighed Curlew, Numenius tahitiensis’
  Pn:     Tongarevan kivi              ‘Numenius tahitensis’
  Pn:     Manihiki   kivi, kihi        ‘Numenius tahitensis’
  Pn:     Maori      kiwi              ‘Kiwi, Apteryx spp.’
cf. also: Probably borrowed from Polynesian:
  MM: Halia          kivi          ‘generic term for waders, esp. Pluvialis fulva’


                                                                                    Birds   363



The set above is perhaps cognate with the set from which PWOc *kiwiwi ‘sandpiper sp.’
(p.360) is reconstructed. There are also probable Western Oceanic cognates, namely Tawala
(PT), Gapapaiwa (PT) kiu ‘bird (generic)’ andNakanai (MM) e-kivu ‘bird sp.’. Together with
the set above these imply the reconstruction of POc *kiu, but its gloss cannot be reconstructed,
as the Tawala and Gapapaiwa generic presumably reflects the promotion of a bird taxon term
to generic status, and the Nakanai gloss is not specific.

Proto Central Eastern Polynesian *torea ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fulva’’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      kolea
  Pn:     Tahitian      torea
  Pn:     Tongarevan    torea
  Pn:     Manihiki      torea
  Pn:     Rarotongan    torea
  Pn:     Maori         torea         ‘Oystercatcher, Haematopus spp.’


PMic *kulu ‘wader’ (Bender et al. 2003: ‘bird sp.’)
  Mic:    Mokilese    kul             ‘bird sp.’
  Mic:    Ponapean    kulu            ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fulva’
  Mic:    Marshallese koi             ‘Calidris spp.’
                      kwel            ‘ semipalmated sandpiper’
                      k^el-fyac)      ‘golden plover’
  Mic:    Kiribati    kun             ‘ Pluvialis fulva’

364     Ross Clark


Proto Chuukic-Ponapeic *kul(i,u)ya ‘plover’
  Mic:     Sonsorolese          yirpja, kiriŋ   ‘sandpiper, dotterel’
  Mic:     Woleaian             xuruij(o)       ‘golden plover’
  Mic:     Carolinian (Tanapag) guhŋ            ‘sp. of coastal bird, plover or sandpiper’
  Mic:     Puluwatese           kiliŋ           ‘Pacific Golden Plover, Pluvialis fidva'
  Mic:     Namoluk              kiliŋ           ‘Pluvialis fulva’’
  Mic:     Chuukese             kuriŋ           ‘plover’
Probable borrowing from a Micronesian language:
  Yap: Yapese                 ?kuley       ‘type of sea bird’


PROc *keke^*kaka 'waded
  SV:      Anejom      na-yay     ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscelus incanus’
  NCal:    Nyelayu     ceek       ‘shore bird’
  Mic:     Woleaian    (riy)ak(a) ‘bristle-thighed curlew’
  Mic:     Puluwatese (liye)kak   Tong-necked migratory shore bird’
  Mic:     Namoluk     (lia)kak   ‘Whimbrel, Numeniusphaeopus’
  Mic:     Chuukese    (riye)kak  ‘bird sp.’
  Mic:     Marshallese (pa)krkr   ‘Pluvialis fulva, black variety in breeding plumage
  Mic:     Kiribati    kaka       ‘Bar-tailed Godwit, Limosa lapponica’
Probable borrowings from some Micronesian language are:
  Pn:   Nukuoro       kaka        ‘bird sp.’
  Pn:   K’marangi kaka            ‘Bristle-thighed Curlew, Numenius lahiliensis'

    Hote (NNG) kakapyak, glossed as a ‘small black bird like a swallow; doesn’t sit in a tree
but on rock; morning and afternoon it catches insects in sky’ is a possible Western Oceanic
cognate, but its similarity to the items above may be due to chance.

PPn *(lafu)lafulafu ‘wader sp.’
  Pn:      Nukuoro      lahulahu             ‘Wandering Tattler, Heteroscelus incanus
  Pn:      Tokelauan    lefulefu             ‘ Sanderling, Calidris alba’’
  Pn:      Pukapukan    lewulewu             ‘Calidris alba’’
  Pn:      Tongarevan   (kd)rahurahu         ‘Blue-gray Noddy, Procelsterna eerulea'
  Pn:      Rarotongan   (ngdio-?a)re?ure?u   ‘Procelsterna cerulea’
The following may be cognate, though the semantic connection is hardly close:
  Pn:    Tongan      lafu                 ‘petrel’

    Finally, one very distinctive shore bird, much larger than the rest, with heavy build and
thick bill, is well known in the western Solomons:

Proto NW Solomonic *(b,v)ili[ki(k,t)i] ‘Beach Stone-Curlew, Burhinus neglectus’’
  MM:      Marovo       bilikiki
  MM:      Nduke        vivili
  MM:      Roviana      bilikiki     ‘large whitish bird, frequents beach, flat bill, fond of hermit crabs, etc.’
  MM:      Simbo        bilikiki     ‘bird sp.’
  MM: Maringe          bi(li)bili
  MM: Kia              bilikiti       ‘bird sp,, eats crabs’


                                                                                  Birds   365

6.7.6 Terns (Laridae)

The family Laridae includes both gulls and terns. Gulls are mainly birds of the temperate
zones, and are only rare visitors to tropical Oceania. The common gloss ‘seagull’ in dictionaries and vocabularies of languages in this area almost certainly indicates a tern. Several
species of tern (Sterna, Thalasseus') are common in the waters of the homeland, along with
noddies (Anous) and the very distinctive White Tern (Gygis alba).

PMP *kanaway ‘white bird’ (Blust 2002)
POc *kanawe ‘tern, Sterna spp.’
  Adm: Loniu              kanaw         ‘bird sp. with black body and white head and beak; possibly a kind of noddy’
  Adm:    Nyindrou    kanau             ‘white seagull’
  Adm:    Lou         kana              ‘seagull’
  NNG     Yabem       kano              ‘seagull’
  NNG     Labu        kandla            ‘small sp. of seagull’
  NNG     Mapos Buang kaŋ               ‘seagull’
  NNG     Bariai      kanae-nae         ‘sea tern’
  NNG     Kove        anae              ‘sea tern’
  NNG     Lusi        anae              ‘sea tern’
  NNG     Bing        kanay             ‘seagull’
  NNG     Gedaged     kanai             ‘a sea gull’
  NNG     Dami        kanai             ‘seagull’
  NNG     Takia       kanai             ‘seagull’
  NNG     Mangap      kanae             ‘seagull’
  NNG     Kilenge     kanae             ‘sea tern’
  PT:     Tawala      kanawe            ‘seagull’
  PT:     Ubir        kanau             ‘seagull’
  PT:     Nimoa       kan-kanau         ‘seagull’
  PT:     Motu        kanaye            ‘seagull’
  MM:     Patpatar    kanaia            ‘roseate tern’
  MM:     Tolai       kanai             ‘Sterna sp.’
  MM:     Halia       nai               ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna sumatrana’’
  MM:     Tai of      kanai             ‘tern’
  SES:    Gela        ganae             ‘a seagull, larger than sele'
  SES:    Longgu      anawa             ‘tern’
  SES:    To’aba’ita  ?anakwe           ‘Sterna sp.’
  SES:    Kwaio       ?anakwe           ‘gull sp.’
  SES:    Arosi       lanawe            ‘Red-billed Tropic Bird, Phaethon aethurus'
  Mic:    Sonsorolese xainiau           ‘birds of seagull type’

   Although terns and tropic birds could be confused at a distance, the species identified for
Arosi would be a rare stray in this part of the Pacific.

366   Ross Clark


POc *sele(kai) ‘tern’
  Adm :    Loniu        celehey           ‘small white bird sp., possibly a tern’
  MM:      Marovo       celekae           ‘Sterna spp,, esp. albifrons'
  MM:      Nduke        helekai           ‘Sterna spp.’
  MM:      Roviana      helekae           ‘white sea bird, often seen in flocks over a shoal of fish’
   MM:     Simbo        elekai            ‘white sea bird sp.’
   MM:     Kia          helekai           ‘seagull’
   SES:    Gela         sele              ‘seagull’
cf. also
   Mic:    Sonsorolese kirigay, xirixax ‘Common Noddy, Anous stolidus’


POc *ker(a,e)(ker(a,e)) ‘tern’
  PT       Tubetube     (man)kelakela ‘seagull’
  PT       Dobu         (me)kela      ‘seagull’
  PT       Iduna        (mai)?ela     ‘tern (generic)’
  PT       Ubir         (manu)kerer   ‘seagull’
  PT       Kilivila     (me)kela      ‘seagull’
  PT       Misima       (man)kelakela ‘seagull’
  MM:      Teop         kera          ‘tern (generic)’
  MM:      Roviana      (de)kere      ‘noddy’
  MM:      Simbo        (de)keive     ‘black sea bird sp.’
  MM:      Nduke        (de)kere
  MM:      Marovo       (de)kere
  Mic:     Kiribati     kerekere      ‘ Sooty Tern, Sterna fuscata’’


PMic *karakara ‘tern’
  Mic:     Carolinian ardr            ‘small black bird sp.’
  Mic:     Woleaian    xarexar        ‘grey-backed tern’
  Mic:     Puluwatese yarar           ‘sooty tern sp.
                       kare(fas)      ‘tern sp.’
  Mic:     Namoluk     arar           ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna sumalrana'
                       ara(fao)       ‘Greater Crested Tern, Thalasseus bergii'
  Mic:     Chuukese    ardr           ‘white tern’
  Mic:     Marshallese kedr           ‘Sterna spp.’
  Mic:     Kiribati    karakara       ‘ Thalasseus bergif
cf. also:
   MM: Nehan            kara          ‘tern (generic)’


POc *kiRa ‘White Tern, Gygis alba‘
  Yap:     Yapese                 glgiy         ‘bird sp.’
  MM:      Halia                  kira          ‘Little Tern, Sterna albifrons'
  MM:      Petats                 kira          ‘small white seabird which dives for small fish’

                                                                               Birds      367


PMic *kiakict ‘White Tern, Gygis alba’
  Mic. Sonsorolese             giegi
  Mic: Woleaian                xiyexiy       ‘white or fairy tern’
  Mic: Carolinian (Tanapag) giyegi           ‘white bird sp.’
  Mic: Puluwatese              kiyekiy
  Mic: Namoluk                 ekiek
  Mic: Chuukese                ekiyek
  Mic: Ponapean                kdke          ‘fairy tern’
  Mic: Kiribati                kiakia        ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna snmatrana
  Mic: Nauruan                 (da)gigia     ‘white tern’
PPn *aki-aki ‘White Tern, Gygis alba’ (metathesis)
  Pn:    Tongan                ?ekiaki
  Pn:    E Futunan             akiaki
  Pn:    Tokelauan             akiaki
  Pn:    Tuvalu                akiaki        ‘ Sterna snmatrana
  Pn:    Pukapukan             akiaki        ‘ Sterna snmatrana
  Pn:    Nukuoro               akiaki
  Pn:    Nukuria               te-akiaki
  Pn:    Luangiua              ia?i          ‘white sea bird’
  Pn:    Tikopia               akiaki
  Pn:    Rapanui               kiakia

   The following two terms from Polynesian Outliers show a closer resemblance to the Halia
form above than to the rest of Polynesian, and are probably borrowed from some North
Solomons language:

   Pn:    Takuu        kinakina
   Pn:    Sikaiana     kinakina


POc *b' auro ‘tern’
  TM:     Burna         bauro, bauri             ‘noddy, Anous sp.’
  NCV:    Labo          nu-mbuaxa (ne-tes)       ‘gull’ (tes ‘seawater’)
  NCV:    SWBay         ni-mbuar (ajmbatambat)   ‘gull’
  NCV:    Maskelynes    (na-li)mbner             ‘gull’
  NCV:    Port Sandwich (li)mbuer                ‘seagull’
  NCal:   Nyelayu       bor(ivie)                ‘sea bird’
  NCal:   Nelemwa       bor(irie)                ‘tern, Sterna spp.’
  Mic:    Marshallese   p^dr^(oe)                ‘a white sea bird’


POc *golo ‘tern’
  MM:     Banoni      (va)yora      ‘noddy sp.’
  MM:     Marovo      (va)golo      ‘Greater Crested Tern, Thalassens bergii’
  MM.     Nduke       (va)golo      ‘Sterna sp., bergiiT
  MM:     Roviana     (va) golo     ‘sea bird, often seen with helekae following shoals
                                    of bonito etc.’
  MM:      Simbo       (va)golo      ‘sea bird sp.’
  MM:      Kia         (va)yolo      ‘Common Tern, Sterna hirundo‘
  NCV:     Mwotlap     na-tkol       ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna sumatrana) (??)’
  NCal:    Fwai        khole         ‘ Sterna sumatrana‘
  NCal:    Cemuhi      hoole         ‘Fairy Tern, Sterna nereis"
  Mic:     Mokilese    (sa)kol       ‘tern sp. with white crest’



368     Ross Clark


PAdm *baraij^*rabcui ‘tern’
  Adm: Mussau         rabaŋana       ‘seagull’
  Adm: Loniu          pa'baŋ         ‘white seabird sp., flies over sea and feeds on small fish; possibly tern or heron’
  Adm: Nyindrou        barak         ‘black seagull’

    PAdm ^baraŋ is reconstructed on the basis of the Loniu and Nyindrou terms. Mussau
rabaŋana points to earlier ^rabaŋan (or * baraijan), but the relationship of Mussau to the
Admiralties languages is not well enough understood to know what protolanguage this earlier
term occurred in.

PPn *tala ‘tern’
  Pn:      Tongan      tala         ‘Greater Crested Tern, Thalasseus bergii and other terns with mainly white plumage’
  Pn:    E Uvean      tala          ‘White Tern, Gygis alba‘
                      tala(ŋoŋo)    ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna sumatrana"
  Pn:    Tokelauan    tala(ŋoŋo)    ‘ Sooty Tern, Sterna fuscata"
  Pn:    Tuvalu       tala          ‘ Thalasseus bergii"
                      tala(liki)    ‘ Sternafuscata or Blue-grey Noddy, Procelsterna cerulea"
                      tala(alofi)   ‘ Spectacled Tern, Sterna lunata"
  Pn:    Nukuoro      tala          ‘tern (?) vagrant species, hardly ever seen’
  Pn:    K’marangi    tala          ‘ Sterna lunata‘
  Pn:    Takuu        tara          ‘ Thalasseus bergii, Sterna fuscata, and other terns with black heads’
  Pn:    Sikaiana     tala          ‘seagull sp.’
                      tala          ‘ Thalasseus bergii‘
                      tala(mona) ‘ Sternafuscata"
  Pn:    Pileni       tala          ‘diving sea bird sp.’
  Pn:    Rennellese taga            ‘ Thalasseus bergii‘
  Pn:    Tikopia      tara moana ‘small kingfisher-like sea bird’
  Pn:    Emae         tara          ‘largest sp. of tern’
  Pn:    Marquesan taʔa             ‘ Sternafuscata‘
  Pn:    Mangarevan tarara          ‘ Thalasseus bergii"
  Pn:    Tahitian     tard(papa) ‘ Thalasseus bergii"
  Pn:    Manihiki     tara          ‘ Sternafuscata"
  Pn:    Maori        tara          ‘various tern and gull spp.’
and probable Polynesian borrowings:
  Fij:   Rotuman      tala          ‘ Thalasseus bergii‘ (expected ``fala)
  Mic: Kiribati       tara(ŋoŋo) ‘ Sterna lunata"

                                                                                 Birds    369


    Watling (2004:208) gives Fijian tala (dialect unspecified) for ‘Gygis alba\ but this is
unconfirmed by other sources.

    The following term for a particular tern species may originate from a compound with
*tala, though the identity of the second element is unclear.

PNPn *[ta]lapiti ‘Black-naped Tern, Sterna sumatrana
  Pn:    Nukuoro       lepiti        ‘white tern?’
  Pn:    K’marangi     tolopiti
  Pn:    Nukuria       tropiti
  Pn:    Takuu         lopiti
  Pn:    Luangiua      (ka)lapiki
  Pn:    Sikaiana      tapiti
  Pn:    Rennellese    gopiti

    The noddies are smaller, generally dark-coloured relatives of the terns. Reconstructible
terms for them are restricted to Central Pacific languages

PCP *ijoijo ‘Common Noddy, Anous stolidus’
 Fij:    Rotuman         ŋoŋo
 Fij:    Lau, Taveuni ŋoŋo              ‘Anous spp
 Fij:    Wayan (Viwa)    ŋoŋo(sawa)     ‘Anous spp
 Pn:     Tongan          ŋoŋo
 Pn:     Niuean          ŋoŋo
 Pn:     Samoan          ŋoŋo           ‘Anous spp
 Pn:     Pukapukan       ŋoŋo
 Pn:     Nukuoro         ŋoŋo
 Pn:     Nukuria         (te)nono
 Pn:     Takuu           nnd
  Pn:    Sikaiana        nono
  Pn:    Rennellese      ŋoŋo
 Pn:     Tikopia         ŋoŋo
An irregular change leads to forms reflecting Proto Central Eastern Polynesian *ijoio'.
 Pn:     Hawaiian        noio           ‘White-capped Noddy, Anous minutus
 Pn:     Mangarevan ŋoio
 Pn:     Tahitian        ?dio
 Pn:     Rarotongan      ŋdio

   The following term, like *lapiti above, may originally have been a compound of Gala
with an unidentified second element:

PNPn *[ta]lakia ‘White-capped Noddy, Anous minutus’’
  Pn:    Samoan      laia         ‘Blue-grey Noddy, Procelsterna cerulea’
  Pn:    Tokelauan   lakia
  Pn:    Tuvalu      lakia
  Pn:    Pukapukan lakia
  Pn:    Nukuoro     lekia
 Pn:      K’marangi    manu-telekia
 Pn:      Nukuria      terakia
 Pn:      Takuu        lakia
 Pn:      Luangiua     leia, le?iʔa
 Pn:      Sikaiana     lekia, leia
 Pn:      Tikopia      rakia
 Pn:      Tongarevan   rakia
 Pn:      Manihiki     rakie


370    Ross Clark




7 Insects and other creepy-crawlies

7.1 Introduction

The Oceanic Lexicon Project is concerned both with reconstruction of POc terms and their
meanings and with compiling a picture of the kind of culture that can be associated with these
reconstructed concepts.1 My intention here is not just to identify the insects that existed in
the world of Proto Oceanic speakers but also to consider their role in it. Were they dangerous
or merely pesky, harmless, insignificant or perhaps useful? Were they associated with the
supernatural? The perceived role of an insect depends on the way in which it impinges on
human lives, whether by biting or stinging, by being highly visible or noisy, by attacking
woodwork or food plants, by being a valued food, and so on. Occasionally we find linguistic
clues that throw additional light.

    It should be noted that the term ‘insects’ is used here in its popular extended sense to
include spiders, centipedes, and other creepy-crawlies such as grubs, worms and leeches.

    The difficulty of the task is increased by the sheer size of the Oceanic world, involving as it
does many different environments. Compared with other animals, insects are highly adaptable
(capable of living in a wide range of environments), easily transportable (by man, animal
or wind), and numerous in both kind and number. Consequently, it is difficult to plot the
distribution of even a major order, such as scorpions or leeches. Ideally it would be useful to
know whether a given creature exists in a region (in one or more readily identifiable species),
and if so, whether it has been there at least as long as the first settlers. Even this information
is of little use, however, unless we also have local names. Specialised entomological tomes,
dealing with, say, the Hymenoptera of Vanuatu, rarely have this information.

    For the time being, then, we make do with the most readily available information, culled
from general wordlists fleshed out by ethnographic descriptions. Many apparent cognates
show unexpected variation in gloss, so that the term for a mosquito in language A becomes
that for sandfly in language B, wasp terms move to bee, centipede to millipede, grasshopper
to cricket to cicada, and so on. I have to decide if this is due to change in distribution of
the creature, or perhaps reflects the insect’s lack of importance to a community, or may be a
deficiency in the wordlist.

[1] Particular thanks are due to Andrew Pawley and Malcolm Ross for unfailing help and advice. I am also grateful
 to Ann Chowning. John Lynch, Ross Clark and the late Phil Quick for a host of useful data and comments.

372 Meredith Osmond

    Another factor to be considered is a seemingly high degree of phonological irregularity in
 some insect names. This manifests itself at times in collections of terms which share strong
resemblance but for which no reconstruction is possible. At other times it results in doublets,
where two or more very similar reconstructions can be made for the same insect. Terms
for noisy insects are likely to be influenced by onomatopoeia, while terms for insects that
jump or sting or tickle may be derived from relevant verbs. This may help explain why I can
have several reconstructions for an insect that are based on quite limited cognate sets, but
no one dominant form. In contrast, terms such as POc *kutu ‘louse’ and POc * laijo ‘fly’ are
particularly stable, their reflexes occurring in a very high proportion of languages throughout
the Oceanic region.

     One further concern of this chapter is the role of a particular prefix in insect names as
a possible supernatural marker. In 1983 Robert Blust presented a paper at the Third Eastern
Conference on Austronesian Linguistics entitled _A linguistic key to the early Austronesian spirit world_[2].
It dealt with the frequent occurrence of an affix, often fossilised, in Austronesian
languages, traceable back to PAn. Its typical form was qali- or kali-, although there were
a number of variants. Blust listed 62 lexical sets containing over 570 examples from about
 50 languages distributed geographically from Taiwan to Polynesia, with the vast majority
occurring in Western Malayo-Polynesian languages. When these 62 lexical sets were sorted
into semantic categories, 20 were for creepy-crawly life forms, the largest single category.
Other categories were bats/birds (six sets including doves, owls), striking natural phenomena
(six sets, including rainbows, echoes, whirlpools), body parts (five sets, including pupil of
eye, hair whorl), and muddled psychological states (four sets, including being dizzy, talk-
ing/walking in one’s sleep). The puzzle for Blust was to assign a single conceptual principle
that linked these apparently disparate meanings. If qali-lkali- was a morpheme, what did it
mean?

    He realised that in a substantial number of cases the referents had a connection— most
commonly a dangerous connection— with the world of spirits. Insects in particular were as sociated
with spirits of the dead. The qali-lkali- terms listed by Blust (updated in 2001:37)
refer to the following creepy-crawlies: ant/termite, honey bee, bumble bee, beetle, butterfly,
caterpillar, centipede, cockroach, crab, cricket, dragonfly, earthworm, firefly, flea, gecko,
grasshopper, jungle leech, paddy leech, luminous millipede, scorpion, snake, spider, wasp.
Other phenomena he lists (rainbows, whirlpools, sleep-walking etc.) are thought of as supernatural
events/conditions. In other words, the qali-lkali- terms indicated a taboo, a warning
that certain kinds of behaviour were to be avoided in the presence of these creatures or events.
It would be an advantage for such taboos to be linguistically clearly marked, to be learned
early by children.

    Blust strengthens his argument by considering the kinds of insects which are not marked
by qali-lkali-. He sorts them into creatures that (i) tend to invade human space (maggot,
horsefly, housefly, both types of lice, mosquito, nit), or (ii) are economically important either
because they are edible (sago grub), or because they cause damage to human crops or
constructions (termite).[3] In contrast, the marked creatures have little or no economic importance.
In addition, some of these, particularly fireflies and luminous millipedes, have unusual
properties which might be regarded as supernatural (pp 37-38).

[2] Now published as Blust (2001).

[3] Where a creature is listed as both marked and unmarked, the unmarked tends to be generic while the marked
 singles out individual species (Blust 2001:37).

                                                            Insects and other creepy-crawlies          373


    Blust concludes his argument: ‘In short, then, the function of the qali-lkali- prefix evidently was to mark facets of experience that were regarded as spiritually dangerous, hence
requiring special precautions of a sort likely to be violated by incompletely accultured children. It did this purely by lengthening the affixed word to an atypical quadrisyllable shape,
hence marking the associated semantic categories as those requiring particular behavioural
sensitivity’ (p.59).

     One of my purposes in this study, then, is to see to what extent gɑ/z-denoted insects are
regarded as creatures with supernatural associations in Oceanic languages. At first glance,
it would seem that the Oceanic lexical forms no longer hold the same warning take care
message. Nonetheless, the affix, or traces of it, occurs in a large number of Oceanic languages
in a range of insect terms, and I have been able to reconstruct it to POc level in a small number
of items.


7.2 Lice (Order Anoplura: Family Pediculidae)

One of the largest cognate sets in the entire lexicon
of POc reconstructions is that reflecting * kutu ‘louse’.
Its reflexes serve in places as a generic term for lice
and fleas, often in compound form, when they refer to
other creatures parasitic on plants or animals such as
‘pig louse’ or ‘dog flea’. The very size of the set (I
have over 100 reflexes) and their consistency of referent, must reflect its relative salience for witnesses in
contemporary languages. The set below is simply a representative sample. Also reconstructed is POc *tuma
‘body louse’. In Nakanai, Roviana and Gela, languages
where reflexes of both *kutu and *tuma survive, reflexes of *tuma now refer to ‘flea, house louse, bed
bug’, ‘house bug’ or ‘(mat-eating) moth’ respectively.
As well, I have a widely reflected term for the louse egg
or nit and a number of terms for the action of searching for headlice. This grooming activity was no doubt
a regular feature of social life.

Figure 7.1   Pediciilus humanus capitis, head louse (male)


374 Meredith Osmond


7.2.1 Head lice


PAn *kuCu ‘louse’ (Blust 2002)
PMP *kutu ‘louse’
POc *kutu (i) ‘louse (generic)’; (2) ‘head louse’
  Adm:    Kaniet        uto           ‘louse’
  Adm:    Lou           kut           ‘louse’
  NNG:    Sio           kutu          ‘louse’
  NNG:    Roinji        yutu          ‘louse’
  NNG:    Wampur        gur           ‘louse’
  NNG:    Gedaged       ut            ‘louse, flea, plant louse, tick’
  PT:     Are           kutu          ‘louse’
  PT:     Bwaidoga      utu           ‘louse’
  PT:     Molima        Tutu          ‘louse’
  PT:     Motu          utu           ‘louse’
  MM:     Vitu          yutu          ‘louse’
  MM:     Nakanai       utu           ‘louse, dog flea’
  MM:     Roviana       yutu          ‘louse’ {yutu siki ‘dog flea’)
  SES:    Bugotu        yutu          ‘louse’
  SES:    Gela          yutu          ‘louse’
  SES:    Lau           Tu            ‘louse, flea’
  SES:    ’Are’are      u             ‘louse, flea’
  NCV:    Mota          wutu          ‘louse’
  NCV:    Raga          gutu          ‘generic for biting lice and sucking lice’ (gutu-boe ‘pig louse’, gutu-n-manu ‘bird louse’)
  NCV:    Tamambo       hutu          ‘louse’
  NCV:    Nguna         kutu          ‘louse’
  SV:     Lenakel       kur           ‘louse’
  SV:     Kwamera       ur            ‘louse’
  NCal:   Nemi          elk           ‘louse’
  NCal:   Nixumwak      ciyic         ‘louse’
  NCal:   Iaai          uto           ‘louse’
  Mic:    Kiribati      uti           ‘louse’
  Mic:    Kosraean      kut           ‘louse’
  Fij:    Rotuman       Tufu          ‘louse’
  Fij:    Wayan         kutu          (1) ‘head louse’; (2) ‘generic for lice and fleas’
  Fij:    Bauan         kutu          ‘crab louse, flea’
  Pn:     Tongan        kutu          ‘louse’ (kutu-fisi ‘flea’, kutu-lotuma ‘bedbug’)
  Pn:     Rennellese    kutu          ‘louse, bird louse, mite, leech, tiny insects of various kinds’
  Pn:     Samoan        Tutu          ‘louse’
  Pn:     E Futunan     kutu          ‘head louse’
  Pn:     Tikopia       kutu          ‘head louse’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      Tuku          ‘any small insects: louse, flea, mite’

                                                           Insects and other creepy-crctwlies       375


7.2.2 Body lice

Because clothes did not feature strongly in the lives of Proto Oceanic speakers, who did not
make use of woven cloth, I have preferred to gloss the POc reflex of PAn *tumeS ‘clothes
louse’ as ‘body louse’. These creatures would no doubt have continued to exist in Proto
Oceanic household items such as the woven pandanus matting generally used as sleeping
mats (vol.l, p.80). Although the term has survived in Proto Oceanic, its PAn/PMP meaning
has been restored in Niuean and East Futunan reflexes, perhaps fortuituously, through the
modem advent of clothing. It seems that in societies where woven clothes were not worn, the
distinction between the different kinds of lice was not significant, and either term was used
in places as a generic for functionally similar creatures.

PAn *tumeS ‘clothes louse’ (Blust 2002)
PMP *tumah ‘clothes louse’
POc *tuma ‘body louse’
  NNG:     Kove           tuma            ‘louse, flea’
  NNG:     Numbami        tuma            ‘louse’
  PT:      Gapapaiwa      tuma            ‘louse’
  PT:      Ouma           tuma            ‘louse’
  PT:      Suau           tuma            ‘louse’
  MM:      Nakanai        tuma            ‘house louse, bed bug, flea’
  MM:      Bola           tuma            ‘bug’
  MM:      Nehan          tuma(su)        ‘bedbug’
  MM:      Roviana        tuma(o)         ‘house bug’ (ef also tuma-rere ‘stinking black cockroach’, tuma-rititi ‘k.o. dragonfly’)
  SES:     Gela           tuma            ‘(mat-eating) moth’
  SES:     Fagani         (a)um'‘ a       ‘louse’
  Pn:      Niuean         tuma            ‘clothes louse’
  Pn:      Tongan         tuma            ‘k.o.louse’
  Pn:      E Futunan      tuma            ‘body or clothes louse’



7.2.3 Nits

In addition to POc *lisaq ‘nit’ I have reconstructed PWOc *lejaq ‘nit’. Both forms are securely based. No language has reflexes of both. Their formal similarity may be due to chance
or may reflect an early borrowing.

PAn *liseqeS ‘nit, louse egg’ (Blust 2002)
POc *lisaq ‘nit’ [4]
  Adm:     Mussau         lisa            ‘louse’
  Adm:     Lou            lisa
  NNG:     Wogeo          lisa
  NNG:     Kove           lare            (vowel metathesis)
  MM:     Patpatar    Use
  MM:     Ramoaaina   Ha
  MM:     Nehan       lih
  MM:     Halia       lisa
  MM:     Teop        niha
  SES:    Gela        liha
  SES:    Talise      lisa
  SES:    Kwaio       lita
  NCVr:   Mota        lisa
  NCVr:   Tamambo     lisa
  NCVr:   Nguna       lisa
  SV:     Anejom      na-laθ
  SV:     Lenakel     (ki)lha
  SV:     Kwamera     (kwa)resa
  SV:     Sye         ne-lis
  NCal:   Nemi        nhida
  Mic:    Kiribati    rina        (metathesis)
  Mic:    Ponapean    cil         (metathesis)
  Fij:    Bauan       lise
  Pn:     Tongan      liha
  Pn:     Samoan      lia
  Pn:     Tikopia     rie         ‘nits of head lice’
  Pn:     Maori       riha
  Pn:     Hawaiian    lia, liha

[4] Retention of final vowel in Lenakel ki-lha, Kwamera Ida-reset suggests that *-q was present (John Lynch,
 pers. comm.)

376 Meredith Osmond




PWOc '`'le)aŋ ‘nit’
  NNG:    Tuam        les
  NNG:    Mangap      leze
  NNG:    Yabem       leseŋ
  PT:     Dobu        neda
  PT:     Molima      neda
  PT:     Tawala      neda
  PT:     Kilivila    lesa
  PT:     Sudest      leleji
  MM:     Vitu        leda
  MM:     Bali        ledaŋa
  MM:     Meramera    lesa        ‘nit; louse’


PWOc *ka(R,r)oma ‘nit’
  NNG: Labu           aloma(la)
  MM: Hoava           karoma

                                                        Insects and other creepy-crowlies    377


7.2.4 Search head for lice

One POc term and one PROc term have been reconstructed with specific reference to searching for lice. Other terms with more general meaning, particularly POc *tirop, *tirop-i ‘look
intently’, are sometimes used. In Kove (NNG) the expression is ravu tuma ‘feel for lice’
(Ann Chowning, pers. comm.).These terms indicate the likelihood of reciprocal grooming,
an activity undertaken in many societies as part of social interaction.


PMP *tin[d]ap Took intently’ (Dempwolff 1938)
POc *tiro(p),   *tirop-i- Took intently, look for (lice etc.)’
  MM:     Roviana    ti-tiro              ‘search for’
  SES:    Lau        irofi                ‘look at fixedly, look for’
  SES:    Kwaio      ilo(i) (falaina)     ‘search hair (i.e. for lice)’ (falaina ‘hair’)
  SES:    ’Are’are   iro                  Took for, collect’
  SES:    Sa’a       irohi                ‘clear the head of lice’
  SES:    Arosi      (ha)irdhi            Took for lice in the hair’ (ha- ‘verbal prefix’)
  Pn:     W Futunan jiro(a)               Took carefully, search for’
  Pn:     Maori      tiro                 Took into, examine’


POc *tapu(s), *tapus-i- ‘seek lice’
  PT:     Motu             tahu(a)      ‘seek, examine’
  PT:     Gumawana         too          Took for lice’
  SES:    Gela             tavuhi       ‘seek, esp. lice in the hair’
  SES:    Ghari            tavu(a)      ‘scratch, look for lice’
  SES:    Lau              afui         ‘search a head for lice’
  NOV:    Avava            tap          ‘pick fruit’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NOV:    Naman            tov          ‘pick fruit’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)


PROc *pakit, *pakit-i- ‘search hair for lice’
  NCV:    Tamambo         vahi          ‘groom hair, search head for lice’
  NCV:    Nguna           vdke          ‘search hair for lice’
  Mic:    Woleaian       faxiti         ‘search hair for lice’
  Mic:    Mokilese       pakit          ‘delouse’



7.3 Butterflies (Order Lepidoptera = ‘scaly wings’)

A number of formally similar reconstructions for butterfly have been made above the level
of POc: PAn *(qali)-bei]bei]. : PMP *kali-mbembeij and PSHWNG ^kalə-mbombəŋ. From the
first-mentioned one would expect the regularly derived POc *kali-boboij . It does appear, but
its reflexes are with one exception limited to the North New Guinea subgroup. The most
widespread Oceanic cognate set, yielding POc * (kau)bebek, cannot be derived directly from
PMP.

378   Meredith Osmond


PAn *qaH-heijhei] ‘butterfly’ (ACD)
POc *[kali]bobo(ŋ) ‘butterfly’
  Adm:    Loniu        popw(ilow)
  NNG     Gedaged      kilibob        ‘butterflies, a collective term’
  NNG     Numbami      kaimbombo
  NNG     Bariai       vovo
  NNG     Kove         vovo
  NNG     Maleu        na-lvovo
  NNG     Tuam         bobo(im)
  NNG     Gitua        bobo(koro)
  NNG     Malalamai    vovo
  NNG     Sio          bobo
  NNG     Bing         kalbob
  NNG     Bilibil      kilibob
  NNG     Megi ar      kabob
  NNG     Manam        bo-bobe
  NNG     Bam          ba-bob
  NNG     Wogeo        bobo

   POc *\kau\bebek has reflexes throughout almost the entire Oceanic region apart from
NNG. The added -a in Molima, Dobu, Sewa Bay, Duau, Bwaidoga and ’ Auhelawa reflects a
regular process, but the labialisation of *k is unexpected.

POc *[kau]bebek ‘butterfly, moth’
  Adm:    Lou         pepe            ‘centipede’
  Adm :   Mussau       kau-bebe       ‘butterfly’
  PT      Molima      pepe?"’a        ‘butterfly’
  PT      Dobu        pepek''a        ‘butterfly’
  PT      Sewa Bay    pepek''a        ‘butterfly’
  PT      Duau        pepek'`a        ‘butterfly’
  PT      Bwaidoga     bebewa         ‘butterfly’
  PT      Gapapaiwa    beba-beba      ‘butterfly’
  PT      Ubir        fefek           ‘butterfly’
  PT      Hula        pepe            ‘butterfly’
  PT      Sinaugoro    kau-bebe       ‘butterfly’
  PT      Mekeo       fefe            ‘butterfly’
  PT      Motu         kau-bebe       ‘butterfly, moth’
  MM:     Bali         ka-bebeke      ‘butterfly’
  MM:     Nakanai      bebe           ‘butterfly’
  MM:     Tolai        bebe           ‘butterfly’
  MM:     Mono-Alu     bebe           ‘butterfly’
  SES:    Lau          bebe           ‘butterfly, moth’
  SES:    Sa’a        pepe            ‘butterfly, moth’
  SES:    Arosi        bebe           ‘butterfly (generic)’ (used as first element in compound terms for partic. varieties)
  NOV: Mota            pepe           ‘a yellow butterfly’
  NCV:     Raga        bebe            ‘generic for butterflies and moths’
  NCV:     Lewo        (le)pepe        ‘butterfly’
  NCV:     S Efate     (li)pep         ‘butterfly’
  Mic:     Kiribati    p''ep''e        ‘butterfly’
  Mic:     Marshallese pwapwipw        ‘butterfly, moth’
  Fij:     Rotuman     pepe            ‘moth or butterfly of any kind’
  Fij:     Wayan       bebe            ‘butterflies and moths’
  Fij:     Bauan       bebe            ‘butterfly’
  Pn:      Tongan      pepe            ‘butterfly’
  Pn:      Pukapukan pepe              ‘dragonfly’
  Pn:      Tikopia     pepe            ‘butterfly, moth; gen. term for Lepidoptera’
  Pn:      Maori       pepe            ‘flutter, moth’
  Pn:      Maori       pepepe          ‘butterfly’
cf. also:
   Mic: Puluwatese      (li)p'ekip'ek ‘butterfly’ (/z- ‘nominal prefix’)
   Mic: Woleaian        (ri)<])exi(])ex ‘butterfly, caterpillar’ (ri- ‘nominal prefix’)


                                                      Insects and other creepy-crawlies   379


    One other reconstruction is restricted to Papuan Tip.

PPT *qara-bembem ‘butterfly’
  PT:      Ubir        kara-bimbim
  PT:      Doga        ara-bembem
  PT:      Anuki       kara-bemem
  PT:      Are         ara-bembemta

    In Western Oceanic, but with just two reflexes, I find—

PWOc *bebelo ‘butterfly’
  PT:      Lala       ebebelo
  MM:      Torau       bebelo

—and in that part of MM which lies within the Northwest Solomons:

Proto NW Solomonic *pepele ‘butterfly’
  MM:      Ririo       pepel
  MM:      Sisiqa      pe-pepele
  MM:      Babatana    pe-pepele
  MM:      Nduke       pepele          ‘general term for butterflies and moths’
  MM:      Roviana     pepele
  MM:      Hoava       pepele
  MM:      Vangunu     pepele
cf. also
   TM:     Teanu       mebeli

    What are we to make of these variations? Butterflies, like lice and flies, are commonplace, but whereas I have extremely stable cognate sets for the latter two, butterfly terms in

380     Meredith Osmond


Western Oceanic have many slightly different forms. It is as if there is wordplay, with small
changes being deliberately made to a word. Was there something culturally significant about
butterflies, perhaps some trace of the supernatural that the kali- prefix reflects, that gave rise
to some taboo about the use of the normal term? Although I have examples of an association
between butterflies and the supernatural in Sa’a (Ivens 1927:187), Maori (Andrew Crowe
pers. comm.) and Easter Island (Steven Roger Fischer pers. comm.) I have no comparable
examples from Western Oceanic. Malcolm Ross (pers. comm.) suggests an explanation involving a different kind of cultural taboo.

     There is a widespread origin legend along the New Guinea north coast based on the activities
of two brothers, Manub (blue dove) and Kilibob (butterfly), who, between them, ‘made
their dwelling places, sun, moon and stars etc. and also the people, and gave them all their
customs and usages’ (Pech 1991:81). It happens that such legends may be seen to belong to
particular clans in their traditional form. Others may continue the legends but lack the right
to use traditional names (Pech 1991:116). If this were the case, it would be the names, rather
than the creature, which were subject to some kind of taboo. It may have been some such reason that is the explanation for the numerous variations in the WOc butterfly term. The EOc
terms, however, are quite consistent, all derived from one of the WOc variations, *bebek, so
evidently no longer subject to the same taboo pressures.

     Although POc speakers evidently included moths and butterflies within one generic term,
I have a lower-level reconstruction which is limited to moths, possibly a particular kind of
moth. Samoan and Tikopia reflect *lele-fua while the Central Eastern Polynesian languages
appear to have added a prefix of unclear function.

PNPn *[pu]lele-fua ‘k.o. moth’ (pollex: *lele ‘fly swiftly’)
  Pn:     Samoan     lele-fua          ‘moth’
  Pn:     Tikopia    rere-fue          ‘large moth’
  Pn:     Rarotongan purere-Pua        ‘large moth sp.’
  Pn:     Tahitian   pure-hua          ‘moth’
  Pn:     Maori      purere-hua        ‘moth’
  Pn:     Hawaiian   pulele-hua        ‘butterfly, moth’



7.4 Mosquitoes (Order Diptera = ‘two wings’: Family Culicidae)

A POc reconstruction for ‘mosquito’, ^hamuk, is based on
numerous cognates from all major subgroups, with little
variation in meaning, together with a PMP antecedent. In
some Papuan Tip languages reflexes form compounds to
refer to a range of small flying biting insects. The PT reflexes have undergone a common sporadic vowel change,
lowering of unstressed -u to -o.
    A number of terms that refer to the mosquito have been
reconstructed in addition to *hamuk.

    Figure 7.2  Anopheles sp., mosquito

                                                 Insects and other creepy-crowlies   381


PMP *hamuk ‘mosquito’ (Blust 2002)
POc *hamuk ‘mosquito’
  Ad m:   Aua          namu          ‘mosquito’
  Adm:    Seimat       namu          ‘mosquito’
  Adm:    Kaniet       namu          ‘mosquito’
  Adm:    Loniu        hamon         ‘mosquito’
  NNG:    Lukep (Pono) nam           ‘mosquito’
  NNG:    Kaiwa        namuk         ‘mosquito’
  NNG:    Manam        nam           ‘mosquito’
  PT      Molima       namo-namo     ‘fly’ (namo-kili ‘mosquito’, namo-kodu-kodu ‘k.o. sandfly’)
  PT      Bwaidoga      nimoya       ‘mosquito’ (namo-kili-kili ‘fruit-fly’)
  PT      Mai sin       namoyi       ‘mosquito’
  PT      Minaveha      namo-namo    ‘fly (generic)’ (namo-kina ‘mosquito’, vivia namo-namo ‘wasp, small red variety’)
  PT      Gapapaiwa     namo-namo    ‘fly’ (namo-kiri ‘mosquito)
  PT      Are           namo-namo    ‘housefly’
  PT      Motu          namo         ‘mosquito’
  PT      Sudest        namo-namo    ‘fruitfly’
  MM:     Nalik         namu         ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Nakanai       lamo         ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Tolai         namu         ‘sandfly’
  SES:    Bugotu        namu         ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Gela          namu         ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Kwaio         namu-namu    ‘small flying insect (generic); sandfly, gnat’
  SES:    Arosi         [na]namu     ‘mosquito’
  TM:     Burna         muko         ‘mosquito’
  NCV:    Mota          namu         ‘mosquito’
  NCV:    Raga          namu         ‘generic for mosquitoes’
  NCV:    Paamese       a-namu       ‘mosquito’
  NCV:    Nese          namyo        (regular metathesis of final *-Vk)
  SV:     Sye           yomoy        ‘mosquito’
  SV:     Anejom        n-yam‘       ‘mosquito’
  NCal:   Nixumwak      nabuc        ‘mosquito’
  NCal:   Nemi          naguk        ‘mosquito’
  Mic:    Marshallese   namw         ‘mosquito’
  Mic:    Woleaian      ramwu        ‘mosquito’
  Mic:    Ulithian      lamwo        ‘mosquito’
  Fij     Bauan         namu         ‘mosquito’
  Fij     Wayan         am           ‘mosquito’
  Pn      Tongan        namu         ‘mosquito’
  Pn      Tahitian      namu         ‘mosquito’
  Pn      Maori         namu         ‘sandfly’


382 Meredith Osmond


   The following reconstruction shares the same second syllable as *hamuk ‘mosquito’.
Both *hamuk and *simuk evidently referred to ‘mosquito’ in WOc, although *simuk may
have had a broader semantic range than * hamuk, its reflexes at times referring to other small
biting flies. Southeast Solomonic terms reflect Proto SE Solomonic *simi rather than f *simu.
(Maringe si-simi is evidently borrowed from a neighbouring SES language). Reflexes of
*simuk are not found in subgroups east of the Solomons.

POc *simuk ‘mosquito, small biting fly’
  NNCk    Tuam          sum                ‘mosquito’
  NNG:    Mato          simak              ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Labu          sumu(si)           ‘mosquito’
  PT:     Wedau         imo(kini)          ‘mosquito’ (kini ‘to sting’)
  PT:     Tawala        himo(kini)         ‘mosquito’
  PT:     Tawala        himo-himo(kini)    ‘sandfly’
  PT:     Dawawa        simo(kin)          ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Mono-Alu      simu?u             ‘midge’
  MM:     Vari si       simu-simu          ‘midge’
  MM:     Avaso         simuku             ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Maringe       si-simi            ‘housefly’
  SES:    Lau           simi               ‘sandfly’
  SES:    Baegu         si-simi            ‘midge’
  SES:    Longgu        simi               ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Kwai          simi(sakwalo)      ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Kwaio         simi               ‘fly, sandfly’
  SES:    Kwaio         simi(lak'' alo)    ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Dori’o        simi(lak'' alo)    ‘midge’
  SES:    Dori’o        simi(ni-one)       ‘mosquito; sandfly’
  SES:    ’Are’are      sime               ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Sa’a          sime               ‘mosquito’

    Another term, POc * ma-kini(t), is also reconstructable, with reflexes thar refer to ‘mosquito’
in Western Oceanic, but in Remote Oceanic rather to the state of being stung. As a literal translation of a form of the verb * kini-t, ‘to pinch’, *ma-kini(t) means ‘to get pinched’, i.e. ‘get
stung’. The languages in which reflexes of *ma-kini(t) are listed have all lost POc final consonants,
and putative final *-t is reconstructed on the basis of etymology. In languages such
as (PT) Gumawana, the meaning of the verb gini includes ‘to puncture, spear, inject, sting’.
Reflexes of * kini-t appear frequently in PT languages as the second element in compound
terms referring to biting insects. (See also POc *simuk above.)

POc *ma-kini(t) ‘mosquito’
  NNG: Bariai         makin-kin        ‘mosquito’
  NNG: Kove           makini-kini      ‘mosquito’
  MM: Nakanai         makili-kili      ‘black gnats, sandflies’
  MM: Bali            makini-kini      ‘mosquito’
  MM: Bulu            makini-kini      ‘mosquito’
PROc *makini ‘to be stung’
  NCV: Nguna         makini-kini       ‘itchy’
  Pn:   Samoan       ma?ini            ‘to sting, to smart’
  Pn:       Tongan      makini        ‘to have a pricking or tingling sensation like pins and needles’ (also makini-kini implying duration)
cf. also:
   Pn:      Tikopia     kini-kini     ‘insect, small brown, predatory on man, in houses (? flea)’


                                                     Insects and other creepy-crawlies      383


    A tendency to identify small buzzing and biting insects with nasal-initial terms and fre
quent reduplication is noted with *hamuk as well as POc 'djiŋi(ŋ) and PWOc *yati-yati below,
and is apparent also in the terms for sandfly/midge/gnat in the following section (POc *niku-
niku, *nonok, *iji(s,j)i'y Most are onomatopaeic, using //, h and ŋ almost interchangeably,
making it difficult to trace cognate forms.

PMP *rjh] ‘buzz, hum’ (ACD)
POc djiŋi(ŋ) (i) ‘buzz as a mosquito’; (2) ‘mosquito’ (onomatopoeic)
  NNG:      Bing        ŋiŋ           ‘mosquito’
  SES:      Gela        VW            ‘buzz as a mosquito’
  SES:      Talise      ŋi            ‘midge’
  SES:      Birao       ŋi            ‘midge’
  SES:      Tolo        ŋi            ‘mosquito’
  Fij:      Bauan       ŋlŋl          ‘buzz as a mosquito’


PWOc djali-ŋali ‘mosquito’
  NNG:      Mapos Buang ŋat-ŋat         ‘mosquito’
  PT:       Gapapaiwa   nasi-nasi       ‘small brown fly’
  MM:       Tab ar      ŋati-ŋati       ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Lihir       ŋet-ŋet         ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Madak       ŋit             ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Ramoaaina   ŋat-ŋat         ‘sandfly’
  MM:       Patpatar    ŋati-ŋat        ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Minigir     ŋati-ŋati       ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Tolai       ŋati-ŋat        ‘mosquito’
  MM:       Nehan       nat-nat         ‘mosquito’



7.5 Sandflies, midges, gnats (Order Diptera: Families Chironomidae (non-biting), Ceratopogonidae, Psychodidae, Simuliidae (biting); Families Drosophilidae, Tephritidae (fruitflies))

Cognates in the following sets refer to a range of very small flying biting insects. Vagueness
of identity may be due to the fact that speakers have no real need to distinguish these insects
more precisely.

    POc * niku-niku from PMP *nik-nik rather than the expected '`''diinik may simply be another
example of the playful variation prevalent in some insect terms.

384 Meredith Osmond



PMP *nik-nik, *hik-hik ‘tiny biting insect: gnat, sandfly, fruitfly’ (ACD)
POc *nikii-niku ‘small biting fly’
  PT:     Bwaidoga        niku-niku     ‘small fly that bites (like sandfly)’
  MM:     Vitu            niki          ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Konomala        nuk-nuk       ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Tolai           nuku-nuku     ‘very small fly’
  MM:     Roviana         niku-niku     ‘k.o. sandfly whose bite is painful’
  MM:     Hoava           niku-niku     ‘midge’
  MM:     Vangunu         niku-niku     ‘midge’

    Polynesian reflexes of *nonok ‘sandfly, midge’ appear to refer to fruitflies and perhaps
other small non-biting flies. The Cristobal-Malaitan terms reflect PCM *nono(i)tasi, literally
‘fly of salt water’.

PMP *nek-nek ‘gnat, sandfly, fruit fly’ (ACD)
POc *nonok ‘sandfly, midge’
  Adm :   Lou             (tip)non      ‘sandfly,mosquito’
  Adm :   Baluan          (liplip)non   ‘sandfly’
  MM:     Mono-Alu        nono          ‘mosquito’
  MM:     Nduke           nonoyo        ‘mosquito’
  SES:    Gela            nonoke        ‘ko. sandfly on the shore’
  SES:    Baegu           nono(dsi)     ‘sandfly’
  SES:    ’Are’are        nono(asi)     ‘small stinging midge; gnat; sandfly’
  SES:    Sa’a            nono(asi)     ‘midge, gnat’
  SES:    Arosi           nono          ‘fly’
  SES:    Arosi           nono(iasi)    ‘sandfly’
  SES:    Arosi           (?arai)nono   ‘mosquito’ (?ara?i ‘to bite, sting’)
  SES: Fagani             nana(osi)     ‘sandfly’ (vowel metathesis)
  NCVr: Mota              nono          ‘a small beetle that comes on decaying fruit
  NCV': Lewo              ne-nono       ‘sandfly, midge, fruitfly’
  NCVr: Uripiv            nunu          ‘midge’
  Pn:   Niuean            nono          ‘small beetle’
  Pn:   Tongan            nono          ‘fruitfly’
  Pn:   Rennellese        nono          ‘k.o. small fly found on rotten bananas’
  Pn:   Samoan            nono          ‘white ant when winged’
  Pn:   Tikopia           nono          ‘fruitfly’
  Pn:   Tuvalu            nono          ‘small flying insect’
  Pn:   E Uvean           nono          ‘small flying insect’

   The next reconstruction is reflected mainly in compound terms which include a range of
unidentified elements.

POc ^ŋi(s,j)i ‘sandfly’
  Adm: Mussau       (kala)ŋisi     ‘sandfly’
  NNG: Malai        (maraŋ)ŋis-ŋis ‘sandfly’
  NNG: Lukep (Pono) (bara)ŋis-ŋis  ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Singorakai       (mala)ŋis         ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Tami             siŋi-siŋ          ‘firefly’ (metathesis)
  NNG:    Wab              ŋis               ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Bing             (ramaŋas)ŋis      ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Mindiri          (boro)ŋis         ‘sandfly’
  NNG:    Manam            (mara)ŋizi-ŋizi   ‘k.o. gnat, small’
  SES:    WG’ canal        ŋiju              ‘sandfly’


                                                       Insects and other creepy-crawlies      385


PWOc *ki(r,R)i-ki(r,R)i ‘sandfly’
  PT:     Gapapaiwa kiri-kiri
  PT:     Ubir      ire
  PT:     Dobu      (dag™ a)kili-kili
  MM:     Maringe   gri-gri




7.6 Flies (Order Diptera: Families Muscidae (houseflies, bluebottles), Tabanidae (horseflies), Bibionidae (Marchflies))

7.6.1 Flies (generic); houseflies

Blust (2002) has reconstructed both PMP *lalej ‘housefly’ and PMP ^laŋaw ‘botfly, bluebottle’.
The latter became in POc the generic term for flies, with reflexes often referring
specifically to the common housefly.

    Reflexes of POc *larjo ‘fly’ are both numerous and widespread, occurring in all major
subgroups. In a number of languages including Lou (Adm), Gela (SES) and Hawaiian (Pn),
the term is used in compounds as first element, referring to a range of flies (housefly, blowfly,
horsefly, March fly, bluebottle fly etc.).

PMP *larjcrw ‘botfly, bluebottle’ (Blust 2002)
POc *larjo ‘fly’
  Adm: Mussau            laŋo                 ‘housefly’
  Adm: Lou               laŋ-laŋ(a)           ‘fly, flying insect’
  Adm: Lou               laŋ(et)              ‘housefly’
  Adm: Lou               laŋ-laŋa-n palawa    ‘honey bee’
  Adm: Lou               laŋ-laŋ ŋara         ‘bluebottle, horsefly, March fly’
  NNG: Tami              laŋo-laŋ             ‘fly’
  NNG: Kove              laŋo-laŋo            ‘fly’
  NNG: Kove              laŋo-vihi            ‘blowfly, big, blue, noisy, bites and stinks’
  NNG: Sengseng          laŋ                  ‘fly’
  NNG: Sengseng          laij-i-yuyu          ‘hornet with papery nest’
  NNG: Sengseng          laŋ-oŋoŋ             ‘insect that makes holes in wood’
  PT:     Motu           lao                  ‘fly’
  PT:     Lala          nalo                 ‘k.o. fly’ (metathesis)
  MM:     Tab ar         raŋo                 ‘fly’
  MM:     Vitu          laŋo                ‘fly’
  MM:     Nehan         laŋo                ‘fly’
  SES:    Gela          laŋo                ‘fly (generic)’ (first element in many binomial fly
                                            terms)
  SES:    Sa’a        laŋo                  ‘bluebottle fly’
  SES:    Arosi       raŋo                  ‘fly’
  NCV:    Mota        laŋo                  ‘bluebottle fly’
  NCV:    Raga        laŋo                  ‘generic for flies’
  NCV:    Paamese     a-laŋo                ‘fly’
  SV:     Sye         (u)laŋ                ‘a fly’
  SV:     Lenakel     (k)iaŋ                ‘a fly’
  SV:     SW Tanna (e)laŋ                   ‘a fly’
  NCal:   Nemi        nen                   ‘fly’
  NCal:   Jawe        nen                   ‘fly’
  Mic:    Kiribati    naŋo                  ‘fly, blowfly’
  Mic:    Woleaian    raŋo                  ‘fly’
  Mic:    Sonsorolese rdŋo                  ‘fly’
  Fij:    Rotuman     laŋo                  ‘fly’
  Fij:    Bauan       laŋo                  ‘fly’
  Pn:     Samoan      laŋo                  ‘fly’
  Pn:     Tikopia     raŋo                  ‘fly’
  Pn:     Maori       raŋo                  ‘fly’ (eastern dialect)
  Pn:     Hawaiian    nalo                  ‘common house fly’ (metathesis). Used as first element in compounds for hornet, wasp, bee, bluebottle etc.)


386 Meredith Osmond




7.6.2 Horseflies and March flies

Members of the horsefly and March fly families suck the blood of mammals, inflicting a
painful bite. Few terms have been collected, and no reconstructions have been possible.


7.7 Dragonflies and damselflies (Order Odonata = ‘flies with teeth’)

Dragonflies and damselflies are arguably the most
acomplished aerialists in the animal kingdom. Swift
and agile, they can reverse direction in midair within
one body length, hover with ease and fly backwards.
They copulate in the air, typically over a body of fresh
water, where the female lays her eggs. Although cognate sets have been elusive, a remarkable consistency
of meaning has emerged in descriptive compounds
meaning literally ‘copulate’ + ‘water’, from terms in
SE New Britain to the Solomons to Fiji. Terms referring to copulation have evidently been replaced
by euphemisms in many languages. Lack of cognacy in the
terms for water is due to the tendency in some languages to generalise terms originally referring
specifically to fresh water, rain, river, pond and so on. For instance, the second element
in the Pendau (central Sulawesi) term for a dragonfly, tuntu/rano, translates literally as ‘lake’
(Phil Quick pers. comm.). POc *waiR ‘water’ is attested in the two following (non-cognate)
sets by terms from SES, NCV and Fiji.

Figure 7.3   Dragonfly

                                                      Insects and other creepy-crowlies      387


__pre__
   NNG:    Poeng         roro-me        (roro ‘copulate’, me ‘water’)
   SES:    Gela          hita-hita-beti (hito ‘to cohabit’, bell ‘water, stream’)
   SES:    Arosi         ?ani-wai       (?ani ‘fornicate’, wai ‘water’)
   Mic:    Chuukese      nifefecon      (‘the one that copulates with water’; Davis 1999)
   Fij:    Wayan         dulu-dulu-wai (dulu ‘copulate’, wai ‘water’)
   Fij:    Bauan         ðai-ðai-wai    (ðai ‘copulate’, wai ‘water’)

   Other compounds retain the water connection, but vary the verbal concept.

__pre__
   PT:     Sudest            (wawa
                         wawa-emba       mbwa ‘water’)
   SES:    Gela          gi to-be ti
                             (‘steal water’)
   SES:    Tolo              (ici “T, kolo ‘water’)
                         ici-kolo
   SES:    Lau           nalu-kafo
                             (‘scoop up water’)
                             kafo (‘skim water’)
                         tatara
   SES: Longgu               ‘large dragonfly with tail like a helicopter’ (lit
                         tatara-wai
                             ‘skim water’)
   SES: Sa’a      tdtara-wai (‘skim water’)
   SES: Arosi     tdtd-wai   (‘skim water’)
   SES: ’Are’are  tatara-wa  (‘skim water’)
   NCV: Mota      roro-pei   (roro ‘sink’, pei ‘water’)
   NCV: Paamese   menmen-oai (men-men cf. munmun ‘drink’, oai ‘water’)
   NCV: SE Ambrym mnnmnn-oi (‘drink water’)

    Samoan retains the skimming element in se?e-mu ‘dragonfly’ (se?e ‘glide’, mil ‘flying
insect’).

    The Rennellese describe it as a sailing insect: mann-mann hogan (hogan ‘sailor, ocean
voyager’).

    There are isolated instances of dragonflies being used in sorcery, as a means of causing death
in Kiribati (Rosemary Grimble 1972:26-27) and to facilitate theft in Tahiti (Henry 1971:391),
but rather than reflecting something specific about the role of dragonflies in POc
times, this is probably no more than an indication that certain insects were commonly regarded as agents of the gods and spirits.


7.8 Bees (Order Hymenoptera = ‘membrane wings’: Super Family Apoidea)

The following reconstruction rests on a pair of cognates from different primary subgroups.

POc *kororo ‘bee’
  Adm: Lou             koror           ‘bee (generic)’
  MM: Teop             kororo          ‘honey-bee/honey/(ear wax)’
cf. also:
   PT:    Sinaugoro        kororo          ‘cricket’

388    Meredith Osmond


    Although the following reconstruction bears some resemblance to PMP *(n,h)ik-(n,h)ik,
‘tiny biting insect: gnat, sandfly, fruitfly’ (§5), it is lacking a final consonant and may simply
have been generated independently on onomatopoeic grounds. The initial ŋ- of the Lau and
Sa’a cognates is a common variation on n- and h- that occurs in terms for buzzing insects.

POc *(n,h)i(n,h)i ‘bee, buzzing insect’
  Adm:     Seimat          nini            ‘bee’
  NNG:     Kela            nini            ‘mosquito’
  NNG:     Sio             ni              ‘mosquito’
  NNG:     Labu            nenefig‘'a)     ‘fly (insect)’
  NNG:     Takia           nini            ‘bee, wasp (generic)’
  SES:     ’Are’are        nini(sua)       ‘a bee which makes its nest in the ground and in trees’ (sua ‘to burrow’)
  SES:     Lau             ŋiŋi(dua)       ‘bee’
  SES:     Sa’a            ŋiŋi(due)       ‘native bee’



7.9 Wasps (Order Hymenoptera): Families Ichneumonidae, Vespidae (paper wasp), Sphecidae (mud-dauber wasp, mason wasp)

I have been unable to identify a particular species that can be identified by POc *pupuk. It
may be a name given to any wasp-like insect that infests wood.

PMP * bukbuk ‘weevil that infests wood, bamboo, and rice; dust produced by the boring of this insect; tooth decay, dental caries’ (ACD)[5]
POc *pupuk ‘k.o. borer wasp or bee that infests wood and bamboo’
  NNG:     Gedaged        fi'f             ‘wood-borer’
  PT:      Sudest          VUVU            ‘sugarcane borer’
  PT:      Gapapaiwa       vuvua           ‘bee type; carpenter bee’
  PT:      Molima          wuwuwuva        ‘borer wasp’
  MM:      Patpatar        huh             ‘borer insect; wood that has been bored by wood-borers’
  MM:      Nakanai         VIIVU           ‘wasp and wasp-like insects’
  MM:      Tolai           pupuka          ‘weevil; dust from weevil-eaten bamboos in house roof’
  MM:      Nduke           vuvu            ‘black insect that eats wood’
  MM:      Maringe        fi'fi'           ‘bamboo borer’
  SES:     Gela            vuvu            ‘a worm that bores into wood’
  SES:     Bugotu          vuvu            ‘mason wasp’
  SES:     Tolo            vuvu            ‘k.o. wasp which bores through wood’
  SES:      Longgu      vuvu(i)       ‘a type of black wasp, digs in the ground, painful if it stings you’
  SES:      Lau         fufu          ‘mason wasp’
  Pn:       Niuean       (laŋo)fufu   ‘mason wasp’
  Pn:       Tahitian     huhu         ‘xylocope or carpenter bee, large Hymenopterous insect, black, attacks wood’
  Pn:       Maori       huhu          ‘larva of beetle sp,, edible grub’
  Pn:       Hawaiian    huhu          ‘wood-boring insect, worm-eaten’
  Pn:       Marquesan   huhu          ‘white wood-eating worm’
cf. also:
   PT:    Minaveha      vuvu(ha)      ‘bee, small black variety that bores holes in wood’
   MM: Nakanai          vuvu(li)      ‘k.o. stinging worm which is painful’ (reflects ^pupuni)
  MM:       Roviana     vuvu(nu)      ‘wood-eating worm’ (reflects *pupun rather than *pupuk)
  NCV: Raga             huhu (gai)    ‘generic for wood-boring beetle larvae’ (expect 17/17/)
                        huhu (lua)    ‘bee or wasp, hairy body, large head, painful sting’


[5] For discussion of tooth decay perceived to be caused by a burrowing worm see §22.1.

                                                    Insects and other creepy-crawlies        389


    The next reconstruction, POc *bubu ‘k.o. wasp’, may simply be a variant of POc *pupuk.

POc *bubu ‘k.o. wasp’
   NNG:     Adzera      (wa)mpup         ‘hornet’
   NNG:     Kove        vuvuvu           ‘wasp, kills spiders’
   PT:      Motu        bubu             ‘an insect like a wild bee that destroys timber’
   PT:      Lala       bubu             ‘hole-borer wasp’
   MM:      Roviana     bubu             ‘Buzzer wasp (Odynerus superbump
   MM:      Nduke       bubu             ‘black wasp, lives in the ground’
   MM:      Mono-Alu    (si) bubu        ‘wasp’
   SES:     Sa’a        pu               ‘mason bee, wasp’
   SES:     ’Are’are    pu               ‘wasp’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Gitua       bubu(la)      ‘housefly, mosquito’
   SES:     Sa’a        pupu(oro)     ‘an insect which digs up the ground and leaves a track’ (pro ‘stoop down’)
  SES:      Arosi       buburu(nfago) ‘mason bee, v large variety’ (mdgo ‘earth, soil, brown?’. Also totora m'`ago ‘mason bee’)
  SES:      Arosi       buburu(atod)  ‘k.o. cricket’ (atod ‘noon’)
  Pn:       Tikopia     pupu(matau)   ‘dragonfly’ (trad, embodiment of spirit) (matau ‘fishhook’?)

    I am unable to account for the existence of two very similar POc reconstructions for
‘wasp’, *manipo and *(n,h)i(n,h)ipo, although presumably they are contrasted with *pupukl
*bubu. Nor can they be divided according to their subgroups; reflexes of both appear in the
Admiralties and in the Southeast Solomons. Wandamen (SHWNG) anibar ‘wasp/bee’ may
be a non-Oceanic cognate. A third group reflects Proto Central Papuan *naniyo. It seems that
here we have yet another example of wordplay. It is difficult to know whether the resemblance
between *(n,h)i(n,h)ipo ‘wasp’ below and *(n,h)i(n,h)i ‘bee, buzzing insect’ (§8) arose by
chance or reflects common ancestry in some way.

390 Meredith Osmond



POc *mahipo ‘k.o. wasp’
  Adm: Loniu            menih          ‘large black bee; k.o. deep water seaweed which stings’ (exp mehipo)
   PT:      Iduna       manibo         ‘blue insect, perhaps k.o. mud wasp’
   SES:     Bugotu      mahivo         ‘wasp’
   SES:     Tolo        manivo         ‘wasp’
   SES:     Lengo       manivo         ‘wasp’
   SES:     Arosi       ma-mcmiho      ‘hornet’
cf. also:
   NNG:     Yabem       bani?          ‘generic for wasps, hornets’


POc *(n,h)i(n,h)ipo ‘k.o. wasp’
   Adm: Drehet        ninih
   SES: Longgu        ninivoi
   SES: Sa’a          niniho        ‘hornet’
cf. also:
   NNG: Manam         niniko        ‘wasp’
Proto Central Papuan *naniyo ‘wasp’
   PT:    Sinaugoro naniyo          ‘small black and red wasp’
   PT:    Motu        naniyo        ‘k.o. manu manu. hornet’
   PT:    Lala       nani?o        ‘wasp’

    In the next set we find the same lowering of an unstressed vowel from l-ul to l-ol in Papuan
Tip languages that was noted in reflexes of POc *hamuk (§4).

PWOc *gumu ‘k.o. wasp’
  PT        Dobu        gumo          ‘paper wasp’
  PT        Saliba      gumo          ‘wasp, bee’
  PT        Muyuw       gum           ‘wasp, hornet’
  PT        Molima      gumo          ‘wasp’
  PT        Tawala      gumo          ‘wasp’
  PT        Nimoa       gumo          ‘black wasp’
  MM:       Maringe     gu-yumhu      ‘mud wasp’



7.10 Ants (Order Hymenoptera: Family Formicidae)


                                                           Insects and other creepy-crawlies       391


Although sources for a number of languages give a term for ants in general, I cannot reconstruct
a POc generic. It is likely that the dominant ant species varies from place to place, and
that the term for that species has become the generic term in that area. In Yabem (NNG), for
instance, the generic term is lese?, in Sudest (PT) it is vwara-vwara, in Vitu (MM) duri-duri.
and in Kwaio (SES), ta-galo. In Way an Fijian kadi (from POc *kadik ‘stinging black ant’)
has become the generic. In Niue and Tonga, Id (from POc *loRo ‘large red stinging ant’) is
the generic form. However, a number of POc reconstructions can be made for ant taxa.

POc *kadik ‘stinging black ant’
  Adm :    Nyindrou       karak           ‘ant’ (Tryon 1995)
  NNG:     Kaulong        keh-keh         ‘(?) (red) ant’
  MM:      Bulu           kadi            ‘stinging black ant’
  MM:      Tolai          kədik           ‘black ant’ (kərəkum ‘large red ant’)
  MM:      Nehan          kadik           ‘tree ant’
  MM:      Simbo          kadiki          ‘black ant’
  SES:     Gela           yadi            ‘k.o. black ant, bulldog ant’
  SES:     Lengo          yadi            ‘black ant’
  SES:     Longgu         hadi            ‘black ant that bites’ (possibly a borrowing from Malango)
  SES:     Lau            kadi            ‘bulldog ant’
  SES:     Kwaio          (ka)kadi        ‘stinging black ant’
  NCV‘:    Mwotlap        yen             ‘big stinging black ant’
  NCV':    Nguna          kadi            ‘black biting ant’
  NCV':    NE Ambae       gadi            ‘fire ant’
  NCV':    Nese           na-yajye        ‘fire ant’ (regular final *-Vk metathesis)
  SV:      Ura            (w)asek         ‘small stinging black ant’
  SV:      Lenakel        kasək           ‘soldier ant’
  SV:      Anejom         n-yas           ‘fire ant’
  Mic:     Woleaian       (u)xesi         ‘k.o. black ant’
  Mic:     Carolinian     (wu)xes         ‘large black ant with a painful stinging bite, makes its nest near rotting trees’
  Mic:     Kosraean       kas(kin)        ‘k.o. ant’
  Mic:     Ponapean       kac             ‘ant’
  Fij:     Wayan          kadi            ‘generic for ants; large ants’
  Fij:     Bauan          kadi            ‘large black ant, stings’

    Rufus Pech refers to the stinging red ant of the north New Guinea coast (lol in Tami) in
the following way: ‘This is perhaps the most enterprising and obviously ubiquitous species
of ant in the Melanesian lowlands. They build huge nests in trees by drawing and sticking
together bunches of leaves, are carnivorous, and defend their territory ferociously.’ (Pech
1991:91). POc *loRo probably referred to this group of ants although witnesses in Eastern
Oceanic have a wider range of reference.


PMP *loRo ‘red tree ant’ [6]
POc *loRo ‘large stinging red ant’
  Adm: Mussau             loa             ‘red tree ant’
  NNG:   Tami          lol           ‘stinging red ant’
  MM:    Vitu          loro          ‘large red stinging ant’
  MM:    Nakanai       lolo          ‘large red ant’
  MM:    Tab ar        ror           ‘red ants’
  MM:    Tangga        lo            ‘large sugar ants’
  SES:   Gela          lolo          ‘small black ant’
  SES:   Longgu        lolo          ‘a small ant’
  SES:   Lau           lolo          ‘k.o. ant’
  SES:   Kwaio         lolo          ‘ant’
  SES:   Sa’a          lolo          ‘red sugar ant’
  Fij:   Rotuman       roro          ‘fruit fly’
  Fij:   Bauan         Id            ‘small black ant’
  Fij:   Bauan         lolo          ‘small ant’
  Pn:    Niuean        Id            ‘ant (generic)’
  Pn:    Tongan        Id            ‘ant (generic)’: kinds: Id hina (white ant), Id kula (red ant?), Id ?uli (black), lo?ata (see below)
  Pn:    Tikopia       ro            ‘ant, of various kinds’
  Pn:    Tahitian      rd            ‘ant’
  Pn:    Maori         rd            ‘ant, stick insect, mantis’
  Pn:    Hawaiian      Id            ‘black insect, earwig’
cf. also:
   Adm: Lou            lole          ‘small black sugar ant’

[6] The reconstruction of PMP *loRo is based on comparison of the Oceanic reflexes with a WMP term. Pendau
 to 'big red tree ant’ (Phil Quick, pers. comm.).

392 Meredith Osmond


The next set is possibly a compound form of the above.

PPn *lo-qata ‘large ant’ (PPn *qcita ‘image, likeness’)
  Pn:    Tongan        IdPcttct      ‘k.o. black ant w painful bite’
  Pn:    Samoan        ldata         ‘k.o. large black ant’
  Pn:    Nanumea       loata         ‘large ant’

   The three reconstructions which follow, POc *drui ‘ant’, POc *\driu\driu ‘small red or
brown ants’ and PWOc * didi ‘small ant’ may all be variants of the same etymon.

POc *drui ‘ant’
  MM Kandas            dui-dui       ‘centipede’
  MM Si ar             dui           ‘centipede’
  MM Simbo             dui           ‘ant’ (any ant?)
  MM Nduke             dui           ‘small black ant, found in gardens’
  MM Roviana           dui           ‘small ant’
  SES Tolo             (koko)dui     ‘reddish-brown ant’
  SES Ghari            dui-dui       ‘grey middle-sized ant’
  SES Lau              dudui         ‘k.o. large yellow ant in trees’
  SES Kwaio            dui-dui       ‘vinegar ant’
  SES To’aba’ita       dudui         ‘fairly big reddish ant, stings’
  NCV: Nokuku          ?u?ui         ‘ant’
  NCV: Nduindui        dui-dui       ‘ant’
cf. also:
   MM: Vitu              duri-duri       ‘generic for ants’


                                                         Insects and other creepy-crowlies    393


POc *[driu]driu ‘small red or brown ants’
  MM: Sursurunga         diu                ‘centipede’
  SES: Arosi             diu-diu, di-diu    ‘k.o. small brown ant’
  NCV: Mota              ni-niu             ‘small red ant’
  NCV: NE Ambae          di-diu             ‘ant’
  NCV: Tangoa            ri-riu             ‘red ant’
  NCV: Tamambo           diu-diu            ‘ small sugar ants; general term for red and brown ants, just a nuisance with food’
  Fij:      Wayan        (ka)driu-driu      ‘very small ants’

    Given that all terms in the following set except Nduke are binomials, *didi may have been
a generic for ‘ant’.

PWOc *didi ‘small ant’
  NNG: Labu               titi(nalo)       ‘ant’ (nalo ‘small’)
  PT:  Dobu               didi(yauyau)     ‘ant’ (yau ‘number, to increase in number’)
  PT:  Sinaugoro          didi(rima)       ‘small black ants’
  PT:  Sinaugoro          riri(ka)         ‘sugar ants’
  MM:       Tolai         (kara)didi       ‘larvae of the red ant, used as food’
  MM:       Nduke         didi             ‘wood-borer’

   The next set consists of possibly related items, but there are too many irregularities to
permit a POc reconstruction.

__pre__
  NNG:      Vehes           kakak                 ‘ant’
  NNG:      Mapos Buang     kakok                 ‘ant’
  NNG:      Mumeng (Kumaru) kakok                 ‘ant’
  NNG:      Mumeng (Patep)  kekeak                ‘ant’
  NNG:      Mumeng (Zenag)  kkewa                 ‘ant’
  MM:       Tolai           kakakau               ‘small black ant’
  SES:      Arosi           ?aʔaki                ‘large black ant, bulldog ant, w painful bite’

   Although the following terms for ‘ant’ appear to be related (reflecting POc *kal(a,o)\ all
except Marshallese carry additional unrelated morphemes which cannot be accounted for.

__pre__
   Adm:     Loniu       kalo(n)                   ‘ant’
   PT:      Saliba      kalakala-p'` asip'` asi   ‘black ants’
   MM:      Teop        ano(hi)                   ‘ant’
   SES:     ’Are’are    (ta)karo                  ‘small black ant’
   NCV:     Nguna       (ma)kdla                  ‘red ant’
   Mic:     Marshallese kal(lep)                  ‘big black ant’ (lep ‘big’)
cf. also:
   NNG:     Manam         kala(poaki)             ‘k.o. red ant’
  NCV: Mota            kalo                    ‘crawl, creep’
  SV:  Lenakel         (ma)kal                 ‘large brown spider’


394 Meredith Osmond


7.11 Termites (Order Isoptera = ‘equal wings’)

POc *ane is well-supported as a term for ‘termite/white ant’. There are occasional mentions
of an association of white ants with the supernatural in SES languages. In Arosi ane-hau
refers to ‘k.o. white ant that lives in the ground; these ants were thought to be incarnations of
the dead’, while in Sa’a they are ‘the food of ghosts on Malapa’. However, they would have
been regarded as pests, and it is not surprising that we have no record of their ever being
referred to by a *kah- term.


PAn *SayaN ‘white ant, termite’ (Blust 2002)
PMP *anay ‘termite’ (metathesis) (Blust 2002)
POc *ane ‘termite’
  Adm:    Mussau        ane       ‘termite’
  Adm:    Pak           an        ‘termite’
  Adm:    Lou           (ŋ)an     ‘termite’
  Adm:    Loniu         an        ‘termite’
  PT:     Saliba        yane      ‘termite’
  SES:    Bugotu        ane       ‘termite’
  SES:    Gela          ane       ‘termite’
  SES:    Lau           sane      ‘termite’
  SES:    ’Are’are      sane      ‘termite’
  SES:    Sa’a          sane      ‘termite’
  SES:    Arosi         ane       ‘white ant which bores and destroys’
  SES:    Arosi            ane(?ara) ‘k.o. white ant found in coconuts’
  SES:    Arosi            ane(hau)  ‘k.o. white ant that lives in the ground; name for its nest’
  SES:    Arosi         ane(niragui) ‘white ant, common wood-boring’
  SES:    Arosi         ane (w ado)  ‘white ant, large’
  Mic:    Carolinian anay         ‘termite; to be infested with termites’
  Fiji    Bauan      yane         ‘k.o. moth’
  Pn:     Tongan     ane          ‘moth, or more strictly, its larva, that eats holes in clothes etc. Also applied to silverfish’
  Pn:     Samoan     ane          ‘termite, k.o. white ant’
  Pn:     Tikopia    ane          ‘termite’
  Pn:     Rarotongan ane          ‘termite’

                                                         Insects and other creepy-crctwlies   395


7.12 Crickets, grasshoppers (Order Orthoptera - ‘straightwings’); Cicadas (Order Hemiptera= ‘half wings’)

Figure 7.4 Grvllus sp., cricket


If a generic term existed in POc, either for grasshoppers, or
for grasshoppers + crickets + cicadas (+ mantises), I have not
been able to reconstruct it. Although I have a number of reconstructions, their reflexes show considerable variation in
gloss. Some terms refer to ‘singing insect’, which may indicate either cricket or cicada. Lack of agreement in glosses
may reflect indifference among speakers, although I would
expect a generic term if particular varieties were not seen as
important. Some languages have simply adopted verb forms
for ‘grasshopper’— etymons from Kove (piti-piti ‘jumping
insect found in beach rubbish’ and Raga (visi[ribi] ‘taro plant
hopper’) are from POc *pitik ‘spring up suddenly’/ POc
*pitik-pitik jump repeatedly . In Dobu crickets are named
kelei ?ana toelita, literally ‘wallaby’s teacher’ (Ralph Lawton. pers. comm.). A grasshopper named kokoru-bote in Arosi is remarkable for the use found
for it. It is described as ‘a large grasshopper, put on one’s head to eat lice’ (from koru ‘eat’,
bote ‘lice’). Together with mantises and stick insects, grasshoppers and crickets are valued as
food. Kwaio has a term, faPafulu glossed as ‘generic term for edible insects, incl. grasshoppers,
stick insects etc.’ Their appeal would no doubt be as a kind of snack food, a chance
variation on their regular diet.


POc *sisi(rR) ‘orthopterous insect’
   NNG      Mengen (Poeng) sisi                 ‘grasshopper’
   NNG      Lukep (Pono)   sis                  ‘grasshopper’
   NNG      Kaulong        u-sis                ‘grasshopper’
   NNG      Sengseng       e-sis                ‘grasshopper’
   NNG      Gedaged        sis                  ‘grasshopper, locust’
   PT:      Iduna          sili(fa)             ‘k.o. small grasshopper’
   MM:      Tangga         sisi                 ‘cicada’
   MM:      Nehan          sir-siri(alum)       ‘cricket’
   MM:      Nduke          hiri-ri              ‘k.o. cicada’
   MM:      Roviana        sisiri               ‘k.o. cicada (Diceropyga obtectay
   SES:     Kwara’ae       sisi                 ‘generic for beetles and insects’
   SES:     To’aba’ita     sisi                 ‘generic for beetles and fireflies’
   NCV:     Nese           sis                  ‘chirp, of cicada’
cf. also:
   MM:      Tolai             titi(tiŋ)         ‘k.o. small locust’
   NCV:     Mwotlap           titifkey)         ‘grasshopper’

    Any resemblance between POc *riija and PROc *liijo-liijo is probably fortuituous.

POc *riija ‘orthopterous insect’
  Adm: Drehet           riŋ               ‘cricket’
  PT: Molima            lia           ‘cicada’
  MM: Nehan             (kaka)riŋ     ‘grasshopper’

396 Meredith Osmond

                                      Figure 7.5   Cicada


PROc *lhjo-liijo ‘night insect, probably a cricket’
  Mic:    Kiribati      niŋo-niŋo     ‘an insect which chirps at night’
  Fij:    Bauan         liŋo-liŋo     ‘night insect, esp. k.o. moth’
  Pn:     Tongan        liŋo-liŋo     ‘k.o. cricket’
  Pn:     Samoan        liŋo-liŋo     ‘cicada, sings in daytime. Pdlisi sings at night’ (Stair 1983:207)
  Pn:     Tikopia       riŋo-riŋo     ‘cricket (Gryllidae). Rarely seen’


POc *siko ‘grasshopper’
  MM:     Tab ar        c/A'o         ‘grasshopper’
  SES:    Lau           siko          ‘grasshopper’
  SES:    Kwara’ae      siko          ‘grasshopper’ (Whitmore 1966)
  SES:    To’aba’ita    siko          ‘generic for a class of insects that includes locusts, grasshoppers, stick insects, mantises, cicadas’
  NCV: Nese             (narra)syo    ‘grasshopper’ (narra ‘?’)


POc *sakwa ‘grasshopper or stick insect’
  NNG:    Gedaged       sok(sok)      ‘stick insect’
  NNG:    Takia         sok           ‘large insect, prickly, with six legs, eaten
  PT:     Molima        saga-saga     ‘green mantis (eaten)’
  MM:     Kara (East)   saywa         ‘grasshopper’ (reflects *saqa)
  Mic:    Carolinian    taxa          ‘grasshopper’

    The next term, POc *lale ‘cicada’, is based on external evidence plus reflexes from two
closely related languages. It remains an uncertain reconstruction.

                                                     Insects and other creepy-crowlies     397


PAn *lalay ‘cicada’ (Blust 2002)
POc *l(a,e)le ‘cicada’
  PT:    Molima         lele          ‘a mountain insect with very attractive cry’
  PT:    Dobu           lele          ‘cicada’

    The next reconstruction is reliable in form only at PEOc level, and there is little consistency of gloss even within Polynesian languages.

PEOc *(s,j)eqe ‘grasshopper ?’
  SES: Bugotu          se-se        ‘grasshopper’
  Fij:   Rotuman       Jei          ‘cricket’
PPn *seqe ‘insect spp. including mantis, stick insect, locust
  Pn:    Tongan        he?e         ‘locust, grasshopper’
  Pn:    Niuean        he           ‘grasshopper, locust’
  Pn:    Rennellese se?e            ‘k.o. small cricket’
  Pn:    Samoan        se           ‘stick insect’
  Pn:    Tikopia       se           ‘stick insect; mantis’
  Pn:    Tokelauan he               ‘locust, grasshopper’

    John Lynch (pers. comm.) notes a number of NCV forms for ‘cicada’ (Motapuŋa, Naman
bngale, Neve’ei nalbugalr Tape bəŋale, Paamese halvuŋahi). and Namakir biŋaleh ‘cricket’
which support PNCV *bu(g,ij)alis(V) . This in turn suggests a possible relationship with the
following PPn reconstruction, *kalisi.

PPn *kalisi ‘cicada, cricket’
  Pn:     Tongan        kdlihi        ‘k.o. cricket’
  Pn:     Samoan        ?alisi        ‘cicada, cricket (night insects)’
  Pn:     Ifira-Mele    karisi        ‘cicada’


PPn *nzni « ‘orthopterous insect’
  Pn:     Niuean        vd             ‘insect sp.’
  Pn:     Rarotongan    vdvd           ‘cricket’
  Pn:     Tongarevan    vava           ‘grasshopper, cricket’
  Pn:     Mangarevan    vdvd           ‘insect sp.’
  Pn:     Tahitian      vdvd           ‘praying mantis, stick insect’
  Pn:     Tuamotuan     vava           ‘grasshopper, stick insect’



7.13 Mantises (Order Mantodea = ‘like a prophet’), stick insects (Order Phasmatodea = ‘like a ghost’)

Figure 7.6 Above Praying mantis. Below Stick insect.


398   Meredith Osmond


Although there is some confusion of gloss within cognate sets, it seems clear that POc speakers
distinguished praying mantises (*papa) from stick insects (*mimis-mata). The ability to
project a milky chemical painful to the skin which is reflected in POc *mimis-mata is a defensive
mechanism of at least some stick insects (Serkan Alasya, CSIRO Entomology, pers.
comm.).

PMP * (kali)papa ‘praying mantis, grasshopper’ [7]
POc *papa ‘praying mantis’
  MM: Tolai              pap         ‘praying mantis’
  MM: Roviana            papa(maho) ‘praying mantis’ also ma/maho ‘green mantis’
  MM: Nehan              popo(hosoi) ‘walking stick insect’

    POc * mimis-mata, literally ‘urinate’ + ‘eye’, reflects awareness that the stick insect can
eject a fluid which causes pain if it touches the eye. One of the better-known Phasmatodea
of the Oceanic region is Megacrania batesii, the pandanus stick insect.

POc *mimis-mata ‘stick insect’
  MM:     Roviana         mimi-mata      ‘walking-stick insect which ejects a fluid said to cause intense pain should it touch the eye’
  NCV: Raga               me-merehi-mata ‘praying mantis’ (lit. ‘urinate on eye’)
  Fij: Wayan              mimi-mata      (1) ‘praying mantis’; (2) ‘stick insect (generic)’ (lit. ‘urinate in eye’)
cf. also:
   PT:    Molima       mata-se?a-se?a         ‘large poisonous beetle’ (.seAzz or seiʔa ‘to squirt poison, as a millipede) (lit. squirt in eye??)’)


[7] The reconstruction of PMP *(kali)papa is based on comparison of the Oceanic reflexes with a WMP term,
 Pendau ɑ/zpapa ‘grasshopper, praying mantis’ (Phil Quick, pers. comm.).

                                                       Insects and other creepy-crowlies       399


    Closely related to stick insects are leaf insects. The only terms I have located are
descriptive compounds: Tawala (PT) hiaga luguna (hiaga ‘T, lugu ‘leaf’), Tongan moko-moko
tu?aniu (moko-moko ‘crawling insect, tuPaniu ‘midrib of coconut leaflet’), and Rennellese
manu gaukei (‘insect’ + ‘leaf’).

    Some varieties of mantis and stick insect are listed as edible in a number of languages.


7.14 Fireflies (Order Coleoptera = ‘sheath wings’: Family Lampyridae)

Judging from ethnographic references and brief elaborations in wordlists, it is fireflies, among
all the insects of the Oceanic world, which are most associated with supernatural qualities.
For Takia (NNG) speakers, a firefly, lutot, is thought to be a messenger of someone’s death
(Bugenhagen wordlist). The term for a firefly in Sissano (NNG), mas eyiaw, is a compound
term, mas being defined as ‘devil; spirit of dead relative’ and eyiaw as ‘evil spirit; thief’
(Whitacre wordlist). Seligmann quotes a report from Bartie Bay (Wedau, PT) that ‘if a firefly
enters a house at night, it is a sign that someone in the house will die.’ (1910:653). Molima
(PT) speakers regard fireflies as emissaries of witches who enter the house at night in order
to report back on who is there, and for that reason they are killed as soon as they are seen
(Ann Chowning, pers. comm.). In Nakanai (MM), although its speakers consider that fireflies
embody spirits of the dead, they are delighted if a firefly enters the house at night, because
it is a sign that someone recently dead is paying a visit (Ann Chowning, pers. comm.). Ivens
writes that fireflies are popularly classified as ghosts in Sa’a and Ulawa (1927:189), and in
his Sa’a dictionary he defines fireflies (pulu-pulu) as ‘souls of dead persons’. The Tolo people
of Guadalcanal regard cicadas and fireflies as the ghosts of unknown people, or ghosts of the
forest (Ivens 1930:229). Tamambo (NCV) speakers are frightened of them, and try to avoid
them as Tittle devils’ (Dorothy Jauncey pers. comm.). In Wayan Fijian, fireflies (tdtdvuatd)
are believed to be a sign of the gods inspecting fruit crops. The Rennellese see a firefly as the
embodiment of a goddess.

     The belief that fireflies are messengers of doom is an ancient one among Austronesian
speakers. Blust (pers. comm.) provides additional evidence from Isneg (northern Philippines)
that fireflies are precursors of death, and Karo Batak (northern Sumatra) where their presence
in a house signals that thieves will come. Of all POc reconstructions, then, I should expect that
for ‘firefly’ to be most likely to retain the kali-lqali- indicator of supernatural status. I have
limited evidence supporting two reconstructions derived from PMP *qali-petpet, POc *qa!i-
popot ‘firefly’ and POc * (k,q)ali-totop ‘firefly’, the latter with metathesis. POc *(k,q)ali-totop
depends on one reflex, from Rennellese, for reconstruction of its first element and on another,
Nduke, for reconstruction of its second element.


PMP *qali-petpet ‘firefly’ (acd: WMP)
POc *qali-popot ‘firefly’
  NCV: Lewo             le-popo        ‘firefly’
  NCV: Tamambo          vovo(mbo)      ‘firefly; regarded as little devils and avoided’


PMP *qali-petpet ‘firefly’ (ACD)
POc *(k,q)ali-totop ‘firefly’ (metathesis)
  NNG: Takia            lu-tot          ‘firefly’
  MM: Tangga            kel-tot         ‘firefly’
  MM:       Nduke           alal-totovo     ‘luminous flying insect, its light flashes on-off’
  Pn:       Rennellese      ?agi-to         ‘firefly, seen inland, a rare phenomenon; believed to
                                            be the embodiment of the goddess Sikingimoemoe,
                                            and might not be killed’

400     Meredith Osmond


    A putative reconstruction, POc *bulu-bulu ‘firefly’, must be regarded as dubious because
witnesses are from adjoining subgroups where borrowing cannot be ruled out. Etymons may
be derived from POc *bulut ‘gum’ whose reflexes can include ‘a torch (of gum)’, and thus
extend to ‘light, firefly’.

__pre__
   MM:      Nehan           bol-bol      ‘lightning bug, near swamps’
   SES:     Gela            bulu         (tora) ‘firefly; phosphorescent fungus’ (bulu ‘torch,
                                         lamp’)8
   SES:     Sa’a            pulu-pulu    ‘firefly. Regarded as souls of dead persons, and
                                         killed when they enter a house’
   SES:     Kwaio           bulu-buhi    ‘star; firefly. Believed (esp. when enters house) to
                                         be a messenger from an ancestral spirit.’
   SES:     Arosi           buru-buru    ‘firefly; torch (of gum)’
                            buburu(atod) ‘k.o. cricket’ (atod ‘noon’)
   SES:     ’Are’are        puru-puru    ‘star; firefly’
   SES:     To’aba’ita      bubulu       ‘star; firefly; beetle sp.’

      Other terms use reflexes of POc *mata ‘eye’, sometimes extended to ‘star’ and ‘firefly’.

  NNG: Mengen (Poeng) mata                        ‘eye; star; firefly’ (mata-balaŋ ‘bee/wasp’)
  MM: Nakanai         mata(tabu)                  ‘star; firefly’
                      mata(laso)                  ‘k.o. long glow worm’

Other languages may make similar associations between fireflies, stars and sometimes phosphorescence.

   NNG: Sengseng           limlek             ‘firefly; star’
   MM: Roviana             pinoro             ‘phosphorescence as seen in the sea or on fireflies
                                              etc.’ (pino-pino ‘a star’)



7.15 Beetles (Order Coleoptera)

Although there are thousands of different beetle species, very few taxa are named in wordlists.
Only two POc reconstructions have been made, and in the first listed below there are grounds
for believing that the gloss given in many of the daughter languages is a recent adaptation.
The large rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros), which bores into the crown of the coconut
palm and is considered a serious pest in many parts of the Pacific, is believed to have been
introduced from southeast Asia only in the 20th century (Gressitt & Homabrook 1985:34).
A beetle similar in appearance and behaviour is Xylotrupes gideon, found in almost all parts
of New Guinea. Presumably, speakers used an existing beetle term to refer to the introduced
beetle. The second reconstruction, POc ‘kumuk. probably refers to longicorn beetles, those
with extremely long antenna (Family Cerambycidae), the larvae of which attack timber.

[8] This etymon and Bugotu tora ‘to be phosphorescent’ support PGuadalcanal-Gelic *[to]tora ‘firefly, s.t. phos phorescent’.

                                                      Insects and other creepy-crawlies    401

         Figure 7.7   Left Longicom beetle. Right Oryctes rhinoceros, rhinoceros-beetle.


POc *tabuRuRu ‘k.o. beetle’
  NNG:    Sengseng        taput          ‘an enormous black beetle’
  MM:     Nakanai         tabuburu       ‘coconut beetle’ (expect ^tabururu)
  MM:     Tabar           taburu(ŋa)     ‘beetle’
  MM:     Tolai           taburur        ‘horned beetle’
  MM:     Kara (East)     tevu(ŋun)      ‘rhinoceros beetle’
  SES:    Gela            tabelulu       ‘rhinoceros beetle’
  SES:    Bugotu          tabilolo       ‘rhinoceros beetle’
  NCV:    Uripiv          barur          ‘yam weevil, Papuana beetle’ (loss of first syllable unexplained)
   SV:    Sye       n-tompi              ‘k.o. beetle’
cf. also:
   NNG: Mapos Buang abu                  ‘rhinoceros beetle’
   MM: Nduke        vure                 ‘rhinoceros beetle’


POc *kamak ‘beetle, possibly longicom’
  NNG: Kaulong          kum.uk         ‘k.o. insect; large, edible, found inside the hollows of trees’
  NNG: Yabem            kaŋ            ‘beetle: capricorn beetle, stag beetle, homed beetle, weevil’
  NNG: Sengseng         makah          ‘longicorn beetle’ (metathesis)
  PT:       Iduna        kama         ‘large insect with long fat body’
  Pn:       Tikopia      kama         ‘insect, possibly of various types, attacks cultivated plants’
cf. also:
   MM:      Nakanai      komaga       Tong thin black beetle, edible, longicorn beetle’


402     Meredith Osmond


    A surprising omission from most wordlists are terms for the taro beetle (Papnana unin-
odis). Although these beetles may be as long-established in the region as the tubers which we
know were cultivated in Proto Oceanic times, I have not been able to reconstruct a term for
them other than Proto SE Solomonic *ko[l,R]o-ko[l,R]o ‘beetle that attacks plants’. Damage
to the tuber is caused by the adult beetles, and not by their larval stage which feeds on soil
and roots (Robin Hide, pers. comm.). I can locate very few terms for the pest in Western
Oceanic languages, none cognate. Although damaged tubers cause significant economic loss
in today’s marketing terms, it may be that the damage was of little significance when tubers
were primarily for home consumption.

Proto SE Solomonic *ko[l,R]o-kol,R]o ‘beetle that attacks plants’
   SES:     Bugotu       kololo       ‘coconut beetle’
   SES:     Gela         kololo       ‘taro-eating beetle’
   SES:     ’Are’are     ?oro-?oro    ‘taro-boring beetle’
   SES:     To’aba’ita   ?oro(kwao)   ‘k.o. white worm, attacks sugar-cane stems’ (k‘ ao ‘white’)
cf. also:
   SES: Sa’a             ?oro?oro     ‘beetle that bores into yams’ (for f Po/oPo/o)

    Wordlists contain a few references to edible beetles. Sudest (PT) has a term gilai ‘a large
black sago beetle; people eat both the adults and the larvae’; Nakanai (MM) has komaga
‘an edible insect like a long thin black beetle’ and bureka ‘large (6 ins) edible insect found
in trees’; Wayan (Fij) has gou ‘large beetle, Coleopterus sp., 2 inches long with hard shell.
Eaten by some people’.


7.16 Cockroaches (Order Blattodea = ‘light avoiders’)

Three POc reconstructions and one lower-level reconstruction can be made for ‘cockroach’.

PAn *Sipes ‘cockroach’ (ACD)
POc *ipos ‘cockroach’ (ACD)
  Adm.-     Nali         yih          ‘cockroach’
  Adm:      Nauna        ih           ‘cockroach’
  Adm:      Drehet       ih           ‘cockroach’
  NNG:      Mutu         up           ‘cockroach’
  NNG:      Kaulong      e-yus        ‘cockroach’
  NNG:      Sengseng     e-yus        ‘cockroach’
  MM:       Tolai        ipi(na)      ‘sp. beetle’ (ipina-koto ‘cockroach’)
  NCal:     Cemuhi       iwet         ‘cockroach’
  NCal: Nemi          yuet           ‘cockroach’
cf. also:
   NCV: Raga          ihi            ‘cockroach’ (for expected zvz)


                                                    Insects and other creepy-crawlies   403


POc *musi ‘cockroach’
  PT:    Roro          muhi          ‘cockroach’ (for expected must')
  MM:    Maringe       mhi-mhi(gi)   ‘stink beetle’
  SES:   Bugotu        muhu          ‘cockroach, beetle’
  SES:   Gela          muhu          ‘cockroach’
  SES:   Tolo          musu          ‘cockroach’
  SES:   Ghari         mosu          ‘small cockroach’

    Final -u for f-z in the SES items appears to reflect vowel assimilation.

    The next set shows a variety of reduplication patterns. Some Polynesian terms show possible
contamination from English cockroach or Spanish cucaracha.

POc *k''aru-k'aru ‘cockroach’
  PT: Bwaidoga         kwalu-kwalu   ‘cockroach’
  MM: Nehan            kur-kuru      ‘cockroach’
  MM: Banoni           karo          ‘small white cockroach’
  Pn: Tongan           kakalu        ‘large cricket/cicada sp.’
  Pn: E Futunan        kakalu        ‘that which smells bad’
  Pn: Samoan           alalu         ‘cockroach’
  Pn: Tahitian         aʔararu       ‘small beetle’
  Pn: Maori            kekereru      ‘stinkroach’
  Pn: Hawaiian         ?elelu        ‘cockroaches’


PPn ^ioŋa-moŋa ‘cockroach’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Tongan        moŋo-moŋa     ‘any kind of beetle or cockroach
  Pn:    Niuean        moŋa-moŋa     ‘cockroach’
  Pn:    Samoan        moŋa-moŋa     ‘cockroach’
  Pn:    Nanumea       moŋa-moŋa     ‘beetle sp.’
  Pn:    Tokelauan     moŋa-moŋa     ‘cockroach’



7.17 Grubs, caterpillars

Grubs and caterpillars are the larval stages of beetles (Coleoptera) and butterflies (Lepi-
doptera). Particular kinds are more likely to be named if they are a useful food source, or
if they attack crops.


404      Meredith Osmond


     One which is widely recognised is the edible sago grub (Order Coleoptera, family Curculionidae),
a valuable source of protein. Sago grows in low-lying, swampy areas of Melanesia
where other food plants do not thrive. Lack of the means of a varied diet may contribute
to the specialised sago grub cultivation employed by the Labu (NNG) people.[9] In Sissano
the sago grubs, yiat, are used in food offerings to the spirits in some healing ceremonies
(Whiteacre wordlist).

    The Admiralties languages in the next set all have -e- for ^-a-.

PMP *qcibcited ‘sago grub’ (Blust 2002)
POc *qapator ‘sago grub, edible’
  Adm:      Loniu          het                 ‘sago grub’
  Adm:      Ere            ehet                ‘sago grub’
  Adm:      Titan          aet                 ‘sago grub’ (for ]ahat)
  Adm:      Pak            keher               ‘sago grub’
  Adm:      Penchai        kahst               ‘sago grub’
  Adm:      Lenkau         kehetr              ‘sago grub’
  NNG:      Sissano (Arop) yiat                ‘sago grub’
  NNG:      Kove           awatohi             ‘sago grub’
  NNG:      Gedaged        gafat               ‘big grub found in rotten sago logs. Eaten raw or roasted. A great delicacy’ (initial g- unexpected)
  PT:       Lala              avako           ‘grub, found in sago palms’
  SES:      Gela               vato            ‘k.o. grub, eaten as food on Mala’
  SES:      Ghari              vato            ‘white worm in decayed tree’
  SES:      Arosi              hao             ‘white grub in rotten wood, eaten’ (first syllable lost)
   SES:     Lau                safao           ‘grub that eats sago palms’
   SES:     Kwaio              lafao           ‘large edible grub, larva of stag beetle’
   SES:     Sa’a               sahao           ‘the grub found in fallen logs of breadfruit tree, supposed to turn into the cockchafer beetle’
  SES:      ’Are’are           rahao           ‘big, white worm, lives in dead trees’
  NCV:      Mota               vato            ‘white grub found in dead trees, eaten’
  NCV:      Lewo               varo            ‘grub found in dead wood, edible’
  NCV:      Raga               avato           ‘large white insect found in trees, edible, larva of longhorn beetle’
  SV:       Sye                n-avat          ‘edible wood grub’
  SV:       Anejom             n-ahat          ‘edible wood grub’
  Fij:      Wayan              avato           ‘wood-boring grubs of various species’
  Fij:      Bauan              yavato          ‘grub in a tree, develops into the coleopterous called qou’
  Pn:       Tongan             lofato          ‘k.o. white grub found in timber, sometimes eaten’
  Pn:       Samoan             ?afato          ‘large edible grub, found in dry trees’ (P- unexpected)
  Pn:       E Futunan          ?afato          ‘larvae which are eaten; large edible grub, found in dry trees’
  Pn:       Rennellese         ahato           ‘larva of longicorn beetle Olethrus tyrranus’ (for y'lahalo)
cf. also:
   PT:      Sinaugoro          kavata          ‘ caterpi 11 ar ’
   MM:      Nakanai            (k,g)avato       ‘black lizard, found in rotten trees’ (kopa ‘larva of a beetle, found in trees and eaten’)


[9] C. W. L. Mercer (1994) describes a study conducted on the inland margin of the Labu swamp (near Lae), where
 the thorny steɪmned sago palm species Metroxylon rumphii is used almost exclusively by the Labu people for
 raising the grub of the palm weevil Rhynchophorus ferrugineus papuanus, which is an important source of
 protein (and also a pest of the living palms).

                                                            Insects and other creepy-crowlies     405



   POc *muno may have been a generic term for caterpillars. Reflexes are not found in
Central Pacific where a reflex of POc *qanupe is the most widespread term for ‘caterpillar’.

POc *muno[-muno] ‘caterpillar, grub’
   Adm :    Lou            mon-muon         ‘caterpillar’
   MM:      Simbo          mu-muno          ‘worm’
   MM:      Nduke          mu-muno          ‘looper caterpillar’
   MM:      Roviana        muno-muno        ‘general name for caterpillars and grubs’
   SES:     Bugotu         muno             ‘caterpillar’
   SES:     Lau            muno             ‘caterpillar’
   SES:     Sa’a           muno             ‘larva, chrysalis’
   SES:     ’Are’are       muno             ‘caterpillar’
   SES:     To’aba’ita     muna             ‘k.o. caterpillar that turns into a butterfly’
   Mic:     Puluwatese     mun              ‘caterpillar’
   Mic:     Carolinian     mwul             ‘generic term for maggots, larvae or small worms’
   Mic:     Woleaian       mwura            ‘caterpillar, silkworm’
cf. also:
   MM:      Nduke          meno             ‘taro beetle’

    WOc cognates of POc *qanupe refer to trepangs,[10] also known as beche-de-mer or sea
slugs (ch.4, §5.2.1), while Eastern Oceanic cognates refer to caterpillars. Without external
cognates, the meaning of POc * qanupe is indeterminate.

[10] Thanks to Ann Chowning for bringing this to my notice.

POc *qanupe ‘caterpillar or k.o. sea cucumber (indeterminate)’
PWOc *qanupe ‘sea cucumber, holothurian’
  NNG: Kove                anuwe            ‘trepang’
  PT:  Dobu                kanue            ‘beche de mer’
  PT:  Galea               anue             ‘general term for all sea cucumbers’ (Lawrence Rutter pers.comm.)
  MM:   Nakanai      haluve                 ‘trepang’
PEOc *qanupe ‘caterpillar’
  SES: Ghari         nive                   ‘caterpillar’
  Fij:  Rotuman      aniha                  ‘caterpillar, maggot’
  Fij:  Bauan        (b)anuve               ‘caterpillar’
  Pn:   Tongan       lunufe                 ‘caterpillar (generic)
  Pn:   Samoan       lanufe                 ‘worm, caterpillar’
  Pn:      Tikopia      unufe         ‘caterpillar’
  Pn:      Nanumea      anufe         ‘caterpillar, worm, slug, etc.’
  Pn:      Tuamotuan    anuhe         ‘caterpillar’


406     Meredith Osmond


7.18 Centipedes (Class Chilopoda): Millipedes (Class Diplopoda)

Another * qali- term, POc * qalipan ‘centipede’, is reconstructable, probably embracing millipedes
as well. Evidence of an association between centipedes and the supernatural comes
from ethnographic descriptions as well as linguistic clues. For instance, Sengseng (NNG)
speakers consider centipedes to be supernatural beings, and carefully remove them from their
houses (Ann Chowning, pers. comm.). Elbert’s Rennellese dictionary defines ?agi-paipai as
‘centipede, considered the embodiment of non-worshipped deities and a loathsome creature’.
In his Tikopia dictionary Firth defines morokau as ‘centipede. Trad, held to be frequent embodiment of spirit’. There is also a Samoan term atna-loa ‘k.o. centipede with poisonous
bite’, whose prefix atua- has supernatural significance (discussed in §27). In addition to the
*qalipan cognate set I list non-cognate terms for centipede from a range of languages across
several subgroups which all exhibit a reflex of the qali-lkali- prefix.

    Reflexes of *qalipan are numerous and widespread. As well, I have a number of lower-
level reconstructions, possibly for particular kinds of centipede. Two kinds of centipede/ millipede are described in wordlists, categorised by behaviour or luminosity rather than number
of legs. One, when threatened, squirts a kind of acid from between its scales which can cause
blisters or even permanent eye damage, while a second is described as phosphorescent or
luminous. A millipede in Arosi (SES), doŋa, is also singled out as having a vile smell. I have
one lower-level reconstruction for the luminous variety, PPn *taqe-tuli ‘phosphorescent centipede or millipede’, whose first element is derived from POc *taqe ‘excrement’, implying
strongly that the creature is considered unpleasant in Central Pacific languages. In Tahiti,
however, where there are two kinds, not venomous, one short and thick and light brown, the
other long, threadlike and phosphorescent, they were well regarded. Teuira Henry (1971:391)
writes that ‘when a centipede fell upon a wound or bruise of any kind, it soon healed. If it
crawled upon a sick person, a speedy recovery followed.’


PAn *qalu-Sipan ‘centipede’ (ACD)
PMP *qalu-hipan ‘centipede’ (ACD)
POc *qalipan ‘centipede’
  Adm:     Mussau       aliena
  Adm:     Wuvulu       ali-alifa
  NNG:     Manam        alia
  NNG:     Mangga       garivaŋ
  NNG:     Yalu         kanif
  NNG:     Wampur       ganef
  PT:      Maopa        yaiva
  PT:      Gumawana     ganiva
  PT:      Saliba       kalihai
  PT:      Duau         ganihana
  PT:       Motu         aiha
  MM:       Bola         yaliua
  MM:       Halia        lihaŋ(a)
  MM:       Nehan        hilaŋ             (metathesis)
  MM:       Nduke        livaŋ(a)
  SES:      Gela         lira
  SES:      Bugotu       liva
  SES:      Lengo        aliva
  SES:      Lau          safila            (metathesis)
  SES:      Kwaio        lalifa
  SES:      Arosi        (karikari) ?ariha
  Fij:      Rotuman      aniha             ‘maggot; also applied to many kinds of caterpillars
                                           and millipedes’
   Fij:     Bauan        yaliva            ‘a red millipede, possibly generic for millipedes’
cf. also:
   Pn:      Rennellese   ?agipaipai


                                                        Insects and other creepy-crowlies     407


    Other terms for centipede which apparently exhibit a reflex of the qali-kali- prefix include:

__pre__
    Adm:     Drehet       kxane-pup
    PT:      Molima       gani-geva
    MM:      Ririo        kali-gava
    MM:      Sisiqa       kala-gava
    MM:      Babatana     kali-gava

    The compound terms below yield a reconstructed first element, PWOc *mwali-.

PWOc *mwali-X ‘millipede’
  PT:       Bwaidoga     ni‘ ali(keke)   ‘millipede (yellow, causing irritation or burn to skin when it squirts acid from between scales)’
  PT:       Kilivila     rri' ani(ta)    ‘centipede’
  MM:       Maringe      mali(so)        ‘millipede’
cf. also:
   PT:    Molima         p‘ ali(keke)    ‘millipede’

    POc *weli (i) ‘fireworm, sea centipede’; (2) ? ‘k.o. millipede’ is included in chapter 4,
§7.2.

PPn *taqe-tuli ‘phosphorescent centipede/millipede’ (pollex)
  Pn:       Tongan       te?e-tuli       ‘phosphorescent centipede’
  Pn:       Rennellese   ta?-tugi        Tong and slender centipede variety’
  Pn:       Samoan       tae-tuli        ‘phosphorescent millipede’
  Pn:       Tikopia      tae-turi        ‘millipede’
cf. also:
   Fij:   Rotuman        turi            ‘phosphorescent centipede’ (Pn borrowing)

408   Meredith Osmond


    In Bugotu (SES) the term for a phosphorescent centipede, /zwz tora, is a literal description:
(liva ‘centipede’, tora ‘phosphorescent’).

    Reflexes of a reconstruction from a different semantic field, POc *taqe ‘excrement’ (see
ch.2, p.60), have extended their meaning to refer to a centipede in Kahua (SES) and Bauan Fijian and a scorpion in Tamambo (NCV) and Anejom (SV), no doubt reflecting their common
characterisation as painful stinger.


7.19 Scorpions (Class Arachnida: Order Scorpiones)

A substantial number of terms for scorpions have been
collected, but only a single reconstruction, Proto SE
Solomonic *vtzrz ‘scorpion’ (not listed here) has been possible. In the Solomons, many terms are compounds or
phrases which include the word for centipede (Gela liva-ni
mala, Birao kaukau-liva, Lengo aliva-ni-yoro). Although
centipedes and scorpions belong to different zoological
classes, the linking of the two creatures in this way may be
due to the similar appearance of grasping pincers, and to
the facts that both are capable of delivering a severe bite
or sting, and both frequent the same habitat, under rocks
or leaf litter. The scorpion is named as crab-like in Gapa-
paiwa (g‘aya-gwaya ‘scorpion; idiom for one who moves
slowly and fearfully on heights) (gwaya Arab (generic)’)
and possibly also in Molima (dowa ‘scorpion, land crab’),
although Chowning adds a question mark to her gloss.

                                                                   Figure 7.8   Honnurus sp.,
                                                                             scorpion

7.20 Spiders (Order Araneae)

Although POc speakers would undoubtedly have named a range of spiders, I have not been
able to link reconstructions with specific kinds of spider. I have only one lower-level example
in which a name is assigned to a particular spider — PCP *tuku-tuku ‘k.o. spider that lets itself
down by a single thread’. POc *lawaq, traceable back to PAn, with cognates right across
the Oceanic region, may have referred primarily to ‘spider’ but by POc times had come to
refer as well to ‘spider web’ and ‘k.o. fish net’ (see vol.l, p.212). I also find a number of
reconstructions with formal similarities, including POc *koko, POc * gagao *(g,k)a(g,k)a-,
PWOc *kuku, and PEOc *\ko\ko-miji. Some kind of word play has evidently taken place,
although I have no ethnographic evidence that particular spiders are associated with any kind
of supernatural belief or taboo. On the contrary, they are freely eaten in many communities.
Wordlists of a number of languages including Molima and Sinaugoro (PT), Takia (NNG) and
Hawaiian (Pn), record particular kinds of edible spider.

    Reconstructions other than * lawaq have an unusually large number of reflexes which are
compounds with a non-reflected element. These reconstructions may refer to particular kinds
of spider. As Pawley (2000:8) has noted, names for folk specifics in plants and animals, or, to
be more exact, the secondary or modifying terms in binomials, are notoriously unstable and
will, in most cases, not be reconstructable for a language as remote in time as POc.

                                                      Insects and other creepy-crawlies   409


PAn *lawaq ‘spider’ (Blust 2002)
POc *lawaq ‘spider, spider web’ (Also ‘fish net’ )
  Adm:   Loniu         (wi)law                    ‘spider’
  NNG:   Tuam          lawag                      ‘spider’
  NNG:   Gitua         lawak                      ‘spider’
  NNG:   Malai         lawak                      ‘web’
  NNG:   Wogeo         lawa                       ‘spider’
  PT:    Bwaidoga      naw aya                    ‘spider’
  PT:    Gapapaiwa     nawa-nawa                  ‘spider web’
  PT:    Sudest        lawa                       ‘spider’
  PT:    Motu          vala-vala                  ‘cobweb’ (metathesis)
  MM:    Vitu          lava                       ‘spider’s web’
  SES:   Lau           lak'ci                     ‘k.o. large yellow spider and large web’
  SES:   Kwaio         lak'a-lak‘a                ‘spider web’
  SES:   ’Are’are      rawa                       ‘spider, cobweb’
  SES:   Sa’a          lawa                       ‘spider’s web, spider’
  SES:   Arosi         rawa                       ‘spider, cobweb, small net’
  NCV:   Mota          (ta)lau                    ‘cobweb, either single line or web’
  NCV:   Nguna         (ka)lau                    ‘spider (web)’
  SV:    Anejom        ni-lva                     ‘spider web’
  Fij:   Bauan         lawa                       ‘fishing net’
  Fij:   Bauan         viritd lawa-lawa           ‘cobweb’
  Fij:   Bauan         tina-ni-virita lawa-lawa   ‘spider’ (lit. ‘mother of cobweb’)

   PPn *lewe is probably cognate, with reduplication and addition of the prefix *ka~, which
may reflect *k wakwa, discussed below the next item.

PPn *ka-lewe-lewe ‘cobweb, spider’ (pollex)
  Pn:    Niuean        ka-leve              ‘cobweb’
  Pn:    Tongan        ka-leve-leve         ‘k.o. spider’
  Pn:    E Futunan     ka-leve-leve         ‘spider, spiderweb’
  Pn:    Samoan        ?a(poqd)-leve-leve   ‘spider; spider’s web’
  Pn:    Tikopia       ka-reve-reve         ‘spider’s web, all types’
  Pn:    Emae          ka-reve-reve         ‘spider web’
  Pn:    Rarotongan    (puŋd)vere-vere      ‘spiderweb’ (puŋd ‘fortress, retreat’) (metathesis)
  Pn:    Hawaiian      (pund)w ele-w ele    ‘spinning spider’ (metathesis)
  Pn:    Tuamotuan     (puŋd)vere-vere      ‘a cobweb’ (metathesis)

    In the cognate set below the Malai (NNG) term and those from the Malakula languages
Nahai’i, Axamb and Nisvai (NCV) speak in favour of a freestanding POc *gagao, whilst
the Molima (PT), Teop, Simbo, Torau, Kia, Kokota (all MM) and Gela (SES) terms point to
*gaga- and * kaka- as forms occurring in compounds.


POc *gagao ~ *(g,k)a(g,k)a- ‘k.o. spider’
  NNG: Malai          (a)gagan        ‘spider’
  PT:  Molima         gaga(bo?a)     ‘house spider’
  MM:       Teop         kaka(rebasn)   ‘spider’
  MM:       Simbo        yaya(vere)     ‘spider’
  MM:       Torau        kaka(piro)     ‘spider’
  MM:       Roviana      kaga           ‘spider with long legs, lives in the house’
  MM:       Kia          kaka(para)     ‘spider’
  MM:       Kokota       kaka(fre)      ‘spider’
  SES:      Gela         kaka(vere)     ‘spider’ (probably borrowed from an Isabel
                                        language)
  NCV:     Raga         (ta)gaga       ‘generic for spiders’
  NCV:     Naha’ai      ne-gegeu       ‘spider’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV:     Axamb        na-gagao       ‘spider’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)
  NCV:     Nisvai       na-gao         ‘spider’ (John Lynch, pers. comm.)

410     Meredith Osmond


    POc * koko and PWOc *kuku may be variants of the same term as *kaka. Two alternate
hypotheses about their origins are (a) that * ko reflects the second syllable of * gagao, and
(b) that the reflexes supporting *kaka-, *koko and *knku reflect POc *k‘ak"a. : Evidence for
(b) is that (i) SE Solomonic languages retain k-.: and this is diagnostic of POc *k w~, and (ii)
Western Oceanic (PT, MM) reflexes other than Simbo retain k- rather than leniting it to y- or
zero, the usual reflexes of *k-.

    POc * koko becomes *\ko\ko-miji ‘k.o. spider’ in PSES with the addition of -mijr an
element which occurs also in other compounds meaning ‘spider’ (Dori’o [SES] kala-midi)
although not found separately. It also may occur in Nakanai kamimisi ‘spider’, if intepreted
as kami-misi with kami- < kali by assimilation. I am unable to suggest a meaning for POc
*-miji, other than to note that I have found it only in spider terms.

POc *koko ‘spider’
  NNG:      Mum eng (Pat ep) koo            ‘spider’s web’
  PT:       Dobu             (wa)koko       ‘brown house spider’
  MM:       Tolai            koko           ‘spider: all kinds of house spider
  MM:       Kandas           ko             ‘spider’
  MM:       Halia            koko(ratski)   ‘spider; starfish’
Proto SE Solomonic *[ko]ko-miji ‘k.o. spider’
  SES:   Lengo           ka-midi         ‘spider’
  SES:   Longgu          ko-midi         ‘spider’
  SES:   Tolo            koko-mici       ‘large house spider
  SES:   Talise          ko-mici         ‘spider’
  SES:   Ghari           ko-mici         ‘common spider’
  SES:   Malango         ko-miji         ‘spider’
cf. also:
   PT:      Wedau            (Mgogo         ‘k.o. spider’
   PT:      Gapapaiwa        (wa)koko       ‘spider type; A specific large species of spider which occupies our outhouse’
  Pn:       Rennellese       ko-miti        ‘various spiders that bite’ (possible borrowing SES)

                                                      Insects and other creepy-crowlies     411


PWOc *knkn ‘spider’
  NNG:    Bariai         knkn              ‘spider’
  NNG:    Gedaged        knk               ‘spider’
  NNG:    Kilenge        na-knkn(n)        ‘spider’s web’
  NNG:    Mai al am ai   knkn(lamlambe)    ‘spider’
  MM:     Vitu           (pa)knkn          ‘spider’
  MM:     Bali           (ma)knkn          ‘spider’
  MM:     Nakanai        knkn (re)         ‘spider’
  MM:     Marovo         knkn              ‘huntsman spider’


PWOc *ka(p,b)ilak‘a ‘k.o. spider’
  NNG:    Mapos Buang kapik               ‘large brown hairy spider’ (for ‘\kabiyok)
  PT:     Molima      kapinoko            ‘k.o. edible black bush spider’
  MM:     Nakanai     kalalana            ‘spider web’ (kala- for ^kabe- by assimilation)
  MM:     Kara (West) kabelana            ‘spider’
  MM:     Tigak       kavelo              ‘k.o. spider’
  MM:     Lamasong    kabiloŋ             ‘k.o. spider’
  MM:     Minigir     (ka)kobiloko        ‘k.o. spider’
  MM:     Tolai       kabiloko            ‘spider; spiderweb’
  MM:     Ramoaaina   kabulak             ‘spider, cobweb’
  MM:     Bilur       kabilak             ‘spider’

   The only reconstruction which can safely be attributed to a particular kind of spider is PCP
*tnkn-tnkn ‘k.o. spider which lowers itself on a single thread’, from PCP * tuku ‘let down’.

PCP *tnkn-tnkn ‘k.o. spider which lowers itself on a single thread’
  Fij:    Rotuman        fn?-fn?n     ‘k.o. spider that lets itself down on a thread’
  Fij:    Bauan           tnkn-tnku   ‘k.o. small spider’
  Pn:     Tikopia         tuku-tuku   ‘spider (unid. but includes daddy long legs. Trad, a creature with silk thread, assoc, with spiritual beings Manu and Tanggaroa)’
  Pn:     Maori     tuku-tuku         ‘spiderweb; ornamental latticework’
  Pn:     Tuamotuan tuku-tuku         ‘k.o. harmless spider’
  Pn:     Hawaiian  ku?u-ku?u         ‘short-legged spider, lowers itself on a single thread’



7.21 Leeches (Class Hirudinea)

There is a well-supported POc reconstruction for ‘leech’ based on reflexes in NNG, PT and
NCV languages. I have not so far located any term for leech, cognate or otherwise, east of Fiji,
and assume that the creatures are not found in Micronesia or Polynesia (with the exception of
New Zealand, where the Maori term is ŋata i.e. ‘snake’) (Ross Clark, pers. comm.). Pawley
has reconstructed a similar term, PROc * drumane ‘anemone’ (ch.4, §6.1) which is almost in
complementary distribution, and the terms may be related.

412   Meredith Osmond


POc *droman ‘leech’
   NNG:     Mangga      domaŋ
   NNG:     Mapos Buang domŋ
   NNG:     Adzera      tiiaman
   PT:      Are         domeni
   PT:      Gapapaiwa   domani
   PT:      Tawala      domani
   PT:      Dobu        domana
   PT:      Molima      domana          ‘mountain leech’
   PT:      Nimoa       dome
   PT:      Lala       toma
   PT:      Motu        doma
   PT:      Taboro      doma
   NCV:     Tamambo     ruma
   NCV:     Raga        rim‘ a
   NCV:     NE Ambae    rirri'e
cf. also:
   MM:      Nakanai       soma          (for f domd)
   MM:      Tolai         domol



7.22 Worms

7.22.1 Worm (generic)

There is a widespread belief among Austronesian speakers that dental caries is caused by a
small worm. Both the creature and the associated condition are named in different languages
by reflexes of various reconstructed terms for ‘worm’. Blust comments on two WMP languages, Cebuano and Malagasy, whose reflexes of PAn *qulej ‘maggot’ refer also to ‘tooth
decay’ or ‘toothache, supposed to be occasioned by a small worm in the tooth’ (ACD) (§23).
Dobu (PT) has a term kimwata ‘the supposed insect which causes caries in children’ (m''ata
‘snake’). The To’aba’ita term is wd-lifo ‘tooth decay, believed to be caused by worms’ (ira
‘worm, grub, maggot, caterpillar, larva’, lifo ‘tooth’). Other WMP languages refer to tooth
decay by reflexes of PMP *bukbuk ‘weevil that infests wood, bamboo, and rice; dust produced by
the boring of this insect; tooth decay’ (ACD) (§9). Codrington also reports the belief
as existing in the Banks Islands (NCV) (1891:193).

    It seems likely that POc *m‘ ’ata-m"’ata, the reduplicated form of * m‘ata ‘snake’, was a
generic for worms and worm-like creatures, including caterpillars and millipedes. In places
it has reverted to its unreduplicated form, either as a generic for snakes and other snake-like
creatures, or, as in Micronesia and Seimat, to refer to worms alone. In Micronesia there are
no snakes except on Guam, where they have been introduced in comparatively recent times
(Jeff Marek, pers. comm.), and hence there is no need to maintain the distinction. I have not
been able to ascertain if snakes are found in the Ninigo Islands, where Seimat is spoken.

POc *m w ata-m‘ ata ‘generic for worms and worm-like creatures’
  Adm:      Seimat      wat             ‘land worm’
  NNG: Kove            mota      ‘snake, eel, caterpillar’
  NNG: Bing            mut-muat  ‘caterpillar’
  NNG: Yabem           moa?      ‘snake, and as first element in compounds (worm
                                 caterpillar, slug, snail and millipede)’
  PT:   Gapapaiwa sulata(ramoa) ‘caterpillar, worm (not earthworm’
  PT:  Bwaidoga mota-mota        ‘grub, caterpillar which eats leaves of yams, taro
                                 etc.’
  PT:   Sudest       m‘ata(wadi) ‘a small black millipede’
  PT:  Minaveha      m‘ata-m"ata ‘caterpillar, worm, maggot or small snake’
  PT:  Dobu          m‘ata-m"ata ‘earthworms, intestinal worms’
  PT:  Molima        m‘ata-m"ata ‘intestinal worms’
  PT:  Kilivila      m''ateta    ‘worm’
  PT:   Gumawana     moteta      ‘snake, worm’
  SES: Sa’a          m‘d-mwa     ‘maggot, worm’
PEOc *mwata ‘snake, worm’
  SES: ’Are’are      ma          ‘generic term for snake, worm’
  SES: Kwaio         wd          ‘snake; various worms, various snake-like creatures
  SES: To’aba’ita wd             ‘worm, grub, maggot, caterpillar, larva’
  SES: Lau           wd          ‘(i) snake; (2) worm, maggot’
  Mic: Kiribati      m''ata      ‘grub, caterpillar, worm’
  Mic: Mokilese      m‘ac        ‘worm’
  Mic: Carolinian m''ata         ‘worm, earthworm’
  Mic: Woleaian      m''at       ‘underground worm’
  Mic: Puluwatese moho           ‘worm, general name (incl. intestinal worms)’
  Pn:  Maori         ŋata        ‘snail, slug, leech’


                                                    Insects and other creepy-crawlies    413


7.22.2 Other worm taxa

Blust has reconstructed PMP *bulati ‘roundworm, ascaris, intestinal worm; also earthworm?’
(ACD) without Oceanic reflexes. I have reconstructed POc *sulati ‘worm’ which evidently
carries a common root, -lati. The Oceanic evidence does not permit further differentiation of
meaning.

POc *sulati ‘worm’
  PT:    Sudest        ula-ulari     ‘worm’
  NCV:   Tamambo       sulati        ‘earthworm’
  NCV:   Mota          sulate        ‘worm’
  NCV:   Mwotlap       ni-slat       ‘worm’
  NCV:   Raga          silosi        ‘general term for worms incl. earthworms and intestinal worms’
  NCV: Paamese         a-silati      ‘worm’
  NCV: Nguna           a-sulati      ‘hookworm, tapeworm’

    The next reconstruction, PNGOc *dim wan ‘k.o. worm’, bears some similarity to POc
*droman ‘leech’ but a contrast is preserved in some languages, e.g. Molima domana ‘mountain leech’,
dim‘ a-m"’ ana ‘worm’; Dobudomana ‘leech’, di-dim'ana ‘common earthworms,
small lizards’; Gapapaiwatfomam ‘leech’, dimo(moga) ‘earthworm’; Sinaugorodoma ‘leech’,
dimo ‘worm’). The resemblance appears to be accidental.

414     Meredith Osmond



PNGOc *dim wan ‘k.o. worm’
  NNG:     Tami         timwa            ‘worm, maggot’
  NNG:     Numb ami     (mota)diŋana     ‘worm’ (mota ‘snake’)
  PT       Molima       dim‘a-dimva-na   ‘earthworms’
  PT       Dobu         di-dim'`a-na     ‘common earthworms, small lizards’
  PT       Sewa Bay     dim'`ana-na      ‘worm’
  PT       Duau         di-dim'`ana      ‘worm’
  PT       Gapapaiwa    dimo(moga)       ‘earthworm’
  PT       Gumawana     dimona-na        ‘an earthworm’
  PT       Muyuw        simwa(mwat)      ‘maggots, worms’ (mwat ‘snake’)
  PT       Sudest      jimo-jimo         ‘earthworm’
  PT       Sinaugoro    dimo             ‘worm’
  PT       Hula         rimo             ‘worm’
  PT       Kuni         sima             ‘worm’


PPn *kele-mutu ‘earthworm, grub’ (pollex: PPn *kele ‘earth, dirt, soil’)
  Pn:     Niuean       kele-mutu     ‘worm’
  Pn:     Tongan       kele-mutu     ‘earthworm, grub’
  Pn:     Samoan       ?ele-mutu     ‘grub in rotten wood’
  Pn:     Tuvalu       kele-mutu     ‘earthworm, grub’
  Pn:     Tokelauan    kele-mutu     ‘earthworm, grub’
cf. also:
   Adm: Loniu          (te)keli-mw et ‘earthworm, grub’

    See also chapter 4, §7.1 and §7.2, for POc *ibo ‘sandworm’ and POc *weli ‘fireworm’
respectively.


7.23 Maggots

POc *quloc continues the PAn term for ‘maggot’, * qidej. Some reflexes show HI instead of
lul in the first vowel, a common sporadic change in many forms.

PAn *qulej ‘maggot’ (ACD)
POc *quloc ‘maggot’
  Adm:     Lou         kul           ‘maggot’
  Adm:     Loniu       un            ‘maggot’
  Adm:     Titan       ul            ‘maggot’
  PT:      Motu        ulo-ulo       ‘maggot’
  PT:      Lala        ulo(li)       ‘worm’
  PT:      Suau        uro-uro       ‘fly’
  MM:      Roviana     uloso         ‘maggot’
  MM:      Roviana     ul-uloso          ‘maggot (pl)’
  MM:     Maringe    n-ulho            ‘maggot’
  SES:    Bugotu     ulo               ‘maggot’
  SES:    Arosi      uro               ‘worm, maggot’
  NCV:    Mota       ulo               ‘maggot’
  NCV:    Raga       ulehi             ‘small worm’
  NCV:    Tape       wiləs             ‘maggot’
  NCV:    Namakir    Til               ‘maggot’
  SV:     Sye        n-ilah            ‘maggot’
  SV:     Anejom     n-ija             ‘maggot’
  NCal:   Cemuhi     unet              ‘maggot’
  NCal:   Caaac      kolet             ‘maggot’
  Mic:    Kiribati   ino               ‘a worm, larva’
  Mic:    Puluwatese wul, yil          ‘maggot’
  Mic:    Kosraean   uls               ‘maggot’
  Mic:    Woleaian   ir                ‘maggot, larva’
  Fij:    Wayan      ilo               ‘maggot’
  Fij:    Bauan      ulo               ‘maggot’
  Pn:     Samoan     ilo               ‘maggot’
  Pn:     Tahitian   iro               ‘generic for maggots, worms’
  Pn:     Marquesan i?o                ‘worm, maggot’
  Pn:     Maori      iro               ‘maggot, threadworm, vermin’
  Pn:     Hawaiian   ilo               ‘maggot, grub; to creep, as worms


                                                       Insects and other creepy-crawlies      415


    The next reconstruction illustrates what was evidently a productive process in POc, the
addition of -a(n) to a term X, where X could be water, sennit, people, pigs etc., to indicate a
state of being ‘full of X’ or in the case of insects, infested with the insect. Besides POc *qulos-a(n) ‘be maggoty’
I can reconstruct PEOc *kutu-a(n) ‘(be) lousy’ (To’aba’ita ?u-la, Samoan
?utu-a, Pukapukan wutu-a). Further examples from SES languages show the process applied
to other insect names: Sa’apote ‘head louse’, pote-la ‘lousy’; To’aba’ita, Lau wet ‘maggot,
worm’, wd-la ‘maggoty, wormy’, and I add a Polynesian example, Tongan moijomoqa-?ia
‘infested with beetles or cockroaches’, from moŋomoŋa ‘any kind of beetle or cockroach’.

PMP *qulej-an ‘have worms’ (ACD)
POc *quloc-a(n) ‘be maggoty’
  SES:    Bugotu        ulo-a          ‘maggoty’
  NCV:    Mota          ulos-a         ‘maggoty, full of maggots’
  Mic:    Kiribati      (ka) ino-a     ‘bring on putrefaction’
  Fij:    Bauan         ulo-ulo-a      ‘wormy, maggoty’
  Pn:     Samoan        ilo-a          ‘be maggoty’

    Reduplication on verbs serves to indicate frequentative aspect, while its nominal counterpart means ‘full of, lots of N’.

416     Meredith Osmond


PMP *qulej-qulej ‘ lots of worms; crawling with worms, extremely wormy’ (ACD)
POc *qulo-quloc ‘full of maggots’
  PT:     Motu          ulo-ulo        ‘maggot’
  MM:     Roviana       ul-uloso       ‘maggots, when in numbers’
  Mic:    Kiribati      ino-ino        ‘full of worms, worm-eaten’
  Fij:    Bauan         ulo-ulo        ‘maggot (diminutive)’



7.24 Unspecified flying insect

The following set consists of cognates with a range of glosses which can only be subsumed
under one generalised reconstruction.

PPn *mu ‘flying insect’ (pollex)
  Pn:     Tongan        mu             ‘moth’
  Pn:     E Futunan     mu-mu          ‘dragonfly’
  Pn:     Samoan        (se?e)mu       ‘dragonfly’ (se?e ‘glide’)
  Pn:     Rarotongan    mu             ‘big reddish moth that flies round lamps at night’
  Pn:     Maori         mu             ‘insects’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      mu             ‘general term for insects that eat cloth, wood, plants’



7.25 Semantic extensions and generalisations

Chapter 8 contains a detailed examination of *manuk and *manu-manuk. POc *manuk evidently had two
senses, one restricted, the other extended. The restricted sense was ‘bird’
or more precisely ‘bird + bat’, hence ‘flying vertebrate’. The extended sense was ‘creature’,
probably excluding people and things that swam in the sea. In POc, diminutives were regularly
formed by reduplication. So *manu-manuk meant either ‘small flying creature’, or
simply ‘small creature’. Beyond that I have only fragments of information to go on as clues
to how POc speakers classified their world of insects and other creepy-crawlies. It is likely
that most languages had generic terms for butterflies, flies, spiders, hoppers, ants, grubs and
so on, although I have been able to reconstruct reliable generic terms for only the first two.

     There is some evidence that there were two broader categories in PPn, the flying creatures,
*manu-lele and the crawlers, *mcmu-totolo. Rennellese has mami-mami-gege ‘fly-
ing/jumping creatures’, and manu-manu-totogo ‘creeping creatures’, the latter including reptiles
other than turtles. Nanumea, a dialect of Tuvalu (Pn), has forms cognate with the Rennellese,
manu lele ‘bird, flying insect’ and manu totolo ‘ground animal e.g. spider, lizard, land
mammal’. Niue also has cognate terms but insects are excluded in both: manu lele ‘bird, can
include flying fox but not flying insects’ and manu totolo ‘any walking or crawling creature
but not insects’. Speakers of the Hula dialect of Keapara (Papuan Tip) distinguish manu-
manu ‘flying insect’ and mani-mani ‘creeping insect’. According to Fox (1974), Lau (SES)
divides the entire animal kingdom three ways, with wdwd ‘generic for all creatures in or
on the ground’, manu ‘generic for all creatures that fly’ and iʔa ‘generic for all creatures in
water’.

                                                     Insects and other creepy-crowlies    417


    The following example illustrates how one particular term may serve as the name of a
class, in this case ‘fly’, and also be used as the first element in binomials defining members
of that class. Examples include:

__pre__
  Adm: Lou              laij-laŋ(a)          ‘fly, flying insect’
                        laŋ-et               ‘housefly’
                        laij-laŋa-n palawa   ‘honey bee’
                        laŋ-laŋ ŋara         ‘bluebottle, horsefly, March fly’
  NNG: Sengseng         laŋ                  ‘fly’
                        latjiyuyu            ‘hornet with papery nest’
                        laijoijoŋ            ‘insect that makes holes in wood’
  MM:     Tolai         laŋa                 ‘fly’
                        laŋa bulit           ‘bee’ (bulit ‘gum’)
  SES:    Gela          laijo                ‘fly’
                        laijo mbeli          ‘k.o. hover fly’
                        laijo ni bolo        ‘k.o. large fly’ (bolo ‘pig’)
                        laŋo ni uvu          ‘k.o. red fly’
                        laŋo pasa-pasa       ‘k.o. large fly’ (pasa-pasa ‘to scold’)
                        laijo vuru           ‘large k.o. fly with yellow wings’
  Pn:     Niuean        laijo                ‘common fly’
                        laijo fufti          ‘mason wasp’
                        laŋo meli            ‘bee’
  Pn:     Hawaiian      nalo                 ‘the common housefly and other similar flies’
                        nalo ?aki            ‘small stinging fly’
                        nalo hope ?eha       ‘hornet’ (lit. ‘fly with stinging posterior’)
                        nalo keleawe         ‘hoverfly’? (lit. ‘brass/copperfly’)
                        nalo lawe-lepo       ‘mud wasp’ (lit. ‘dirt-toting fly’)
                        nalo meli            ‘honey bee’
                        nalo nahu            ‘stinging fly’ (lit. ‘biting fly’)
                        nalo paka            ‘tick; ensign fly’ (lit. ‘lean fly’)
                        nalo pilau           ‘bluebottle fly’ (lit. ‘stink fly’)

    In some Polynesian languages the reflex of POc * moko ‘k.o. snake’ (p.260) has become
a class marker for a whole range of creepy-crawlies:

__pre__
  Pn:    Niuean        moko                  ‘insect, grub, caterpillar; lizard, any creeping
                                             creature’
                       moko elo              ‘stinkbeetle’ (elo ‘to stink’)
                       moko manini           ‘common brown beetle’ (manini ‘a plant, Physalis
                                             angulata')
                       moko maija            ‘earwig’ (maŋa ‘forked, divided’)
                       moko moŋa-moŋa        ‘cockroach’
                       moko niu              ‘rhinoceros beetle’ (niu ‘coconut palm’)
                       moko tafa             ‘blackbeetle’ (tafa ‘be itchy’)
                       moko taliŋa           ‘gecko’ (taliŋa ‘ear’)
                       moko vd               ‘large green mantis’ (vd ‘to mock’?)
  Pn:    Tongan        moko                  ‘k.o. lizard, light-brown in colour’
                         moko hula         ‘earwig’ (hula ‘protuberant’?)
                         moko hunu         ‘sea slug’ (hunu ‘to singe’?)
                         moko-moko tu?aniu ‘mantis, stick insect’ (tu?aniu ‘midrib of coconut
                                           leaflet’)
                         moko tola         ‘shellfish’ (tola ‘snout’)
  Pn:     Hawaiian       mo?o              ‘lizard, reptile of any kind’
                         mo?o huelo-?awa   ‘scorpion’ (lit. ‘lizard with bitter tail’)
                         mo?o niho-?awa    ‘scorpion, viper, asp’ (lit. ‘lizard with bitter tooth’)
                                           (from a Bible translation)


418     Meredith Osmond


    In some Polynesian languages, small lizards and certain other creepy crawlies are lumped
together in a higher order taxon. POc *nf ala-m'` ata ‘worm’ is the diminutive of *m‘ata
‘snake’.[11] Note also Dobu (PT) didi mwana ‘common earthworms, small lizards’.

    Similarities in behaviour form the basis of other groupings. In Tamambo (NCV), the reflex
    of POc *(h,n)opuq ‘stonefish’ refers to ‘centipede or scorpion’ as well as ‘venomous
fish’. The semantic link is clearly ‘painful stinger’. The Polynesian language of Rennell has
extended the meaning of kutu (from POc *kutu ‘head louse’) to refer to ‘louse, bird louse,
mite, leech and tiny insects of various kinds’. The term has presumably come to mean ‘small
blood-sucker’, when no more specific reference is necessary. In Marquesan the reflex of POc
*quloc ‘maggot’, i?o, now refers to bugs and worms.

    Some languages have developed and named unusual groupings. For instance, the Motu
have a term, kikiri kikiri, which refers to ‘all creatures which live on the ground but jump or
fly short distances. Cicadas and hawk moths are kikiri kikiri. So are beetles that make noise’
(Nigel Oram n.d.). In Kwaio, there is a collective term, faʔalfulii, for edible insects.


7.26 Stability and variability of terms

A small number of POc insect names show far greater stability than others. In a survey of 25
dictionaries chosen on comprehensiveness and whose languages together covered all major
subgroups,[12] reflexes of kutu ‘louse’ were listed in 23, *laqo ‘fly’ in 22, *hamuk ‘mosquito’
in 21, *bebek ‘butterfly’ in 16, and *qapator ‘sago grub, edible’ in 13. In an email comment
on seahorse terms Robert Blust wrote that ‘The general principle for flora and fauna seems
to be that if it was economically useful or dangerous it was named, and the more useful
or dangerous the more stable the name historically.’[13] With insects, it seems that the more
intrusive in everyday life, the more commonplace and either pesky or valued they are, the
more likely they are to be known by highly stable terms.

    In contrast, it seems that unstable terms may be unstable for a variety of reasons. We
have a number of instances where it has proved very difficult to make any well-supported
reconstructions, and others where two or more reconstructions that differ only very slightly
in form have been made for an insect. Examples are:

[11] For an account of reduplication in Oceanic languages, see vol.3, ch.2, §7.2.

[12] The languages were Loniu, Lou (Adm). Gedaged. Manam (NNG), Motu (PT). Nakanai, Tolai, Roviana (MM).
Bugotu. Gela, Lau, Sa’a. Arosi (SES). Mota. Tamambo. Raga (NCV), Lenakel, Anejom (SV), Woleaian, Pu-
 luwatese (Mic), Wayan. Bauan (Fij). Tongan. Samoan. Tikopia (Pn).

[13] Blust’s comment appeared in the an-lang list on 8 May 1999.

                                                              Insects and other creepy-crowlies           419

__pre__
  butterfly        POc *[kau~\bebek, *kali-bobo(ij) , PPT *qara-bembem,
                   Proto NW Solomonic *pepele
  mosquito         POc *hamuk. *simuk
  sandfly          POc *niku-niku, * nonok, *ij/si
  mason wasp       POc *pupuk. * bubu
  wasp             POc *mahipo. ^(n,h)i(n,h)ipo, Proto Central Papuan * naniyo
  grasshopper      POc *sak way *siko\ POc *riija, PROc *lii]o
  ant              POc *drui, *\driu]drhp PWOc *didi
  spider           POc *ka(k,g)a, *koko„ PWOc *kuku y PEOc *koko-mici

The existence of taboo to limit use of a particular form to a particular area, has already been
suggested for ‘butterfly’ in §3, and may explain why this creature can have a name that is
very stable in most of the Oceanic region, yet be unstable in parts of Western Oceanic.

    Clearly, onomatopoeia plays a role in the naming of the humming and buzzing insects,
where there is frequent interchange of n. h and ŋ. Examples include POc *hamuk, PWOc
*qati-qati\)oth ‘mosquito’, POc * qhji(q) (1) ‘buzz as a mosquito’, (2) ‘mosquito’, *(n,h)i(n,h)i
‘bee, buzzing insect’.

    Irregular patterning of terms for insects has been attributed to the fact that many insects
are ‘expressive’ creatures. That is, they are associated with particular characteristics that impinge strongly on the human sensory system and become a significant identifying feature for
that insect. Characteristics include sound (crickets, cicadas, the buzzing insects), movement
(grasshoppers, butterflies, spiders), ability to sting or bite (mosquitoes, sandflies and other
stinging flies, centipedes, scorpions, ants) and possibly other aspects of appearance or behaviour. It has been claimed that it is their ‘expressive’ condition that underlies a tendency
for speakers to play phonological games with their names, resulting in irregularities that may
then defy reconstruction. This tendency has been observed cross-linguistically by Erik Fudge
(1970) in words of certain semantic type including onomatopoeia or movement, and in the
names of plants and animals in Balinese and the closely related Javanese by Adrian Clynes
(1995:44).


7.27 The supernatural element

Among my POc reconstructions, those carrying the *q ali-kali-l      prefix are limited to *[kali]~
bobo(ŋ) ‘butterfly’, *qalipan ‘centipede’ and *(qali-popotlk,q)ali-totop
‘firefly’. Ethnographic evidence from a number of communities indicates that all three creatures retain some
supernatural association requiring them to be treated with caution. I also have a number of
reconstructions at POc level or lower which may carry the prefix or some trace of it. They
include PPn *kalisi ‘cicada, cricket’, a number of ant terms possibly reflecting POc * kal(a,o),
two lizard terms, PSOc * qala ‘green lizard, Emoia sp.’, PEOc *kalis(i,u) ‘skink, k.o. lizard’
(see ch.5, §5.3.5), and a number of terms for ‘spider’ which carry the prefix ka-u However,
if my reconstructions do in fact carry a trace of the danger prefix, they have lost what was
evidently an essential element of *kali-lqali- words at a stage earlier than POc, that is, conversion
from the typical disyllabic base form to a quadrisyllable one. The prefix had ceased
to be productive in POc.

[14] Cf. Blust’s list of creatures marked with the prefix which include, inter alia, grasshopper, gecko, some ant
 spp. and some spider spp. (2001:37).

420    Meredith Osmond


     Nonetheless, it seems that in Polynesian languages there is a different term which can be
used to mark a creature as supernatural. PPn *qatua (from PMP * qatuari), often glossed ‘god,
deity’, is used primarily to signify that an object, whether human or non-human, has supernatural
qualities. In Williams’ Maori dictionary, the definition of atua runs ‘god, demon, supernatural being,
ghost; object of superstitious regard; anything malign, disagreeable; strange,
extraordinary’.15 Like qali-lkali-, its range in Polynesian languages extends to inexplicable
phenomena such as rainbows and waterspouts.[16]

     Examples of its use in Polynesia include Maori atua-piko ‘rainbow’ (cf PT: Kilivila kali-
pedoga ‘rainbow’), Tongan lotua-kui ‘whirlwind, waterspout’ (cf MM: Nakanai kali-vuru
‘tornado, waterspout’ and MM: Tolai kali-vuvur ‘whirlwind’), and a small number of insect terms,
Samoan atua-loa ‘k.o. centipede with poisonous bite’ (cf POc *qali-pan ‘centipede"} Maoripepe atua
‘northern wattle moth’ (literally ‘supernatural butterfly’) (cf. POc
*[kali]bobo(ŋ) ‘butterfly’) and two Rennellese terms, latua segesege bale ‘a large grasshopper’
(lit. ‘leg-cutting supernatural’) and latua-seu ‘large stinging stick insect’ (lit. Tame supernatural’).

     A detailed account of the way in which atua is linked to natural species in one community is
given by Firth (1967:233). In Tikopia, as in other Polynesian communities, atua
applies primarily to a supernatural object, whether human or non-human in form. However,
it is applied also to any natural species which should not be eaten. ‘The terms atua and kai
(food) in this connection are in fact mutually exclusive. The [former] applies to small crabs,
sea anemones, beche-de-mer and other marine creatures on the reef, as well as to iridescent
lizards, spiders and some insects.’ (p.233). He suggests ‘that the connotation of atua as inedible
may be derivative from its significance of supernatural" (p.234), (italics mine, MO). He
concludes that ‘one point, however, may be stressed with certainty, that any object which is
regarded as an atua may not be eaten, and anything which is fit for human consumption cannot be
in itself an atua— though it may ...become temporarily associated with atua" (p.234).
Among the creatures he lists as atua are two inedible crabs, kaviki ‘small pale land crab’ and
karamisi ‘reddish-brown or yellowish crab, [which] lives in crotch of tree’ (cf PMP *qali-
maŋaw ‘mangrove crab’). Also atua are moko, the black lizard, and morokau, the centipede.
In Tikopia, then, atua is not affixed to the names of natural species as it is in other Polynesian
communities and in the manner of qali-lkali-, but is rather the name of a category.

     The association of certain insects with the supernatural has survived from PAn society
right through to certain contemporary Polynesian societies. Although the qali-lkali- label has
evidently lost its force in Oceanic languages, the existence of reflexes of *qatuan in a similar
capacity is a revealing linguistic clue to certain beliefs of POc speakers.


[15] As the breadth of the Maori definition illustrates, the result of the long association of supernatural qualities
with certain creatures has led to its interpretation in a number of different ways, not all of them compatible with
Blust’s ‘danger: avoid’ message for PMP *qali-. In Rennellese (Pn), mogi ?atua refers to a ‘useless orange’,
perhaps an extension of meaning from ‘dangerous’ > ‘poisonous’ > merely ‘inedible’.

[16] Jeff Marek (1994) reconstructs PMic *auniari ‘whirlwind, waterspout’, based on, among others, Ponapean
 einiar ‘whirlwind’, Mortlockese awuniyar ‘whirlwind, tornado, rainbow’, Carolinian (l)ayuliyay ‘tornado’.
 Woleaian (r)auriyaza ‘rainbow’. Ulithian (l)olyor ‘rainbow’. He comments: ‘This may be analysable as *au-
ni-ari ‘atmosphere-of-?’ where *-ari had some as yet unreconstructed meaning along the lines of ‘troublesome,
fearful’ or whatever’ (p.310).




8 Were turtlesfish in Proto Oceanic? Semantic reconstruction and change in some terms for animal categories in Oceanic languages


|       __fish__. An animal that inhabits the water. (Samuel Johnson, English dictionary, 1755)

|       The whale, the limpet, the tortoise, and the oyster...as men have been willing to give
|       them all the name of fishes, it is wisest to conform. (Oliver Goldsmith, ca 1760)


8.1 Introduction

8.1.1 Aims

This chapter investigates the semantic histories of five Proto Oceanic terms, *ikcm, *pinaijoda,
*sisiq, *manuk and *marru-manuk, each of which is a candidate for the status of a high-level
generic or ‘life form’ in the POc taxonomy of animals.[1] In certain contemporary Oceanic
languages reflexes of * ikan have a range of reference that encompasses fish and other large
water-dwelling animals (cetaceans, dugongs, turtles and crocodiles), reflexes of *pinaijoda
encompass reef invertebrates, or sea animals other than fish and large water-dwelling animals,
reflexes of *sisiq refer to gastropod (snail-like) shellfish, reflexes of *manuk refer to
birds and bats, and reflexes of * manu-manuk to insects and other creepy-crawlies (spiders,
centipedes, worms, etc.). However, in other Oceanic languages these etyma have reflexes
with quite different ranges of reference. For example, in some cases the *manuk reflex includes
not just birds and bats but all flying creatures, in others it includes all land-dwelling
creatures or all creatures other than humans, in still others it includes humans, and there are
some where it includes all objects. In many languages the sisiq reflex refers just to a small
class of small gastropods (nerites and similar) while in others it includes all gastropods or all
shellfish.

[1] I am indebted to Frank Lichtenberk. John Lynch, Meredith Osmond. Malcolm Ross and Anna Wierzbicka
 for valuable comments on a draft of this paper, to John Lynch for pointing to additional Vanuatu and New
 Caledonian comparisons, and to Paul Geraghty, Frank Lichtenberk and the late Nigel Oram, for providing
 information about the generic terms for ‘fish’ in Standard Fijian, To’aba’ita and Motu, respectively.

422   Andrew Pawley


    The aim here is to determine, as far as possible, the range of reference of these five terms
in POc, their place in the taxonomy, and the nature of the changes that have occurred in
daughter languages. The task of reconstructing their semantic histories raises some questions
of more general interest: Are the variations in the meanings of major generics across daughter
languages random or do they follow an implicational scale, a natural sequence of semantic
extension or contraction? Why have such marked differences arisen in the semantic scope of
these terms? Can some of the changes be attributed, for example, to differences in the range
of animal life encountered by different communities?


8.1.2 Methodological preliminaries

Before we examine the Oceanic terms in question it is necessary to discuss some issues of
method and conceptual framework. The semantics of folk taxonomies is a notoriously tricky
domain, not one that one should enter without a map.

    A first consideration is the nature of the analytic apparatus needed to make sense of folk
taxonomies and the task of choosing between competing frameworks. This leads into questions about
how different kinds of classificatory terms differ in their semantic structure and
their role in the taxonomy. Another concern, of a more practical kind, relates to which kinds
of semantic information, which components of lexical meaning it is feasible to deal with when
trying to reconstruct the semantic history of classificatory terms. Finally, there is the problem
that most definitions of classificatory terms in Oceanic dictionaries, our main sources of data,
suffer from serious shortcomings.

8.1.2.1 What are taxonomies?

A well-formed taxonomy is a system of semantic relations between lexical units that has the
following properties:[2] (i) Certain taxa stand in a class-inclusion or superordinate-hyponym
relation. Thus, the statement A is afox terrier unilaterally entails that X is a dog, which in turn
entails X is an animal. That is, fox terrier is a hyponym of dog, which in turn is a hyponym
of animal, (ii) Certain lexical units stand in a relation of incompatibility or contrast. Thus the
statementɪ is a fox terrier entails X is not a labrador, alsatian or poodle, and the statement
X is a dog entails X is not a cat, seal or bear, (iii) the hyponyms of a term X are natural
kinds of X. Thus, it can be said that a fox terrier is a kind of dog and a dog is a kind of
animal. A natural kind typically has many defining features (see §1.2.2) but all other features
are subordinate to the one that defines its place in the taxonomy, the fact that it is a kind of
something (a sparrow is a kind of bird, a dog is a kind of animal, a trout is a kind of fish).

    The relation implied by ‘natural kind’ is not identical to ‘class-inclusion’ or ‘hyponymy’.
Not all hyponyms are natural kinds. Some are ‘nominal kinds’, e.g. spinster, bachelor, mare,
ewe, ram. Unlike natural kinds, contrasts between nominal kinds can be readily defined,
approximately, in an analytic way in terms of just a few features, e.g. bachelor = man who
has never married, spinster = woman who has never married, ewe = adult female sheep,
ram = adult male sheep. It follows that the semantic difference between nominal hyponyms
of the same set can be expressed analytically, as e.g. the difference between bachelor and
spinster or ram and ewe. It is not a dominant feature of nominal terms that they are kinds of
something. Although one can say a spinster is a woman, a mare is a horse, a ram is a sheep
it is questionable whether it makes sense to say a spinster is a kind of woman, a mare is a
kind of horse, or a ram is a kind of sheep.

[2] The discussion that follows draws heavily on Cruse (1986) and Wierzbicka (1984, 1996).

                                                           Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?   423



8.1.2.2 Defining natural kinds

Natural kinds cannot readily be defined analytically. For example, the difference between dog
and bird cannot be reduced to one or two distinguishing features: the two differ in indefinitely
many ways. It is not clear how one should answer a question like: What is the meaning of
dog? Apart from mentioning that dogs are a kind of animal, should a definition say that they
have four legs and a tail, are furry, are carnivorous, bark and howl, have a very keen sense of
smell, are pack animals, that people have selectively bred them to create many breeds, and
keep them as pets, and for hunting game, rounding up sheep and cattle, and guarding property,
that they are not eaten (at least in English-speaking societies), and so on? What about
the meaning of‘bird’? Should a definition mention all and only the universally valid morphological
attributes, that birds have feathers and two legs, two wings (some only vestigial) and
a beak, and that they lay eggs? Which if any behavioural characteristics should it mention:
that birds typically fly (not all do), that they make nests (not all do), that they have diverse
calls, that many male and female pairs mate for life, that they are typically wild creatures but
some species are domesticated, and so on?

     Dictionary-makers typically baulk at the task of defining all the things that may distinguish
natural kinds and are content to pick out just a few salient characteristics. For example,
The Macquarie Dictionary defines dog, in its primary sense, as ‘a domesticated carnivore,
Canis famiHaris, bred in a great many varieties’. The definition of cat is almost identical,
save for the Latin name: ‘a domesticated carnivore, Felis domestica (or F. catus), widely
distributed in a number of breeds’. And dictionary definitions of terms of folk generic and
life-form rank largely reflect scientific knowledge, not folk knowledge. Macquarie defines
bird as ‘any of the Aves, a class of warm-blooded vertebrates, having a body more or less
completely covered with feathers, and the forelimbs modified so as to form wings by which
means most species fly’. As Anna Wierzbicka has repeatedly pointed out, such definitions
are quite unsatisfactory as an account of folk knowledge about what these kinds of animals
are.

8.1.2.3 The taxonomic ranks and naming principles proposed by Berlin (1992)

Folk taxonomies must have at least two levels but can have many levels, as indicated by the
sequence: berkshire > pig > animal > creature, or pinnacle fioribunda > floribunda rose >
rose > flower > plant. One way of distinguishing the levels is to refer to them as primary,
secondary, tertiary, etc. or as first-order, second-order, third-order, etc.


424   Andrew Pawley


    Instead of speaking of levels in a folk taxonomy in this way, Brent Berlin and his associates
propose that taxa at each level be given rank status in a way that broadly parallels the
taxonomic ranks of Western biology (Berlin 1992, Berlin et al. 1973). Building on earlier
work, Berlin (1992) also specifies some general principles of nomenclature. While the system of
naming practices is distinct from the taxonomy, the two are systematically related so
that we can often infer the taxonomic relations between particular taxa from the way they
are named. A key nomenclatural distinction is between uninomials (orprimary lexemes) and
binomials or {secondary lexemes). Binomials are multiword names in which one element
modifies the head noun, and where the head noun can stand alone as a generic name, e.g.
rock crab, mud crab, hammerhead shark, white- pointer shark). A uninomial consists of a
single morpheme, such as herring or perch, or a compound or phrase that is idiomatic, such
as the type of hammerhead or leatherjacket, where no element can stand alone as a generic
term (there is no category of fish called head orjacket), or the type of sea hare, sea cow and
seahorse (the creatures so named are not a kind of hare, cow or horse).

     The following is a summary of the system of rank distinctions in folk taxonomies, and
generalisations about nomenclature given in Berlin (1992).

     Most taxa belong to one of three ranks: life form, folk generic or folk specific.

     __Life-form__. A life-form is a taxon that (i) distinguishes a distinctive morphotype which
(ii) includes many (sometimes hundreds) of lower order taxa which share the characteristic
morphology and ecological adaptation of the type, (iii) is not included in any other taxon
other than kingdom, and (iv) is named by a uninomial. Examples of English life-form taxa
arefish, bird, snake, tree andflower. The nature of categories that rank as life-forms may vary
across speech communities, usually in ways connected with regional differences in flora and
fauna and in the ways of life of communities. For example, for people in the central Pacific,
shellfish are a much more numerous and more important category than snakes, or even birds,
but the reverse is the case in many regions of the world.

     __Folk generic__. A folk generic (or folk genus) is a ‘natural’ category in several senses,
one perceptual, the others linguistic. First, the members of this category are usually marked
off from non-members by multiple characters of morphology and behaviour or ecological
adaptation that will be evident to any close observer. Second, unlike folk species, the category
is named by a uninomial rather than a binomial. Examples of English folk generics are rose,
oak, beech, blackbird, pig, dog, frog, toad, mullet, trout, whale, crocodile. Third, the folk
generic is the usual way of referring to a particular plant or animal if its identity is known.
Depending on various factors, a folk genus may correspond to a single species in biological
taxonomies, to a number of species or a genus, or to a number of genera or families. Many folk
generics are subtaxa of life forms but Berlin recognises a category of unaffiliated generics,
first-order taxa that do not belong to any life-form but are not themselves life-forms.

     __Folk species__. A folk genus sometimes further divides into folk species (or folk specifics),
usually just a few taxa which contrast in a limited number of features with other members
of the generic. Such specifics are usually the lowest-level taxa. Berlin (1992) holds that folk
species names usually consist of the generic name plus a modifier, e.g. red mullet vs grey
mullet, or mako shark vs hammerhead shark. Bulmer (1970, 1974), however, finds that a fair
number of animal folk species, among the Kalam people of the New Guinea highlands, are
named by primary lexemes (uninomials).

     Three other ranks are sometimes distinguished in folk taxonomies.

     __Kingdom__. A single primary (first-order) taxon - one that subsumes all life-form taxa and
other taxa in the relevant semantic domain or class. Names for taxa of kingdom rank will be
uninomials. For some English speakers, whose perceptions have been influenced by scientific
taxonomies,plant and animal qualify as kingdom rank taxa, subsuming various life forms. In
vernacular speech, traditionally, these two terms have narrower meanings. However, in most
societies, folk classifications of living things lack overt taxa of kingdom rank.

                                                          Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?         425


    __Intermediate__. A taxon which (i) is a member of a life-form (and so is never a first-order
taxon) and (ii) comprises a small number of folk generics that show marked similarities to
each other and often correspond to botanical or zoological families. If an intermediate taxon
has a name, it will be a uninomial. However, Berlin says that intermediate taxa are generally
not named, i.e. they are usually ‘covert taxa’, whose unity is indicated by other means than
sharing a class name. For some English speakers, horses, zebras and donkeys form such a
covert category, as do hawks, falcons and eagles.

    __Varietal__. Under certain conditions, folk species can divide into lower order taxa, contrasting in subtle ways with other varieties. Distinctions between varietal taxa mainly apply
to domesticated plants and animals - and so may be motivated mainly by cultural considerations. The names are usually compounds.

    For larger animals and some kinds of plants, at the level of the genus and often at the
level of the species, the distinctions made by communities living close to nature tend to be
similar to those made by Western biologists. The similarities at the genus/species levels are
usually explained as follows. These categories are marked by many distinctive features and
are as obvious to any close observer of nature as they are to highly trained biologists.

    At higher levels the methods and motives underpinning folk and scientific classifications
tend to diverge and therefore so do the categories. The higher you go, either in a folk taxonomy or
a scientific taxonomy, the less the taxa are likely to conform to ‘natural kinds’. Western
biologists aim to capture the evolutionary relationships of organisms, a concern peculiar
to science. Ordinary people, on the other hand, impose higher order categories on cultural
grounds, be they pragmatic or cosmological. Sometimes the grounds for grouping different
kinds of organisms are broad likenesses in form and behaviour. For example, it is fairly common to
find a taxon that subsumes both birds and bats, or both fish and whales. In other cases,
social factors (e.g. ritual restrictions and taboos) and technological or economic factors (e.g.
techniques used to obtain or process foods) peculiar to a society influence the grouping.

8.1.2.4 Taxonomic generics vs collectives

Wierzbicka (1984, 1996) has advanced methodological objections to certain claims made by
anthropologists, linguists and psychologists about the nature and membership of categories
in folk taxonomies. She points out that people’s intuitions about category membership can’t
reliably be established by asking them simple questions like ‘Is X a kind of Y?’ or by asking
them to sort cards with pictures. Instead you need to find out how people talk spontaneously
about such matters and to apply a variety of linguistic tests designed to bring out people’s
tacit knowledge.[3]


[3] Berlin (1992) and Wierzbicka (1994, 1996) argue strongly against the position taken by some commentators
 that a hierarchy of kinds is absent from or marginal to folk biological classifications.

426    Andrew Pciwley


    Wierzbicka has argued persuasively for a distinction between true generic taxonomic
terms and collectives, a distinction that will prove to be relevant to our discussion of Oceanic
generics. For her, collectives are not taxonomic terms, at least not in the same sense as true
generics. She discusses the properties of English terms like animal, bird, fish and flower, in
popular speech, that clearly mark them as being ‘ super taxonomic categories’, or ‘life forms’.
Each of these terms stands for kinds of things that are alike, a category based on perceptual
similarities, something you can draw a picture of schematically, something you can count
individually. She contrasts taxonomic generics with collectives like livestock, game (animals'),
fruit, grass, vegetables, cutlery and furniture. Unlike true generics, these don’t stand
for kinds of things that are alike. A collective is a heterogeneous collection of kinds that share
a common function or some other feature(s). Wierzbicka says that you can draw a generalised
picture of a fish or bird but not a generalised picture of fruit or cutlery.. One can have an
exchange such as Look at that colourfulfish there? - Which one? - The one with yellow stripes,
\)WLook at that big livestock there? - Which one? - The brown and white one, is bizarre. You
can’t count individual objects using a collective: *1 saw one fruit!livestock/furnitureIcutlery.
I saw one fruit is only acceptable in a more abstract sense: I saw one kind offruit, not in the
sense I saw one individual fruit (e.g. one apple)

    This distinction between natural kinds and collectives will prove to be relevant in our
discussion of Oceanic generics.

8.1.2.5 Problems inherent in the semantics of generics

For any generic term, the assumption that there is a single correct definition of its semantic
range that can be uncovered by careful research is itself questionable. The fact is that members
of a speech community often do not agree completely as to the scope of generics. The kind
of variation is of the kind predicted by prototype theory (Rosch 1973, 1975a,b). Generally
people agree on the membership of typical members of a class but disagree when it comes
to marginal members. The definitions given in dictionaries tend to understate the amount of
variation within the speech community.

    Consider, for example, English speakers’ use of the termfish. The Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary (SOED) makes a sharp distinction between popular and scientific definitions of
this term.

|       __Fish 1__. In [popular] language, any animal living exclusively in water, including cetaceans,
|       crustaceans, molluscs, etc. In scientific language any vertebrate animal provided with
|       gills throughout life, and cold-blooded: the limbs, if present being modified into fins.

     Johnson’s definition and Goldsmith’s observations, quoted at the head of this chapter,
show the prevalence of this popular usage in 18th century England. However, a mere two-
way contrast between popular and scientific usage is surely an over-simplification. A survey
of several hundred Australian informants shows that while everyone agrees on including
prototypical fish there is much variation in regard to what other creatures count as fish. Some
English speakers exclude eels, sharks, rays, seahorses and certain other ‘atypical’ fish from
this category while others include whales and dolphins and even crayfish and jellyfish.

     A similar problem arises with ‘shellfish’. Most English dictionaries give definitions similar to the following, taken from the SOED'.

|       __shellfish__ any animal living in water whose outer covering is a shell, whether testaceous,
|       as an oyster, or crustaceous, as a crab.

The problem here is that for many native speakers of English, especially those who are not
from the USA, shellfish refers only to edible molluscs with shells and does not include crabs,
lobsters and prawns.


                                                               Were turtlesfish in Proto Oceanic?           427


    A further difficulty is that directly questioning informants about classification - ‘Are
butterflies a kind of insect?’, ‘Are eels a kind of fish?’ - is likely to yield unreliable answers.
While these are legitimate questions there are other, more reliable ways of getting
at class membership. One such consists of spontaneous utterances that contain information
about class membership: ‘What a beautiful insect! Is it a beetle?’, ‘Kiwis are strange-looking
birds’. Lexical evidence is another valuable source, e.g. is it possible, or usual for a referent
to be named by a true binomial expression, consisting of a generic with an identifying modifier:
sulphur-crested cockatoo, rock cod, oak tree, white pine, grey wolf? Unacceptability or
unacceptability of particular logical relations is yet another useful test. Thus, I saw cats and
dogs is an acceptable conjunction in English but I saw animals and dogs is not. All English
speakers would probably accept They netted tenfish and a turtle, while rejecting They netted
ten fish, including two turtles. But They netted ten fish and two eels or They netted ten fish
and two sharks might yield diverse judgments.

     It is important to recognize that speakers often distinguish two or more senses of generic
terms, some with narrower reference, others with wider reference. English animal is an example.
There are some contexts, in popular speech, where animal denotes a category that
includes, roughly, mammals, four-legged reptiles and frogs but not birds, fish or invertebrates.
There are other contexts where it includes all creatures other than humans. And there
are still other contexts where it includes humans (‘Humans are different from the rest of the
animal kingdom’).

8.1.2.6 A modest objective

Although I see the merit of Wierzbicka’s argument that definitions of a folk category should
try to capture as fully as possible folk perceptions and knowledge about that category, the
data to hand for Oceanic languages do not allow us to pursue such an objective (see §1.2.7).
My concern with definitions in this chapter is more modest: to find the referential range
of a category, the kinds of animals that speakers of a language include in it, where ‘kinds’
can be defined in biological terms (whether this be simply the species, genus, family, etc.
recognised by biologists, or features of morphology or behaviour that allow us to identify
biological categories, such as a folk taxon that consists of birds and bats).

    This objective might seem straightforward enough. But it is not, for reasons outlined in
the following section.

8.1.2.7 Shortcomings of dictionary definitions

For anyone wishing to compare taxonomies of flora and fauna in Oceanic languages a serious
problem is the poor quality of definitions provided in dictionaries and other sources. Ideally,
the taxonomies of a language should be inferable from information given in the dictionary.[4]

[4] Almost fifty years ago Conklin (1962:144) laid down a set of desiderata for dictionaries, especially for the
 provision of systematic information about folk taxonomies. (Conklin had bilingual dictionaries in mind but the
 same standards should apply to monolingual dictionaries.) Ideally, a dictionary should provide:
 __ol__
    1. consistent marking of each entry as to its status as a lexical unit and taxon, its immediately subordinate
       taxa and superordinate taxon, and all coordinate taxa included with it in this next higher taxon...;
    2. differential marking of translation labels and of definitions;
    3. concise indication of distinctive attributes which define categories belonging to analysed lexical sets:
    4. systematic cross-referencing to maximal taxa in all major subhierarchies, to referential synonyms, and
       to all units involved in categoric overlap; and
    5. frequent use of structural charts and diagrams.

428   Andrew Pawley


The definitions we find often betray the fact that the definer has not carefully investigated
the range of reference of a term or variations in the way different speakers use that term.

    For example, many Oceanic dictionaries give a bare gloss, ‘general term for fish’, or
simply ‘fish’, without mentioning which kinds of creatures are included. Such a simple gloss
is unhelpful for two reasons. First, the meaning of the English term ‘fish’ is itself imprecise:
as noted above, it does not have the same range for all native speakers of English. Second, if
a dictionary simply defines term X as ‘fish’ we have no assurance that the dictionary-maker
has systematically investigated the semantic range of X.

     A slightly different sort of gap is exemplified by an entry in Dixon’s (1970) dictionary of
Dobuan, a Papuan Tip language, which glosses iyana as ‘fish, including alligators’. Leaving
aside the detail that alligators but not crocodiles are found in New Guinea waters, we are
left wondering what else besides fish and crocodiles counts as iyana. Lithgow’s dictionary
of Muyuw, another Papuan Tip language, is a bit more informative, offering yin ‘fish, turtles, crocodiles, but not shellfish’. But again, we are not told whether, say, eels, cetaceans,
dugongs, and octopus count as fish.

     In the case of major generics, different sources for the same language often offer conflicting
definitions. The standard dictionary of Motu (Lister-Turn er and Clark 1954) glosses
gwarume simply as ‘fish’. However, Nigel Oram, who looked into the matter in some detail,
obtained a different and narrower definition of this term from his informants, namely ‘fish,
excluding sharks, rays, eels, and also excluding cephalopods’ (Oram, field notes). Capell’s
(1941) dictionary of Standard Fijian (based on the Bauan dialect of Eastern Fijian) glosses
ika as ‘fish’, overlooking the fact that the Fijian term has a broader sense that includes turtles,
dolphins and whales (P. Geraghty, pers. comm.).

     Fox’s (1955) dictionary of Gela (Gela) defines iga as a class name for any kind of sea
creature: ‘sea creature: fish, mollusc, crayfish, whale, squid, sea anemone, etc.’. However,
in his study of Gela fishing the zoologist Simon Foale (1998) distinguishes two uses of iga:
‘bony and cartiligenousfish’ vs ‘all fish, whales, dolphins, dugongs, turtles, crocodiles’.
Neither definition exactly matches Fox’s. (Foale’s definition of the second, extended sense does
not include squid, (shelled) molluscs, crayfish or anemones.) Do such differences reflect variation
among informants or less than exhaustive enquiry on the part of the authors, or a bit of
both?

     A further problem is that dictionaries, quite understandably, seldom provide a corpus of
examples showing how a term is used in everyday discourse. Such a corpus would, among
other things, help us decide whether a particular term is a true taxonomic generic rather than
a collective.

     With all these sobering considerations in mind, let us turn to the several POc terms and
their reflexes.


8.2 POc *ikan

8.2.1 Introduction

POc *ikan, roughly glossable as ‘fish’, is an extremely well-supported reconstruction, which
continues PAn * Sikan ‘fish’ and PMP *ikan ‘fish’ (Blust 1995). What is less clear is what
kinds of creatures counted as *ikan for POc speakers, and/or whether * ikan had two distinct
senses, one with narrower and the other with broader ranges of reference.

                                                           Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?       429

__pre__
      Table 8.1         Implicational scale of types that may be included in reflexes of *ikan
     (1)    typical fish
     (2)    1 + sharks and rays
     (3)    2 + cetaceans (whales, dolphins) and dugongs
     (4)    3 + eels
     (5)    4+ turtles
     (6)    5 + crocodiles
     (7)    6 + cephalopods (octopus, squid, etc.)
     (8)    7 + decapod crustaceans (crabs, crayfish, prawns and their relatives)
     (9)    8 + other aquatic invertebrates (molluscs with shells, sea hares, nudibranchs,
            echinoderms, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, jellyfish, etc.)


    All Oceanic languages have a generic term that can be translated roughly by English
‘fish’ and typically this term is a reflex of POc *ikan. However, the scope of this generic
varies considerably from language to language. A first comparison of definitions across the
group indicates that if ‘typical fish’ are taken as the core members of the class, extensions
to include other kinds of creatures can be ordered along an implicational scale roughly as in
Table 8.1, bearing in mind that while most creatures of types (1-9) occur throughout much of
the Pacific, certain animals, such as dugongs and crocodiles, have more restricted ranges.

    Thus, the hypothesis is that if a language includes only one other group of animals in the
generic for ‘fish’ it will generally be sharks and rays and the next group to be included will
usually be cetaceans together with dugongs (if present) and after that will come eels, then
turtles, and so on. Let us refer to those generics whose semantic scope is restricted to (1) as
‘grade 1’, those restricted to (2) as ‘grade 2’, and so on.

    If this hypothesis were correct it would mean that the definition of Dobuan iyana as ‘fish,
including alligators’ entails that sharks, rays, eels, cetaceans, turtles and cephalopods are
also subsumed under iyana. In the same vein, the definition of Muyuwjv// as ‘fish, turtles,
crocodiles, but not shellfish’ implies that eels, cetaceans, dugongs, and octopus count as jv//.

     The following discussion compares dictionary definitions of reflexes of POc *ikan for
various groups of Oceanic languages. These comparisons are generally followed by tables
that make the dictionary definitions directly comparable by reformulating them in terms of
the presence or absence of particular classes of referents.


8.2.2 Reflexes of *ikan

8.2.2.1 Central Pacific

Relatively detailed definitions of reflexes of *ikan are available for many Central Pacific
languages.

430    Andrew Pawley


__pre__
 Fijian and Rotuman
     Rotuman      iʔa                  ‘fish, turtles, whales, alligators, etc but not crabs or shell                                       fish, etc’
      Wayan          ika           (i) ‘typical fish, true fish. This category includes sharks,
      (W. Fijian)                  rays and eels. syn. ika du “true fish’”,
                                   (2) ‘fish, including cetaceans, turtles and, for many
                                   speakers, octopus and squid’
                     ika-bula      ‘turtle (generic)’
                     ika du        ‘the green turtle, Chelonia mydcts' (lit. ‘true fish’)
      Bauan          ika           ‘fish, including eels, plus turtles, cetaceans,
                                   cephalopods’ (P. Geraghty pers. comm.)
 Polynesian
    Tongan           ika           ‘fish, turtles, whales but not eels, cuttlefish or jellyfish’
                     ika mui       ‘male turtle’
                     ika matu      ‘tender part of turtle near front paddles’
      Niuean         ika           ‘fish, whales and dolphins’
      Niutoputapu    ika           ‘fish (including eels), turtles, cetaceans, and
                                   cephalopods’
      Tahitian       iʔa           ‘fish, porpoise, whale, turtle, octopus’
      Hawaiian       iʔa           ‘fish or any marine animal, e.g. eel, oyster, crab, whale’
      Ifira-Mele     ika           ‘fish, whale, porpoise but not turtles, eels or octopus’
      Tikopia        ika           ‘general category with primary reference to fish but including allied creatures, e.g. turtle, cetaceans’, [turtles
                                   are classified both as ika and as paka ‘crabs and other
                                   shelled creatures’]
      Rennellese     ika           ‘fish, turtle’
      Samoan         iʔa           ‘fish plus turtles and whales (and perhaps others)’ (Milner)
                                   ‘the general name for fishes (except the bonito), molluscs
                                   and crustaceans’ (Pratt)
                     iʔa-mdnu      ‘whale’ (lit. ‘floating fish’) (Milner)
                     iʔa-sd        ‘turtle’ (lit. ‘sacred fish’) (Milner, Pratt)
                     iʔa-vai       (1) ‘eel’; (2) ‘fresh-water fish’ (Pratt)
      Tokelauan      ika           ‘fish, turtle’
                     ika-fafine,   ‘female turtle’
                     ika-fua
                     ika-tagd      ‘male turtle’


    The only Central Pacific dictionary that distinguishes between a narrow sense of the *ikan
reflex, including only ‘true fish’ and a broader sense, including other large marine creatures,
is Wayan Fijian. The Wayan dictionary contains these example sentences: Na siihiana ika ni
qwara, ei tarn tia ika dii. ‘The octopus is a fish living in holes; it is not a true fish. Na ika du
ei vakalaulau. True fish have tails.’

    The semantic range exhibited by these definitions is summarised in Table 8.2. Here and
in later tables the following conventions are used to indicate whether or not the class of
referents listed at the head of each column is included in the meaning: ‘+’ = included, ‘-’ =
excluded, ‘ (+)’ = there is disagreement among speakers, and/or certain members of the class
are included, others excluded, and ‘7’ indicates that sources do not say whether or not the
referent is included.

                                                               Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?       431


__pre__
   Table 8.2       Semantic range of reflexes of *ikan in Central Pacific languages
                typical       shark,    whale,                    octopus, crusta­   shelled    Grade
                                                   eel turtle
                   fish         ray     dolphin                    squid     cean    mollusc
Rotuman             +            +         +       +       +            ?        -       -      5 or 6
Fijian
Bauan               +            +         +       +       +           +         -       -        6
Wayan 1.            +            +         +       +       +           (+)       -       -      5 or 6
Way an 2.           +            +         -       +       -            -        -       -       2,4
Polynesian
Tongan              +            +         +       -       +           -         -       -        4
Niuean              +            +         +       ?       -           -         -       -      3 or 4
Niuatopu.           +            +         +       +       +           +         -       -        6
Tahitian            +            +         +       +       +           +         -       -        6
Hawaiian            +            +         +       +       ?           +         +       +         8
Samoan              +            +         +       ?       ?           -         -       -       3-5
Tokelauan           +            +         ?       ?       +           -         -       -         5
Tikopia             +            +         +       -       +           ?         -       -        Jo
Rennellese          +            +         ?       ?       +           -         -       -         5
Ifira-Mele          +            +         +       -       -           -         -       -        Jo

Note: Crocodiles or dugongs are not present in Triangle Polynesian or Fijian waters,
although they are known to some Polynesian Outlier communities in Melanesia.


__pre__
                   Table 8.3          Semantic range of *ikan in PPn and PCP
            typical     shark,       whale,             octopus, crusta- shelled
                                             eel turtle                                      Grade
              fish        ray        dolphin             squid    cean mollusc
   PPn         +          +            +       ?       +   ~~(+)             ”       -       5 or 6
   PCP         +          +            +       +       +         (+)                 -       5 or 6

432    Andrew Pawley


    The Polynesian languages cited here agree fairly well in their range of referents. Leaving
aside cases where the definition is uninformative on this point, reflexes of *ikan always
include not only typical fish but also sharks, rays and cetaceans. Most (six out of eight) also
include turtles. Most (all but one) exclude crusteaceans and molluscs with shells. The main
area of disagreement concerns eels (three languages include them, three exclude them) and
cephalopods (three include them, six exclude them). The most reasonable historical inference is
that Proto Polynesian (PPn) *ika embraced sharks and rays, cetaceans and turtles.
The status of eels and cephalopods in the PPn taxonomy is less certain.

    Rotuman and the Fijian languages agree in including eels and cephalopods, as well as
sharks and rays, cetaceans and turtles, and in excluding crustaceans and molluscs with shells.
Table 8.3 proposes likely semantic profdes for PPn and Proto Central Pacific.

8.2.2.2 Micronesian

Details follow of reflexes oi*ikan in five Micronesian languages for which quite informative
definitions are available. The semantic range exhibited by these definitions is summarised in
Table 8.4.

__pre__
 Kiribati       ika        ‘fish: all swimming marine creatures including turtles, dugong,
                           whales and porpoises, but not squid or octopus’
 Marshallese ek            ‘fish’ (Abo et al. 1976) However, in the English-Marshallese finder
                           list, under ‘fish’, the authors list terms for ‘dolphin’, ‘giant octopus’,
                           and ‘jellyfish’ as well as ‘shark’, ‘eel’, but not ‘whale’ or ‘turtle’
 Carolinian         ix     ‘generic term for fish’ (Jackson and Marek 1991). However, in the
                           English-Carolinian finder list, under ‘fish’, the authors list terms for
                           ‘porpoise’, ‘whale’, ‘octopus’, ‘sea urchin’, ‘starfish’, ‘sea cucumber’, as well as ‘eel’, ‘shark’ and ‘ray’, though not ‘turtle’
 Woleaian       ixar       ‘fish’ (Sohn and Tawerilmang 1976). However, in the English-
                           Woleaian finder list, under ‘fish’, the authors list terms for ‘dolphin’,
                           whale’ as well as ‘eel’, ‘shark’ and ‘ray’, though not ‘turtle’, ‘ octopus’ or ‘squid’.
 Puluwatese yik,           ‘fish, porpoises and whales but not squid’
            yikan


__pre__
                Table 8.4       Semantic range of *ikan in Micronesian languages
                         typical shark, whale,             octopus, erusta- shelled
                                                eel turtle                                 Grade
                           fish   ray   dolphin             squid    cean mollusc
      Kiribati             +       +        +      +    +        —        —         —         5
      Marshallese          +       +        +      +    ?        +        -         -       4, 6
      Carolinian           +       +        +      +    -        +        -         -       4+
      Woleaian             +       +        +      +    ?        ?        —         —       4+
      Puluwatese           +       +        +      ?    ?        -        -         -        3+


                                                           Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?    433

     All the languages sampled typically exclude turtles, molluscs and crustaceans. Some
definitions include eels and cetaceans but others are indeterminate.

8.2.2.3 Southeast Solomonic and Northwest Solomonic

Informative definitions are available for a few Oceanic languages of the Solomon Islands.
Among the following, all belong to the SE Solomonic group except Marovo, which is NW
Solomonic. For each of Lau and Gela, two definitions are given, from different sources.

__pre__
 Arosi           iʔa         ‘fish, including sharks, rays; also porpoises, and possibly other marine animals’
 Lau             iʔa         ‘fish, any sea creature’ (Fox 1955)
 Lau             iʔa         (i) ‘typical fish, sharks and rays’; (2) ‘extended to include large marine animals such as porpoises, whales, dugongs’ (Akimichi)
 To’aba’ita      iʔa         ‘fish, sharks, rays, dolphins, whales, dugongs, turtles’ (F. Lichtenberk pers. comm.)
 Gela            iya         ‘sea creature: fish, mollusc, crayfish, whale, squid, sea anemone,
                             etc.’ (Fox)
 Gela            iya         (1) ‘bony and cartiligenous fish’; (2) ‘all fish, whales, dolphins,
                             dugongs, turtles, crocodiles’ (Foale)
 Marovo          iyana       ‘generic for all free-swimming creatures, e.g. fish, eels, stingrays,
                             dolphins, whales, squid, jellyfish’

    It can be seen that the witnesses largely agree in including sharks, rays, eels, turtles,
cephalopods and crocodiles, virtually all free swimming aquatic creatures. Fox’s definitions
for Lau and Gela are extreme in including all marine organisms.

8.2.2.4 Vanuatu

There are few informative definitions for reflexes of *ikan in Vanuatu languages.

__pre__
 Mota             iya                  ‘fish’

__pre__
                Table 8.5      Semantic range of *ikan in Solomon Islands languages
                   typical    shark,   whale,             croc­ octopus, crusta­ shelled
                                               eel turtle                                     Grade
                     fish       ray    dolphin            odile  squid    cean mollusc
 Arosi                  +       +          +    ?     ?      ?       ?        ?        ?          3
 Lau (Fox)              +       +          +    +     +      +       +        +        +          9
 Lau (Akm)              +       +          +    +     ?      ?       ?        ?        ?         4+
 To’aba’ita             +       +          +    +     +      -       -        -        -          5
 Gela (Fox)             +       +          +    +     +      +       +        +        +          9
 Gela (Foa.)            +       +          +    +     +      +       ?        ?        ?         6+
 Marovo                 +       +          +    +     +      +       +        -        +          7


434    Andrew Pawley

__pre__
                  Table 8.6        Semantic range of ‘fish’ terms in Vanuatu languages
                         typical   shark.    whale,             octopus, crusta­ shelled
                                                     eel turtle                               Grade
                           fish     ray      dolphin             squid    cean mollusc
      NE Ambae             +        (+)         +      -     -       -        -        -        3
      Raga                 +         +          +      -     ?       -        -        -        3
      Anejom               +         +          +      +     +       +        +        -        7
      Paamese              +         +          +      +     +       +        +        +        8



__pre__
 NE Ambae                                 ‘typical fishes, rays and dolphins, but not sharks and
                                          whales (which are grouped together), eels or cephalopods’
                                          (C. Hyslop, pers. comm.)
 Raga              ixe                    ‘fish, including whales and porpoises but not eels,
                                          seasnakes, octopus, squid, cuttlefish, jellyfish or balolo
                                          worms’
 cf. also:
 Anejom            namu                   ‘fish, including sharks, eels, cetaceans, turtle, octopus
                                          and squid, and crustaceans but not molluscs with shells’
                                          (J. Lynch pers. comm.)
 Paamese           meson                  (i) ‘fish (syn. ai)\ (2) ‘any sea dweller incl. turtles, dol                                          phins, shellfish’
 Tamambo           manji tarusa           ‘fish and shellfish’ (manji ‘animal, including fish and
                                          birds’, tarusa ‘sea’)


    Leaving aside the under-informative Mota and Tamambo definitions, we get Table 8.6.

8.2.2.5 The Admiralties

Definitions are given for *ikan reflexes in four Admiralties languages. The initial n- they
show is a reduced form of the POc article     which has fused with the following noun.

__pre__
 Titan       nii     (1) ‘fish’
                     (2) ‘fish, porpoise, dugong, turtle, crocodile’
 Lenkau      nik     ‘fish, excluding porpoise, whale, turtle, crocodile’
 Penchai     nii     (1) ‘fish’
                     (2) ‘fish, turtle, porpoise, whale, octopus’
 Loniu       ni      ‘general term for fish’


    Discarding the Loniu definition as under-informative, we get the comparative breakdown
in Table 8.7. It can be seen that the definitions for Titan and Penchai agree in including sharks,
rays, cetaceans and turtles, but disagree over cephalopods.

                                                            Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?       435

__pre__
                 Table 8.7       Semantic range of *ikan in Admiralties languages
               typical shark, whale,                       croc- octopus, crusta-   shelled
                                              eel                                             Grade
                 fish   ray   dolphin                      odile   squid    cean    mollusc
   Titan          +         +          +      t+f    +       +       _       —         _        6
   Lenkau         +         +          -      æ      -       -       _       _         _       2,4
   Penchai        +         +          +      æ      +       -       +       -         -       5,7




8.2.2.6 Western Oceanic

Of the Western Oceanic reflexes that follow, only the definitions for Kilivila, Muyuw and
Motu are reasonably informative. The latter are all Papuan Tip languages. It can be seen
from Table 8.8 that two of the three Papuan Tip witnesses agree in including sharks, rays,
eels and crocodiles but disagree over cetaceans and turtles.

__pre__
 North New Guinea
   Manam ika                     ‘fish’
    Yabem    i                   ‘fish’
 Papuan Tip
    Dobuan       iyana           ‘fish, including alligators’
    Kilivila     yena            ‘fish, including sharks, rays and eels, but excluding aquatic
                                 mammals, turtles or cephalopods’
     Molima      iyana           ‘fish’
     Muyuw       yin             ‘fish, turtles, crocodiles, but not shellfish’
 cf. also:
     Motu        fiarume         ‘fish, excluding sharks, rays, eels and also cephalopods’
                                 (N. Oram field notes)
 Meso-Melanesian
   Tolai     en                  ‘fish’
   Nakanai ia                    ‘fish’
   Roviana iyana                 ‘generic name for


__pre__
                 Table 8.8         Semantic range of *ikan in Papuan Tip languages
                typical   shark,     whale,                croc­ octopus, crusta-   shelled
                                              eel turtle                                      Grade
                 fish      ray      dolphin                odile   squid   cean     mollusc
    Kilivila       +        +             -    +    -       ?       —        -        -       2,4
    Muyuw          +        +             ?    +    +       +       ?        ?                 6
    Motu           +        -             -    -    -       —       —        —        —        1

436   Andrew Pawley



8.2.3 Proto Oceanic *ikan 1 and *ikan 2

There is reason to think that POc *ikan was polysemous, having a narrower sense, roughly
‘typical fish’ and a broader sense, which included various other aquatic animals. Among our
sources, such a distinction is made in just a few contemporary languages (chiefly Wayan
Fijian, Gela and Lau of SE Solomonic, and Titan and Penchai of the Admiralties) but it is
also tacitly present in the descriptions of certain Micronesian languages.

      As to a broader sense, if only the more detailed dictionary definitions are considered,
we find that in a high proportion of languages across different major subgroups the reflex of
*ikan refers to sharks and rays, eels, cetaceans and turtles, and also to dugongs and crocodiles
in places where these animals are present. I conclude that this was also the case in POc; that
is, *ikan had at least grade 5 scope. Turtles were ‘fish’ in POc. The status of octopus and
squid is less clear. Other kinds of water-dwelling invertebrates, such as molluscs in shells and
crustaceans, have much weaker claims for inclusion. The balance of the evidence suggests
that while free swimming creatures with bones were *ikan, invertebrates that crawl, burrow
or stick to rocks probably weren’t. However, in a few languages (Lau, Gela, Marovo) the
scope of * ikan has been widened to include all free swimming sea creatures. In Lau and Gela
it may been extended to all marine (and presumably freshwater) creatures (grade 7), although
different sources are in conflict on this point. We must allow that in some Oceanic languages
the semantic range of *ikan has reduced to grade 4, 3 or 2.

      The data loosely support the implicational scale given in Table 1. Some simplifications
may be in order. For example, among languages spoken where both crocodiles and turtles
are common, no language is known to include turtles but to exclude crocodiles or vice versa.
Thus, categories 6 and 7 can perhaps be merged. Only one language in the sample, Anejom,
includes crustaceans but excludes shelled molluscs, so an argument can be made for merging
categories 8 and 9. However, we have little information about the status of other marine
invertebrates included in category 9, such as jellyfish and sea hares.

      Why do speakers of various Oceanic languages (like people in many other places) place
certain other kinds of animals in the same class as typical fish? Most likely the reasons were
diverse. Some non-fish creatures look and behave rather like fish, e.g. whales, dolphins and
dugongs to some extent resemble fish in the way they swim and in being completely aquatic.
But what about turtles? Apart from being free-swimming bony animals that spend a lot of
time at sea, turtles do not look or behave like fish. What they have in common with certain
fish, perhaps, is that everywhere in the Pacific turtles are prized game, caught at sea. That
leaves crocodiles, which resemble sharks in being fearsome creatures but otherwise share
little in common with fish or turtles other than being free-swimming bony creatures.

      At any rate, the two senses of *ikan reflexes pose a problem for Berlin’s system of
taxonomic ranks. If the ‘typical fish’ category counts as a life form, what is the status of extended
categories such as ‘all water creatures’ or ‘all creatures that are free-swimming’ or ‘typical fish,
eels, cetaceans, turtles and crocodiles’? Clearly, categories that contain creatures of
such diverse appearance do not fit well with Berlin’s requirement (§1.2.3) that members of
the same life form taxon share a distinctive morphotype or with Wierzbicka’s analogous requirement
(§1.2.4) that one should be able to draw a generalized picture of the type. In order
to convince Wierzbicka that in a language L, the extended sense of *ikan reflexes, encompassing
turtles, crocodiles, dolphins, etc., is a true major generic in the same way that the
narrower, sense applying to ‘typical fish’ is, we would have to show that speakers of L use
the extended generic not just as a collective but also to refer to individual turtles, crocodiles
and dolphins, e.g. ‘ See that ikan there. It’s a turtle. ’ and ‘We caught ten ikan and two of them
were turtles.’ Unfortunately, this kind of data is almost completely lacking for the languages
in our sample.

                                                         Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?   437


8.3 POc ^pinaŋoda

More light might be shed on the scope of POc *ikan if it could be shown to contrast with another
generic having a complementary meaning. There is a candidate. Clark (1991) provides
an insightful reconstruction of the history of a POc term, * pinaijoda, that referred to a class
of sea creatures that evidently stood in contrast to *ikan. The following discussion is based
largely on his account.

    Dictionaries of some Polynesian languages explicitly mention a two-way contrast between a
reflex of PPn *ika, denoting fish and other large aquatic vertebrates such as dolphins
and turtles and a term, reflecting PPn *fiijola, that denotes forms of sea life other than *ika,
but especially molluscs and other invertebrates found on the reef. Compare, for example, the
Tongan and Samoan entries in the following comparison:

__pre__
 Polynesian
    Tongan           fiŋota      ‘sea creature other than ika (fish, turtles, etc.) especially
                                 shellfish, but also crustaceans, cephalopods, jellyfish, eels,
                                 sea-snakes, sea cucumbers, starfish, seaweed’
     Samoan          fiiŋota     ‘general term for sea animals except fish, cetaceans and turtles, especially molluscs, crustaceans, echinoderms and sea
                                 cucumbers’
    Niuatoputapu finjota         ‘shelled marine animals that creep or crawl: Crustacea, molluscs and echinoderms’
    East Futuna      finjota     ‘coquillage’ [molluscs with external shells]
    Tokelauan        fiiŋota     ‘general term for shellfish’
    Ifira-Mele       finjota     ‘shellfish’ [molluscs with external shells]
    Takuu            fiinota     ‘various types of shellfish and seafoods gathered by women’


    Cognates outside Polynesian are scarce, except in Papuan Tip languages. In the following,
g for POc    in Dobuan and Molima is unexpected (but regular in Kilivila).

__pre__
 Papuan Tip
    Dobuan      igoda          ‘shellfish’
                igo-igoda      ‘any inedible shellfish’
                lo-igoda       ‘to gather shellfish’
    Molima      igoda          ‘to collect shellfish’
    Kilivila    vigoda         ‘shellfish (live, or shell only)’

438    Andrew Paw ley


    A problem with many of these definitions is that for some English speakers the term
‘shellfish’ refers only to molluscs with shells while for others it also includes crustaceans.
There is reason to think that the authors of the dictionary definitions cited here generally had
in the mind the former, narrower definition.[5]

    Clark argues convincingly that PPn *fhjota and Papuan Tip vigoda, igoda are reductions
of POc * p-in-aijoda, the nominalization of a verb, *paijoda, by means of a well-attested
nominalising infix ^-in-[6] The primary sense of *paijoda was ‘to gather seafood (other than
fish) on the reef’ with the additional sense ‘to fish, catch fish’. This verb is widely attested
in Oceanic. Selected examples are given below. In some witnesses, especially in Western
Oceanic, POc *// is unexpectedly reflected as a stop, g.

__pre__
 Meso-Melanesian
   Teop         yagana                   ‘to fish, (n) fishing’
 SE Solomonic
    Bugotu              vaŋoda           ‘hunt for shellfish on the reef’
    Gela                vaŋoda           (i) ‘collect food on the reef’; (2) ‘anything of the reef:
                                         starfish, crab, octopus, sea egg’, (3) ‘shell of mollusk or
                                         crab’, (4) ‘gatherer of reef food’, (5) ‘fisher’
 Micronesian
    Marshallese yaged                    ‘go fishing’
 North and Central Vanuatu
   Mota          vaŋona                  (v) ‘catch fish with a line, get shellfish’, (v) ‘things got to
                                         eat on the reef or by fishing, things for a relish to go with
                                         vegetable food’
      Namakir           ba-vaŋot         ‘to fish’
      Nguna             pa-vaŋoda        ‘to fish, to gather shells’
      Paamese           vaŋor            ‘gather shellfish on reef’
      Anejom            (a)haŋej         ‘forage on the reef’
 Central Pacific
   Rotuman              haŋota           ‘to fish, fishing excursion, shoal of certain fish’
 Polynesian
    Tongan             faaŋota           ‘to fish or search for any kind oifiŋotd'
    Niuean             faŋota            ‘gather shellfish on the reef’
    Samoan             faaŋota           ‘to fish; fishing’
    Rennellese          haŋota           ‘to fish or gather shells, especially by women on the reef’

[5] One reason is that the authors of the dictionaries concerned are from Australia and NZ, where most people
 understand shellfish to refer just to molluscs with shells (Pawley 2004).

[6] *parjoda. in turn, was probably diachronically a morphologically complex verb, reflecting the PMP prefix
 *paN- 'actor focus verb derivative’ plus a root, where * V represents a nasal consonant whose point of articula tion was homorganic with and replaced the initial consonant of the root. Compare POc *kcm-i ‘to eat stli.' and
 *pat]-an 'to eat (intr)’ and other examples in Ross (1998:29-30). This suggests that *pcujoda was an intransi tive verb, one that referred to the general act of gathering seafood on the reef but could not be used to single out
 particular tilings gathered. The root in this verb was most likely POc *koda or *qoda ‘(v) eat raw seafood (flesh
 of fish or molluscs)’, '(n) raw seafood’ (Geraghty 1983. Lichtenberk 1994). with PMP antecedent *qe(n)taq
 (Blust 1972).

                                                     Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?     439




    A few languages retain a reflex of *pinaijoda in which the infix is transparently preserved.

__pre__
 Meso-Melanesian
   Tolai   winagonoi            ‘generic name for sea-shells’
 North and Central Vanuatu
   Nguna vinagoda               ‘shell, shellfish’

    Can we conclude that POc ^pitiaŋoda was a major generic, a life-form of the same rank as *ikan?
 Almost certainly not. Clark concludes that *pinaijoda was probably not a biological taxon in
 the strict sense but a collective, a term for a diverse category of things, namely
‘seafood gathered on the reef’ in which shellfish, i.e. molluscs, were the focal members.
Unfortunately, sources for contemporary Oceanic languages seldom provide discourse examples
to show how speakers talk about reflexes of *pinaijoda. Whenever examples are given they
show the noun being used to refer to a non-specific entity, an undifferentiated collectivity.
Given the heterogeneity of the types of edibles subsumed under this term it would be surprising
if it behaves, grammatically, as anything other than a collective.

    Clark remarks that in some contemporary Oceanic languages *pinaijoda reflexes appear
to have become a biotaxon, specifically a generic for shellfish. This has happened in at least
two Polynesian languages (East Futunan and Tokelauan), one Vanuatu language (Nguna), and
two Papuan Tip languages (Dobuan and Kilivila). However, as sources do not give examples
showing how speakers of these languages use the shellfish generic we cannot be sure whether
is a genuine life-form taxon or a collective.


8.4 POc *sisiq

Oceanic speech communities that have access to reefs and beaches typically distinguish many
kinds of molluscs. Speakers of Wayan Fijian, for example, have approximately 140 names
for kinds of bivalve and gastropod shellfish, of which about 100 are gastropods. This is a
domain, then, where one might expect to find one or more high-order taxonomic categories
in Oceanic languages, a point made by Clark (1981).

    We have already seen that a reflex of * pinagoda ‘ seafood gathered on the reef’ has developed
into a generic for shellfish in Dobuan, Kilivila, Tolai and Nguna, as well as in certain Polynesian
languages. Clark (1981:268, 1991:79) also cites, as Polynesian examples
of a generic that encompassed both bivalves and gastropods, Marquesan (Ua Pou dialect)
puukava, Tahitian puu and puupuu, Rennellese hatu ?atua, and East Futuna and Tokelauan
yzgoto.

    However, no widespread cognate set has been found that consistently serves as a general
name for shellfish. In fact, most Oceanic languages do not have such a taxon. It is more
common to find a generic that refers to edible gastropods, or at least to a large class of edible
gastropods, and a generic that refers to a large class of bivalves. But, once again, hardly any
 such terms have widespread cognates.

440    Andrew Pawley


   Perhaps the strongest candidate for a POc generic in this domain is *sisiq, which may
have had variants *siseq and/or sisuq1 Reflexes of *sisiq vary greatly in range of reference
across Oceanic languages.

__pre__
 North New Guinea
    Takia         sisei                 ‘generic term for all varieties of sea shells’
 Papuan Tip
    Dobuan               sisi-yara      ‘a bivalve, Asaphis diehloma'
                         sisi-we        ‘common whelk’
      Molima             sisi-?alo      ‘a brown bivalve, small and edible, found in tidal flats
      Motu               dudu           ‘name of a shellfish’ (*z > u unexpected)
      Sinaugoro          dudu           ‘cone shell’ (*z > u unexpected)
 Meso-Melanesian
   Nakanai               e-sisi         ‘a shellfish’
   Roviana               sise           ‘general name for a number of small shells’
 Southeast Solomonic
    ’Are’are       sisi                 ‘a shellfish’
                   sisi-                ‘first element in compound names for certain molluscs,
                                        e.g. sisi-nanara, sisi-nikau'
      Arosi              sisi-          ‘first element in compound names for certain molluscs,
                                        e.g. sisi-apir ‘limpet’, sisi-nahu ‘small gastropod sp. in
                                        streams’
      To’aba’ita         sisi-          ‘first element in compound names for a few mollusk
                                        species, e.g. sisi-afufu, sisi-?eiria
      Lau                sisi-afufu     ‘mollusc sp.’
      Gela               hihi-vuhi      ‘freshwater snail sp., Nerita brevispina'
 North and Central Vanuatu
    Tolomako        sise, sisi          ‘shellfish’ (scope uncertain)
    Mota            sese                ‘a smooth shell, turris; in which the gatou ‘hermit crab
                                        lives
      NE Ambae           hihe           ‘Nerita sp.’
      Raga               hiha           ‘sea snail, winkle’
      Uripiv             (na)ses        ‘periwinkle (?)’
      SE Ambrym          ses            ‘shellfish of family Neritidae’
      Nakanamanga        siisa          ‘snail, incl. nerites (sisa karo)'
                         sususa         ‘maculated moon snail, periwinkles, mitres’
      S Efate            ses            ‘nerite’
 New Caledonia
   Cemuhi                ti             ‘generic term for gastropods’
   Fwai                  thik           ‘trochus, but used generically for gastropods’
   Nemi                  thik           ‘trochus, but used generically for gastropods’


[7] The sole internal Oceanic evidence for reconstructing final *q resides in New Caledonian reflexes. North and
 Central Vanuatu languages often reflect *siseq and a few point to *sisaq.

                                                              Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?            441



__pre__
 Fijian and Rotuman
     Bauan          siði                 (1) ‘Trochus spp.,’
                                         (2) ‘first element in various compounds naming kinds of
                                         gastropods and a few bivalves’
     Wayan                ðiði           (1) ‘Generic for (i) gastropod molluscs (Gastropoda) with
                                         external shells, i.e. univalve or snail-like shellfish and (ii)
                                         chitons (Amphineura) and rock oysters, which resemble
                                         typical gastropods in that they stick to rocks and/or that
                                         the shell is not hinged.’
                                         (2) ‘In a limited range of contexts, a generic for all molluscs with external shells’
     Rotuman              sisi           ‘edible shell-fish, the periwinkle’
 Polynesian
    Niuean                hihi           ‘snail (generic), usu. first element in compound names for
                                         certain gastropods’, e.g. hihi Afelika, ‘African snail’, hihi
                                         tea ‘a seasnail’
     Hawaiian             hiihii/wai     ‘grainy snail, Neritina, in both fresh and brackish water,
                                         eaten’
     Samoan               sisi           ‘name given to small snails in general’ (Milner); ‘fresh water molluscs’ (Pratt)[8][9]
                          sisi-tai       ‘saltwater winkles’ (Pratt)
                          sisi-vai       ‘freshwater molluscs’ (Pratt)
                          sisi-vao       ‘landsnails’
     Futunan              sisi           ‘small shellfish spp., Neritidae and Naticidae’
     Uvean                hihi           ‘kind of shellfish, Janthinidae and Neritidae’
     Tikopia              sisi           ‘marine and land snails incl. Melampus and Nerita spp.’
     Mere-Ifira           sisi           ‘small snail (nerites and others of similar shape)’
     Rennellese           sisi           ‘edible nerite shells’
     Nukuoro              sisi           ‘mollusc, Neritidae spp.’


    The semantic range of these terms may be arranged in a scale as shown in Table 8.9. The
semantic ranges of reflexes of * sisiq in better documented Oceanic languages are shown in
Table 8.10.

    Has *sisiq expanded its range of reference from domains (1) or (2), or did it already have
wider scope in POc? Was it already polysemous in POc, with both a broad and a narrow
application?9

    About 50 families of gastropods or snail-like molluscs, comprising hundreds of genera,
are found in the Indo-Pacific region. In almost all languages where the dictionary definitions
specify particular families or genera, these refer to nerites (members of the family Neriti-
dae) and to other fairly similar groups of small edible marine gastropods (grade 3). In many
Oceanic-speaking communities such small shellfish are regularly collected in large quantities
and often they supply a more significant part of the protein consumption than any other
gastropods. This, then, may have been its primary sense in POc.

[8] Pratt lists several compounds that refer to subtaxa of sisi: sisi-loaloa, sisi-mataivi, sisi-tanoa, sisi-tui.

[9] For Proto Malayo-Polynesian Blust (1995) has reconstructed the doublets *sisi and *sisiq ‘edible snail’, citing
 reflexes in two Philippines languages (Bikol sisi ‘barnacles’, Cebuano sisi ‘small oysters’), one Borneo lan guage (Murik isi ‘snail’) and five Oceanic languages, all from Central Pacific. He reconstructs a further doublet
 *sisuq ‘edible snail', citing reflexes in Sasak siso ‘snail’ and Makassarese siso ‘small mollusk found in fish
 ponds'.

442    Andrew Pawley


__pre__
       Table 8.9    Implicational scale of types that may be included in reflexes of *sisiq
      (1)   one or two species of edible molluscs, sometimes a gastropod, sometimes a
            bivalve, sometimes unidentified
      (2)   Nerites (Neritidae), small snail-like shells, with large body whorls)
      (3)   two or more of several several groups of edible small globular gastropods (Neritidae and also Naticidae or moon shells (small, globular and smooth), Lit-
            torinidae or periwinkles (small, heavy shells, with only a few whorls, globular,
            spiral or turbinate in shape)
      (4)   all edible gastropods
      (5)   all molluscs with shells

__pre__
            Table 8.10       Semantic range of reflexes of *sisiq in Oceanic languages
                                               small globular
                                                                       all        all
                    a few spp.                  gastropods:
                                  nerites                             edible    edible    Grade
                    of molluscs             nerites, moon shells,
                                                                    gastropods molluscs
                                              periwinkles, etc.
      Takia              +           +               +                  +         +        5
      Wayan              +           +               +                  +        (+)      4-5
      Cemuhi             +           +               +                  +         -        4
      Samoan             +           +               +                  +         -        4
      ’Are’are           +           +               +                  +         -        4
      Fwai               +           +               +                  +         -        4
      Futuna             +           +               +                  -         -        3
      E Uvean            +           +               +                  -         -        3
      Tikopia            +           +               +                  -         -        3
      Niuean             +           +                ?                 -         -       3 ?
      Rennellese         +           +               -                  -         -        2
      Nukuoro            +           +               -                  -         -        2
      NE Ambae           +           +               -                  -         -        2
      S Efate            +           +               -                  -         -        2
      SE Ambrym          +           -               -                  -         -        1
      Gela               +           -               -                  -         -        1
      Hawaiian           +           -               -                  -         -        1

                                                      Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?    443


    POc * sisiq certainly referred to a class of snail-like (gastropod) molluscs but, given the
very spotty data, it is difficult to determine the range of reference of this term. However,
the fact that *sisiq reflexes are widely preserved as the first element in binominals, even in
languages where a reflex of * sisiq no longer occurs by itself, indicates that it was a generic of
some sort in Oceanic, participating in a number of binomials.

    There is some evidence that *sisiq also served as a high-order generic, perhaps denoting
all gastropods, or all edible gastropods. It was noted above that reflexes of *sisiq denoting
edible marine gastropods in general occur in at least one language in each of the following
subgroups: North New Guinea, SE Solomonic, New Caledonian, Fijian and Polynesian. It is
likely that there are other cases - our sample is very limited. However, in only two languages
in the sample do *sisiq reflexes also serve as a generic for shelled molluscs in general,
including bivalves. Thus, there is no good evidence at present for attributing this last, much
wider range of reference to POc *sisiq.


8.5 POc  *manuk

8.5.1 Introduction

POc * manuk is a well attested form whose semantic range certainly included birds in general,
but whose reflexes often have a broader scope. The implicational scale in Table 8.11,
going from the most restricted domain to the most inclusive, predicts fairly well the kinds of
variations in range seen among *manuk reflexes.

__pre__
   Table 8.11      Implicational scale of types that may be included in reflexes of *manuk
                               (1)   birds and bats
                               (2)   birds, bats and flying insects
                               (3)   all land animals
                               (4)   all animals except humans
                               (5)   all beings
                               (6)   all objects

444   Andrew Pawley


8.5.2 Variation in semantic scope of reflexes of *manuk

8.5.2.1 Polynesian

__pre__
 Tongan            manu        ‘animal, esp. bird but applied also to quadrupeds, reptiles,
                               insects, and other land creatures but not to fish, shell-fish,
                               and other sea creatures’. (Also manu-puna ‘bird or bat’; lit.
                               ‘flying manti’)
 Niuean            manu        ‘any living creature except humans and fish’ (Also manu-
                               lele ‘bird and bat but not insects; lit. ‘flying manu’)
 Maori             manu        ‘bird’
 Tahitian          manu        (i) ‘bird + flying insects’
                               (2) ‘land animal as opposed to iʔa’
                   manu-manu   ‘insects’ [probably in vernacular sense, including arthropods]
 Hawaiian          manu        ‘bird, any winged creature’
 Rarotongan        manu        ‘creature, living thing, usually but not always bird; often used figuratively for a human being’ (also manu-rere.
                               manu-reva ‘bird’, manu vaevae'Pa. lit. ‘four legged animal’)
                               and manumanu ‘insects, small flies’)
 Samoan            manu        (1) ‘bird’ (also manu-lele ‘bird’) (Milner)
                               (2) ‘animal, beast’ (Milner)
                               (3) ‘any living thing’ (Utugagana)
 Tokelauan         manu        (1) ‘animal, beast’
                               (2) ‘bird’
 Futunan           manu        ‘animal in general’; manu-lele ‘bird’ (lit. ‘flying animal’)
 Uvea              manu        ‘animals in general’; manu-lele ‘bird’
 Ifira-Mele        manu        ‘bird, bat (and possibly butterflies)’
 Tikopia           manu        ‘terrestrial creatures: mammals, birds, arthropods, but ex                               cluding marine creatures’
 Rennellese        manu        ‘land fauna except human beings, turtles and fish (incl. birds
                               and flying insects)’ (also manu-gege ‘birds and flying in                               sects’)
 Nukuoro           manu        ‘living things in general’


    The semantic range of these terms may be arranged in a scale as shown in Table 8.12.
    This distribution of meanings suggests that PPn *manu had a narrow sense ‘birds and
bats’ (with synonym * manu-lele), and an extended sense, roughly ‘all land animals other than
humans’. Among the languages cited above, Niuean and Tongan (Tongic), Rarotongan and
Tahitian (Eastern Polynesian), Rennellese, Samoan, Tokelauan and Tikopian (non-Eastern
Nuclear Polynesian) have an extended sense.

    In Futunan, Uvean, (and occasionally) Rarotongan, manu can be extended to all creatures
other than humans and in Nukuoro that seems to be the standard meaning. This more extended
use has a restricted distribution in contemporary Polynesian languages and was probably not
present, or was rare, in PPn.


                                                     Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?   445


__pre__
  Table 8.12    Semantic range of reflexes of POc *manuk in some Polynesian languages
                            1       2       3         4         5       6
                                                      all      all
                          birds   birds,    all
                                                    animals   beings    all
                           and     flying  land                                Grade
                                                     except including things
                           bats   insects animals
                                                    humans humans
         Nukuoro            +       +       +         +         +       -        5
         Rarotongan         +       +       +         +         +       -        5
         Tikopia            +       +       +         +         -       -       4
                                                                                 o
         Tongan             +       +       +         -         -       -        J
                                                                                 o
         Niuean             +       +       +         -         -       -        J
         Samoan     1.      +       -       -         -         -       -        1
                    2.      +       ?       +         ?         -       -        o
                                                                                 J
         Tokelauan 1.       +       -       -         -         -       -        1
                                                                                 o
                    2.      +       ?       +         ?         -       -        J
         Tahitian   1.      +       +       -         -         -       -        2
                    2.      +       +       +         —         —       -        3
         Rennellese         +       +       +         -         -       -        3
         Ifira-Mele         +       +       (+)       -         -       -       3 ?
         Tahitian           +       +        +        -         -       -        3
         Maori              +       -        -        -         -       -        1


    Cecil Brown, in a paper on the development of life form taxa in Polynesian languages,
expresses doubts about the two-sense reconstruction. He concludes (Brown 1981:94) that ‘bird’
probably ‘constituted the primary, if not the only zoological reference’ of PPn *manu. If I
understand him correctly, Brown prefers to interpret the fact that Tongan, Niuean, Samoan,
Tikopia, Rennellese, Rarotongan, etc. agree in having a second, wider sense of * manu, as the
result of semantic extensions made independently several times in the history of the Polynesian
languages. He points out the importance of ecological factors. While birds must have
been very prominent creatures in all the islands of the Pacific, most of the islands settled by
Polynesians would have had very few land animals other than birds and small invertebrates.
All had lizards, a very few had snakes, otherwise there were only those animals brought
by humans: rats, dogs and (sometimes) pigs. When, in the post-European contact era, new
quadrupeds (such as cattle, horses and goats) arrived it would have been natural to extend the
reflex of *manu to these.

    However, it seems to me more likely that *manu was already polysemous in PPn. The
evidence indicating that PPn had a synonym for *manu in its narrower sense, namely the
compound *manu-lele ‘birds, bats, flying insects’ (lit. ‘flying manuf is consistent with the
view that *manu had two senses in PPn. The evidence from Fijian and Rotuman (see below)
also supports a polysemous reconstruction. Be that as it may, there can be little doubt that in
the Polynesian languages ecological factors have motivated both extensions and contractions
in the semantic range of reflexes of POc *manuk.

446   Andrew Pawley

__pre__
    Table 8.13       Semantic range of reflexes of PCP *manu-manu in Rotuman and Fijian
                                            languages
                                 1         2       3         4         5        6
                                                            all        all
                               birds     birds,    all
                                                          animals     beings     all
                               and       flying  land                                 Grade
                                                          except    including tilings
                               bats     insects animals
                                                          humans    humans
            Rotuman             +          +       +         +         —        —      4
            Bauan   1.          +          +       +         ?         -        -       3
                          2.    +          -       -         -         -        -       1
            Wayan         1.    +          +       +         +         -        -      4
                          2.    +          +       +         -         -        -       3



8.5.2.2 Rotuman and Fij ian

Rotuman and the Fijian languages reflect only a reduplicated form *manu-manu. In Rotuman this
term denotes land animals other than humans. In Wayan it denotes all creatures. In
Bauan its narrower sense refers to birds and its wider sense includes all creatures. In all three
languages a compound consisting of a reflex of *manu-manu plus a verb/adjective meaning
‘to fly, flying’ is used to distinguish birds and other flying animals from terrestrial animals.

__pre__
 Rotuman      mon-monu               ‘bird, insect, animal, including all land and air creatures but
                                     no sea creature’ (also mənmənu ferfere ‘bird, flying insect’)
 Bauan        manu-manu              (i) ‘bird’
                                     (2) ‘sometimes also animal, insect’ (also manumanu vuka
                                     ‘bird’ (lit. ‘flying animal)’
 Wayan        manu-manu              (1) ‘animal, creature, being, normally excluding human be                                     ings’ (also manumanu ðavu ‘bird’, lit. ‘flying animal’)
                                     (2) ‘sometimes used to denote land animals in contrast to ma                                     rine animals, such as ika. fish and fish-like creatures’



8.5.2.3 Micronesian

__pre__
 Kiribati           man                  ‘animal (including fish), beast, insect, etc.’; ‘numeral
                                         classifier for people and animals’
 Puluwatese         maan                 ‘creature, being, animal, insect’
 Carolinian         maal, maan           ‘generic term for any living creature except humans’,
                    -mal                 ‘counting classifier for people and animals’
 Chuukese           maan                 ‘living creature of land or air, other than human’
 Woleaian           mal                  (1) ‘animal, bird, animate object’; (2) ‘thing, inanimate
                                         object’
                                     (these are listed as homonyms by Sohn and Tawerilmang
                                     1976; note also mal ‘numeral classifier for animate beings
                                     including humans’)
 Mokilese         mahn               ‘mammal, fruit bat, lizard, monitor, worm, bug, bird’
 Marshallese      men                ‘thing’
                  men-in-mour        ‘animal, living thing’ (from men ‘thing’, -in- ‘of’, mour
                                     ‘life’)

                                                         Were turtlesfish in Proto Oceanic?   447

__pre__
 Table 8.14      Semantic range of reflexes of POc *manuk in some Micronesian languages
                               1       2        3        4           5        6
                                                         all        all
                             birds   birds,    all
                                                       animals    beings     all
                             and      flying  land                                   Grade
                                                       except    including tilings
                             bats    insects animals
                                                       humans    humans
            Marshallese       +        +        +        +          +         +        6
            Woleiai           +        +        +        +          +         +        6
            Kiribati          +        +        +        +          +         -        5
            Puluwatese        +        +        +        +          +         -        5
            Chuukese          +        +        +        +          -         -       4
            Mokilese          +        +        +        +          -         -       4




    It can be seen that in this sample of Nuclear Micronesian languages most reflect POc
*manuk with range of reference much broader than ‘bird’. In Kiribati and Mokilese the meaning
is approximately ‘land animals other than humans’. In Carolinian and Woleaian the reflex
refers to all animals other than humans (domains 1-4 on the implicational scale) but in Woleaian
it can also denote any object (domains 1-6). In Puluwatese the nominal reflex of *manuk
refers to living things in general, as is also the case for the numeral classifier reflex in most
Nuclear Micronesian languages. In Marshallese and Woleaian the reflex of *manuk has become the term for ‘thing’.

    It is likely that the primary sense of the PMic noun *man was at least as broad as ‘land
creatures other than humans’ and that this form had already become a classifier for humans
and animals.

8.5.2.4 Other Oceanic groups

Outside of the Nuclear Micronesian and Central Pacific groups, reflexes of * manuk generally
have the narrower meaning ‘creature with wings: bird, bat, flying insect’. However, the
paucity of good dictionaries for Oceanic languages in most regions of Melanesia limits our
confidence in some of the glosses. The semantic range of reflexes of POc *manuk in some
Oceanic languages other than Nuclear Micronesian and Central Pacific is shown in Table
 8.15.

448    Andrew Pawley

__pre__
 Vanuatu
   NE Ambae            manu      ‘birds and flying foxes’
   Mota                manu      ‘flying creature: bird, bat, beetle’
   Paamese             a-man     ‘bird’
    Sye                menoy     ‘bird’
   Lenakel             menuk     ‘bird’
   Anejom              in-man    ‘bird (includes flying-foxes but not insects)’
New Caledonia
  Cemuhi               meni      ‘birds (generic) and bats’
  Fwai                 manik     ‘bird’
  Nelemwa              malic     ‘bird (generic)’
Southeast Solomonic
   Arosi               manu      ‘bird’
   ‘Are’are            manu      ‘bird, insect, anything that flies’
   Kwaio               manu      ‘bird’
   Lau                 manu      ‘any creature that flies’
   Sa’a                menu      ‘bird, insect’
   Gela                manu      ‘flying creature, bird, insect’
Meso-Melanesian
  Nakanai              malu      ‘bird, insect (general term)’
  Tangga               man       ‘generic term for all species of bird’
   Simbo               maunuyu   (1) ‘creature, being, including humans, birds, marine
                                 mammals, and possibly fish’
                                 (2) ‘thing’
 cf. also
     Marovo            oloko     (1) ‘all flying creatures including large and small bats’
                                 (2) ‘animal, including all mobile land animals’ (Hviding
                                 2005:175)
North New Guinea
  Kairiru              myan      ‘bird’
  Manam                maŋ       ‘bird, fowl’
  Mumeng (Patep)       mena?     ‘bird, including cassowary’
   Yabem               mo?       ‘birds (generic) and flying insects’
Papuan Tip
   Motu                manu      ‘birds and all things that fly including flying foxes’ (also
                                 manu-manu ‘flying insects’ (N. Oram field notes)
      Molima           manu      ‘bird’ (also manu-manuwa ‘insects’)
      Dobuan           manua     ‘birds (generic)’ (also manu-manua ‘insects and small
                                 creatures’)
      Kilivila         mauna     ‘animal, bird, insect’
      Muyuw            man       ‘land creature, bird, animal, insect’
Admiralties
  Lou                  mon-mon   ‘bird’
  Mussau               menua     ‘hawk, eagle’

                                                      Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?   449


__pre__
 Table 8.15    Semantic range of reflexes of POc *manuk in some Oceanic languages other
                       than Nuclear Micronesian and Central Pacific
                           1       2       Jo        4          5        6
                                                     all        all
                         birds   birds,    all
                                                   animals    beings     all
                          and     flying   land                                 Grade
                                                   except    including things
                         bats    insects animals
                                                   humans    humans
          Simbo           +        +       +         +          +        +        6
          Muyuw           +        +       +         -          -        -        3
          Cemuhi          +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Gela            +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Lau             +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Mota            +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Motu            +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Nakanai         +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Manam           +        -       -         -          -        -        1
          Yabem           +        +       -         -          -        -       2
          Dobuan          +        -       -         -          -        -        1
          NE Ambae        +        -       -         -          -        -        1
          Arosi           +        -       -         -          -        -        1
          Nelemwa         +        -       -         -          -        -        1
          Lou             +        -       -         -          -        -        1




8.5.3 Flying creatures only or land creatures in general?

What does the total range of comparisons tell us about the semantic range of POc *manuk?
The variation among reflexes is striking. * manuk is most widely attested in the meaning
‘winged or flying creatures: birds, bats and flying insects’, i.e. grade 2 on the scale.
However, the grade 3 meaning, encompassing all land animals, is common in Central Pacific and
Nuclear Micronesian, and is attested in one Papuan Tip witness, Muyuw. Grade 4, 5 and 6
meanings occur but with more restricted distributions.

    In terms of accounting for the distribution of meanings across subgroups, the most
economical interpretation of the full range of comparative evidence in POc is to assume that
*manuk referred only to winged or flying creatures: birds, bats and flying insects. This meaning
dominates in subgroups other than Micronesian and Central Pacific. The wider meanings
displayed by some daughter languages are best regarded as post-POc innovations.

    This conclusion is consistent with the fact that outside of Oceanic, cognates of * manuk
generally refer to chickens or to birds in general but not to quadrupeds or marine animals.
Blust (2002) attributes to PMP *manuk the meaning ‘chicken (domestic fowl)’ on the basis
of widespread reflexes in Western and Central MP languages. He also reconstructs a reduplicated
form PMP * manu-manuk meaning ‘bird’, widely reflected with this sense in WMP
languages. Blust argues that PAn had an unrelated term for ‘bird’ namely *ayam, which was
replaced in this function by *manu-manuk in PMP. In PMP *ayam came to mean ‘domestic
animal (of any sort)’.

450    Andrew Pawley


    Given that birds are the dominant indigenous land fauna in the island groups of Remote
Oceania, and that there were no mammals native to this region, other than bats, it is not
surprising that the generic term for birds and bats should be extended to other land animals
(see discussion in §5.2.1). Here it seems is a case where a change in the meaning of a POc
biotaxon can be attributed to changes in the range of animal life encountered by speakers of
Oceanic daughter languages as they moved into new environments.


8.6 POc *manu-manuk

8.6.1 Reflexes of POc *manu-manuk in Papuan Tip, SE Solomonic and Polynesian

Osmond (this volume, ch.7) observes that reflexes of a form *manu-manuk, meaning approximately
‘insects and other small invertebrates’ (corresponding to the English vernacular
category ‘insects’)10 are found in three widely separated subgroups of Oceanic: Papuan Tip,
Southeast Solomonic and Polynesian. In certain languages in each of these groups the reflex
of *manu-manuk stands beside and contrasts with a reflex of *manuk, meaning approximately
‘birds and other flying creatures’. Reduplications of *manuk, but with rather different
meanings, are also found in Lou (Admiralties), Fijian and Rotuman (see §5.2).

    In the definitions cited below from dictionary sources it is likely that the English gloss
‘insect’ is generally used in its vernacular sense.[10]

__pre__
 Papuan Tip
    Dobuan              manu-manua                ‘insects and small creatures’
    Motu                manu-manu                 ‘beetles, insects’
    Sinaugoro           manu-manu                 ‘insects’
 SE Solomonic
    Bugotu              mau-manu                  ‘insect’
    Gela                mau-manu                  1. ‘insect’
                                                  2. ‘all living creatures: pigs, fish, birds, etc.’
 Polynesian
    Tahitian            manu-manu                 ‘insects’
    Rarotongan          manu-manu                 ‘insects, small flies’
    Marquesan           manu-manu                 ‘an insect’(pollex)
    Mangarevan          manu-manu                 ‘insect seen clinging to branches and fermentin:
                                                  substances’ (pollex)
      Pukapukan         manu-manu                 Tittle insects’

[10] The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary gives the following definition of the popular use of ‘insect’: “...in
pop. use comprising, besides the animals scientifically so called (... [animals of class lnseeta]), many other
arthropods, as spiders, mites, centipedes, wood-lice, etc. and other invertebrates, as the ’coral insect’; still
applied by the uneducated to earth-worms, snails, etc. and even some small invertebrates, as frogs and tortoises.”
The authors of the SOED seem to have forgotten that the folk taxonomies of the ‘uneducated’ are as worthy as
those of the ‘educated’!

                                                          Were turtles fish in Proto Oceanic?         451

__pre__
Table 8.16     Implicational scale of types that may be included in reflexes of *manu-manuk
                                    (1)   one or a few insect taxa
                                    (2)   insects in general
                                    (3)   all living creatures

__pre__
     Tuamotuan        manu-manu                ‘bug, insect’ (pollex)
     Nukuoro          manu-manu                ‘insectsp.’
     Rennellese       manu-manu hogau          ‘dragonfly’


    These data yield the rather simple implicational scale in Table 8.16. It can be seen that
definitions of type (2) dominate. Just one language in the sample (Gela) has a greatly extended
sense: ‘all living creatures’. Unfortunately, the sources give no evidence that would tell us
whether forms with meanings of types (2) and (3) behave like true taxonomic generics or
whether they are used only as collectives.


8.6.2 What did POc *manu-manuk mean?

It might seem a straightforward matter to conclude that * manu-manuk was a generic or collective
term for insects in general. However, two complicating factors must be addressed.

     In many Oceanic languages a semi-productive use of nominal reduplication is to name
a taxon which resembles that named by the simple form but is smaller or otherwise atypical—not
quite the real thing (for discussion of this function of reduplication in Oceanic see
Ross 2008a:50-51). Given such a mechanism, we must consider the possibility that a reduplicated
form of *manuk developed independently in Papuan Tip, Southeast Solomonic and
Polynesian. On the formal level, such parallel development would not be surprising. However,
it seems unlikely that the meaning of the reduplicated derivative would in both cases
have been ‘insects, creepy crawlies’.

     The other complicating factor is that a case can be made for attributing another sense to
POc * manu-manuk, roughly ‘all creatures’ or‘all creatures other than those that live in water’.
It was noted above (§5.2.2) that reflexes of *manu-manuk have this broader range of reference
in Lou, Rotuman and the Fijian languages. However, I prefer to regard the Lou, Rotuman
and Fijian uses as post-POc innovations, in which the reflex of * manu-manuk replaced the
*manuk reflex as the general term for creatures or land creatures. Thus the conclusion that
*manu-manuk existed in POc as a general term for insects and other small land invertebrates
still stands.11 Some languages, chiefly in Polynesia, have narrowed its application use to just
one or a few insects but in one language its scope has been extended to encompass all living
things.

[11] Blust (2002) reconstructs a reduplicated form PMP *manu-mcmuk meaning ‘bird’, widely reflected with this
 sense in WMP languages, alongside PMP *mamik ‘chicken’.

452   Andrew Pawley


8.7 Conclusions

We have looked into the semantic histories of five POc terms, * ikan, *pinarjoda, * sisiq.
*manuk and * manu-manuk, each a candidate for the status of a high-level generic or life
form in the POc taxonomy of animals but each having reflexes with highly variable meanings.
Approximate semantic reconstructions can be given for each POc term, as follows:

__pre__
 *ikan             ‘high-level generic (life form) with two senses: 1. typical fish’; (2)
                   ‘typical fish, sharks, rays, eels, cetaceans and dugongs, turtles and
                   crocodiles, and possibly octopus and squid’
 *pinaqoda         ‘collective term (not a life-form): seafood (other than fish) gathered on
                   the reef’
 *sisiq            ‘folk generic: small globular gastropods (nerites, moon shells, periwinkles, etc.) which are an important part of the diet. Possibly also used as
                   a collective or high-level generic for edible gastropods in general’
  *manuk           ‘high-level generic (life form): birds, bats and flying insects’
  *manu-manuk      ‘high-level collective or generic (life form): insects and other small land
                   invertebrates’

    Let us now return briefly to two questions asked at the outset. First, are the variations
in the meanings of major generics across daughter languages random or do they follow an
implicational scale, a natural sequence of semantic extension or contraction?

    Variations in definitions given to reflexes of * ikan. *sisiq, *manuk and *manu-manuk
do appear to conform to implication scales, roughly those sketched in Tables 8.1, 8.9, 8.11
and 8.16, respectively. (We leave aside * pinaqoda, which was a collective rather than a true
generic.) However, the nature of the data are such that we can only give approximate analyses.
Undoubtedly, finer-grained data and analysis would show that this picture is too simple. While
my main focus has been on the meanings of these five etyma, the foregoing question might
also be asked of non-cognate terms that refer to ‘the same’ kinds of semantic categories. A
wider comparative study that included non-cognate generic terms for kinds of animals would
provide a broader base for testing hypotheses about implicational scales. However, such a
study must be left for another occasion.

    Finally, why have such marked differences arisen in the semantic scope of these five
POc terms? Can some of the changes be attributed to differences in the range of animal
life encountered by different communities? All I will say here is that Oceanic islands differ
considerably in the richness of their land fauna, with atolls, and small, geographically remote
high islands having extremely impoverished fauna and that this variation may have played a
part in the semantic histories of two of the five terms considered here, *manuk and * manu-
mamik. Brown (1981) has already pointed to the dominance of birds over other large land
animals as a possible driver of semantic change in *manuk reflexes (see §5.2.1). But the
other three terms all refer to aquatic (chiefly marine) animals and, leaving aside crocodiles
and dugongs, the main types of marine fauna are fairly well represented throughout tropical
Oceania. It follows that shifts in the referential range of reflexes of POc * tkan, *pinaqoda
and *sisiq must be explained in terms of other factors.
